MONASTICON ANGLICANUM, OR, THE HISTORY Of the Ancient Abbeys, and other
Monasteries, Hospitals, Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, IN ENGLAND and
WALES. WITH DIVERSE French, Irish, and Scotch Monasteries Formerly relating to
ENGLAND.

Collected, and Published in Latin, by Sir William Dugdale, Knt. late Garter
King of Arms.

In Three Volums.

And now Epitomized in English, Page by Page.

With Sculptures of the several Religious Habits.

-- Forsan and haec olim meminisse juvabit.
Virg. Aen. 1. LICENSED, May the 25th, 1692.

R. MIDGLEY.

LONDON: Printed, for Sam. Keble at the Turks-Head in Fleet Street; Hen. Rhodes
at the Star the Corner of Bride lane in Fleetstreet, MDCXCIII.

To the much Honored WILLIAM BROMLEY, Esquire One of the Knights of the Shire for
the County of WARWICK.
SIR,
THAT which I here present you is Originally the Product of your own Country,
since the Great Artist from whose elaborate and curious hand I Copy this Piece
in little, owed his Birth and Habitation to Warwickshire. I know not therefore
to whom (in the number of my Friends) more properly to dedicate these
Collections than to your self: for thus it is an act of Justice to restore to
the proper County (in your Person who represent it) what came from thence at
first.

Nothing deterred my Presumption in this more than to think I should expose the
Imperfections of my Pen to so accurate and excellent a Judgment. A Judgment
that has taught you the true use of Foreign Travails, by which you have brought
home from the politest Nations of Europe, all their Virtues and
Accomplishments, and left behind their Fopperies and Vice. It is this Judgment
that has so signalized your Merit in the Eye of your Country, that she has
justly fixed her choice on you for one of her Representatives in our Great
Senate; and it is the same Judgment that you have since most worthily employed
in that High and Honorable Assembly, by assisting, and complying with the best
Methods and Endeavors for the Public Good: Or, to use the words of Horace, --
Quid expediat, communiter, aut melior pars,
Malis carere quaeritis laboribus.
Yours are the Public Cares; that is your noble Province. While I, and those in
my inferior and unactive Station, can only wish Success to the Proceedings of
such Good Patriots as your self; Our thoughts are best employed with our own
private Business, and inoffensive Studies.

Concerning this Book, Sir, it is a Subject that gives Posterity such a View of
the decays of Time, and the Inconstancy of Fortune, as the like cannot,
perhaps, be produced in the History of any other Nation Since of all that
stupendous number of Monastic Foundations in England and Wales, the continued
Work of many Ages, by which the greatest Kings, Princes, and Noblemen of this
Island were once thought to have eternized their names, and in those
magnificent and costly Structures to have built themselves so many Monuments as
lasting as the Earth they stood on, not one remains at this day; nay the very
Ruins of many are become invisible. To this purpose (though on a different
occasion) a modern French Poet has well expressed himself in these Lines, Aussi
le temps a fait sur ces Masses hautaines
D'ilustres chastimens des Vanitez humaines.
Ces Tombaux sont tombez, and ces superbes Rois
Sous leur chute sont morts une second fois.
And yet their Memory still lives in our History and Records; so much more
durable and lasting is Paper than Brass and Marble. For this we are heholding
to the Labors of your Sir William Dugdale, a Person so highly meritorious in
the study, and discovery, of our English Antiquities, that his Reputation can
never die among the learned.

Warwickshire has certainly produced two of the most famous and deserving
Writers, in their several ways, that England can boast of; a Dugdale, and a
Shakespeare, both Williams; a name that has been of eminent Grace to this County
in many Instances: nor will it ever cease to be so while you are living.

I might here enlarge in your just Encomium, but I fear to displease you even
with truth, when it must be so very much to your Commendation. I know your
Modesty as well as Merits, and I have ever observed that Praise is most uneasy
to those who best deserve it. I will therefore only add that I am,

SIR, Your very Humble and most Affectionate Servant, J. W.

TO THE READER.
SOmething may be said here, by way of Preface, of the Work it self, and of
this Abridgment or Epitome of that Work. First for the Work it self, it will
perhap^ be thought by some that the Monasticon Anglican^^, or History of the
Foundations and Endowments of the antrent Abbeys, Priories, etc. once
flourishing in England, and long since utterly suppressed, is in these our days
(in which their very Memory seems to some People, odious and ungrateful) more
useless and insignificant than an Old Almanac. It Is true, the matter appears
very obsolete and neglected, yet is the Monasticon Anglicanum so far from being
useless, that it is in effect the most useful Evidenciary, and Repertory of
Titles that is in print. Considering, 1. The vast Quantity of Lands which
formerly belonged to Religious Houses in this Kingdom. 2. The diverse sorts of
Liberties and Immunities which most of those Houses and their Possessions were
endowed with, as Courts of Pleas, Markets, Fairs, Commons, Free Pastures,
Estovers, Exemptions from Tithes, Tolls, Taxes and Contributions, with other
Franchises of various sorts and not easily reckoned up. 3. That by the Statutes
27 H. 8. chapter 28. 1. and. 31 H. 8. chapter 13. 2. 3. it is expressly provided that
the King and his Patentees shall have and hold the said Lands in as large and
ample manner as the said Houses enjoy^d them, and 21. of the last mentiond
Statute, that such Lands as were before discharged of the Payment of Tithes
shall so continue. By which Provisions such Persons as enjoy any of those Lands
are entitled to many of the same Liberties and Franchises as were at first
given with the said Lands to those Houses respectively, such Franchises being
real and annexed to the Estate. 4. All the Monasticon is a Transcript of ancient
Manuscripts coppyed by that laborious Antiqu^ry Mr. Roger Dodsworth, and that
eminently learned Historian Sr. William Dugdale Knt. late Garter King of Arms,
out of the very Original Grants, or Leiger Books, or Public Records, or other
Muniments formerly kept by the respective Monasteries, and (when they perused
them) choicely preserved either in some of our most famous Libraries, or in the
Possession of those Gentlemen and Persons of honor, who since the Suppression
enjoy the Lands to which those Deeds relate, or some part of them; whose names
are cited in the Margin of the said Book. And such credit has it received from
the integrity of the Authors or Collectors thereof, that (as I am credibly
informed) it has been admitted as a good Circumstantial Evidence in the Courts
of Westminster when the Records therein transcribed could not upon diligent
Search be otherwise recovered. Further, this Book is of use to enlighten and
assi^^ the young Student of (...) Common Laws, it showing in diverse parts of
it, the Commencemen^^ of ^enures, the Nature and manner of Corrodies,
Appropriations, Endowmen^ of Vicarages, Reservation of Services upon Grants in
Frankalmoine, or upon Tenures by Divine Service, the old Ways of tithing,
Conveyancing, and something of Pleading. It is also useful in History, giving
us a lively Idea of the manner of our Forefathers way of Living, their Zeal for
Gods Public Worship, as then professed, and the Simplicity of their Devotions;
and of the great Charity to the Poor, and Hospitality and Beneficence to all
Comers, maintained and exercised in the Monasteries. But these things have been
thought faults, and therefore I will mention no more of that; but observe in
the last place, that this Book is of great use in matters of Heraldry and
Genealogies; there being few or none among the Great Families, and old
Nobility, of England, who have not been Founders or Principal Benefactors to
some Monastery or Religious House, and the Monks and Canons have for the most
part taken special Care to record in the Leiger Book of their respective Houses
the History of their Founder's and Patron's Family, setting down their several
Matches, and Issue, and oftentimes the day of their Births and Deaths, with
the most remarkable Circumstances of their Lives, and where buried; which seems
also to be done at the time when every thing happened or soon after, and is
therefore of greater Credit. In this Work we must note that the Author says
nothing of the four Orders of Friars, viz. The Franciscans or Gray-Friers, the
Dominicans or Blackfriars, the Carmelites or White-Friers, and the Augustine
Friars; the Reason was, I suppose, because their Houses, generally speaking,
were not endowed with Lands and Revenues, but they subsisted for the most, part
by daily and accidental Charities.

Thus much of the Book at large, now as to this Abridgment or Epitome, I have
only this to say; It gives you a short view in English of the Principal, and
(as I thought,) most material Passages of what is contained in Latin, and
sometimes old French, in the three great and copious Tomes of the Monasticon
Anglicanum: The Names of Persons and Places, ^^ing variously written according
to the different Orthography of several Ages, and Writer, I have not thought
convenient to alter the ancient way of spelling, but have transcribed them here
in the same variety as I found 'em there: In the Margin I have exactly observed
and marked out the Pages successively in order, that so the Reader may have a
ready recourse to the Book at large for a fuller and more particular
Information. And in my opinion this is the best use that can be made of any
Abridgment; namely to serve as a larger and better sort of Table, which not
only represents the substance of a voluminous Author in little, but refers and
directs the Reader to the place where the Subjects is more expressly handled. On
the whole, you have here a short Historical Account of the Foundation of all
the Principal Churches and Religious Structures in England and Wales, as well
those that were demolisht at the Suppression of the Monasteries, as those that
are still in being (except Parish Churches.) And here we must note that of all
those Cathedral Churches and Episcopal Seats, whose venerable Fabrics we
behold at this day, some were formerly Abbeys, where the Prior and Convent of
Monks were the Bishops Chapter; such were Canterbury, Rochester, Winchester,
Ely, Norwich, Worcester, Durham, Carlisle; (and in such Churches where there was
a Bishop, the Superior of the Monks was always called a Prior, the Bishop being
in effect the Abbot) others never were Abbeys, but the Chapter did always
consist of a Dean and Secular Canons (or Prebendaries) as at present; such were
York, London, Lincoln, Salisbury, Exeter, Wells, Litchfield, Herefored,
Chichester, and in Wales, St. David's, Landaff, Bangor, and St. Asaph. Besides
these, there were five new Bishoprics erected by King Henry VIII. in certain
Ahbies, after their dissolution, viz. Peterborough, Oxford, Chester, Gloucester,
and Bristol, whose Churches were left standing, with some of their old
Buildings for the Habitation of the Bishop, Dean and Chapter, etc. (for which
see the Statutes, 31 H. 8. chapter 9. 34 H. 8. chapter 17.) Westminister-Abby was also
made an Episcopal Seat, but that continued so but a while. Some other Monastic
Churches were made Parochial, and are still in being, as St. Albans, St. Mary
Overies, Royston, etc. to conclude, I think I may, not unfitly, apply to my
present undertaking the words used on the like occasion, in the Second Book of
Maccabees, chapter 2. v. 23. All these things (I say) being declared by Jason of
Cyrene in five Books, we will essay to abridge in one Volum. For considering
the infinite number, and the difficulty which they find that desire to look
into the Narrations of the Story, for the variety of the Matter, we have been
careful that they that will read might have delight, and they that are desirous
to commit to memory might have ease, and that all into whose hands it comes
might have profit. -- To stand upon every point, and to go over things at
large, and to be curious in particulars, belongs to the first Author of the
Story. But to use Brevity, and avoid much laboring of the Work, is to be
granted to him that will make an Abridgment. Here then will we begin the story:
only adding thus much to that which has been said, that it is a foolish thing
to make a long Prologue and to be short in the Story it self.

MONASTICON ANGLICANUM, ABRIDGED.

VOL. I.

OF THE Benedictine Monks, CLUNIACS, CISTERSIANS, and CARTHUSIANS.

Of the first Institution of Monks.
THose who have writ of this Subject have produced for Examples of the
Monastic Life, In the Proem.
out of the Old Testament, Samuel, Elias, and the Sons of the Prophets; and out
of the New, St. John the Baptist, and our Savior Christ himself, who exhorted
his disciples to leave all Secular concerns and follow him. After his Ascension
the Apostles and Disciples lived in common; But after the Apostles were
martyred, some Christians retained Property, others still endeavored to
continue the Apostolic Life, and live in Common: such were the Monks in Egypt;
Anthony, Hilarion, Macarius, etc. After them St. Jerome, St. Augustine, till at
last St. Benedict in the year 516. at Mount-Cassin, writ his Rule, which was
approved by the whole Church.

Of the Rules of Monks, and other Religious Persons there have been several
Authors, some of the Principle were, St. Basil, who writ his Rule for Monks,
Anno Dom. 350. St. Angustin Bishop of Hippo made a Rule for Canons Regular,
Anno Dom. 400. St. Benedict, beforementioned, about Anno 516. St. Bruno, for
Carthusians, An. 1083. Robert an Abbot in Burgundy instituted the Cistercians,
An. 1098. Norbert, the Premonstratenses An. 1120. In the same year began also
the Hospitallers and Templers. St. Gilbert of Sempringham founded his Order,
An. 1148. St. Dominick, An. 1198. St. Francis 1260. The Carmelites were settled
and established by Pope Martin, An. Dom. 1279.

Kings of this Land who have become Monks.
Petroc, King of Wales; Constantine, King of Cornwall; Sebby, Offa, and
Sigebert, Kings of the East Saxons; Ethelred, and Kynred, Kings of Mercia;
Coelwulph, and Edbricht, Kings of Northumberland.

The Old Form of admitting a Brother into a Convent.
His first Petition, in the Colloquium.
Sir I besyche you and all the Covent for the luffe of God, our Lady sanct
Marye, sanct John of Baptist^, and all the hoyle Cowr^e of Devyne, that ze
would resave me, to lyve and dye here among you in the state of a Monk, as
prebenvarye and servant unto all to the honor of God solace to the Company,
prouffet to the place, and health unto my Sawie.

His Answer unto the Examinacyon.
Sir I tryste through the help of God and your good prayers to keep all these
things which ze have now heyr rehersede.

His Petition before the Profession.
Sir I have beyn heyr now this twell month nere hand, and lovyde be God, me
lyks right well, both the order and the company; wherapon I besyche you and all
the company for the luffe of God, our Lady sanct Marye, sanct John of Baptisie
and all the hoyle company of hevyne that ze will resave me unto my profession
at my twell month day according to my petycion which I made when I was first
resaved heyr amongs you^ etc.

Of the Benedictine Order have been four Emperors, twelve Empresses, six and
forty Kings, one and fifty Queens, not to mention those of lesser Quality.

ERRATA.
PAge 6. l. 24. r. Lindisfarn. p. 37. l. ult. r. or an Ox. p. 39. l. 30. r.
for the. p. 69. l. 4. r. Inspeximus. p. 78 l. 12. r. or any. l. 20. r. be put
in. p. 84. l. antepe^ul. r. Daptfer. p. 168. l. antepenul. r. of the same. p.
196. l. 14. r. HETHE in Kent. p. 210. l. 32. r. Earl. p. 220. l. 35. r.
special. p. 231. l. 30. r. East Angles. p. 232. l. 3. r. Derham p. 262. l. 7.
r. Marches. p. 267. l. 4. r. Patron of the. p. 294. l. 19. r. colors. p. 328.
l. 25. r. Wyndesore.

Some other literal Mistakes and false Pointing, have happened, which the
Reader may ea^^^y perceive and correct.

A BENEDICTINE MONK
Place this and ye following plates according to ye pages in ye mergin.

Vol. 1. P. 1.



MONASTICON ANGLICANUM, Abridg'd in English.
VOL. I.
Of the BENEDICTINE Order.
The Monastery at GLASTONBURY, in Somersetshire.
IN the 31th. year after our Savior's Passion, Folio 1.
twelve Disciples of St. Philip the Apostle, among whom Joseph of Arimathea was
one, came to this place, and preached the Christian Religion to King Arviragus.
They obtained of that King the Ground where the Monastery afterward stood, and
twelve Hides of Land, and built there the first Church of the Kingdom, in a
poor and homely manner. They lived here in a kind of heremitical life, and
converted many Pagans to the Faith of Christ. After they were all dead, and
here buried, the holy men Phaganus and Diruvianus, having baptized King Lucius,
obtained this place of that King, and for a great while they and their
Successors remained here in a kind of Society consisting of twelve only, till
the arrival of St. Patrick, who taught them the monastical Life, and became
himself their first Abbot. Afterward St. David Archbishop of Menevia (now
called St. David's) added to the East End of the Old Church a lesser Chapel in
manner of a Chancel, and consecrated it in honor of the Virgin Mary.

This Church for its Antiquity was by the old English called Ealdechirche, and
the Men of those days had no Oath more sacred and formidable than to swear by
this Old Church. And it was reverenced like Rome it self, for as that became
Famous for its multitude of Martyrs, so did this for its multitude of
Confessors here buried.

The Isle in which this Church stood was by the Britions called Ynswyrtryn, i.
e. the Isle of Glass, from the clear and cristaline stream of Water which
Avallonia. By the Saxons it was named Glastynbury. This Isle with several other
places adjoining, were called the twelve Hides, and did enjoy from the
beginning very great Privileges. The Bounds of which twelve Hides may be seen
in the Monasticon at large, p. 2, 3. These places there mentioned enjoyed all
sorts Glastonbury, by the British, English, and Norman Kings.

In this Church did rest and lie buried the twelve Disciples of the Apostle
Philip, above* mentioned, whose chief was Joseph of Arimathea, with his Son
Josephus. Here also lies St. Patrick the Apostle of Ireland, and two of his
Disciples, St. Gildas the British Historaographer, St. David Archbishop of
Menevia, St. Dunstan Archbishop, St. Indractus with his seven Companions all
Martyrs, St. Vrbanus, the Bones of Venerable Bede, with the (...) of a great
number of other Saints, and holy Martyrs, and Confeffors.

To recite all the Relics that were in this Church would be two large Moses's
Rod, Manna, etc. things (...) to our Lord Jesus Christ, two small pieces of his
Cradle, some of the Gold which the Wisemen of the East offered, some pieces of
Bread of (...) Loaves with which Jesus fed five thousand men, some of (...)
some pieces of his Cross, and of his Sepulcher, one (...) of (...) of Thorns,
etc. Things relating to the Virgin M^ry. (...) one thread of her Garment, and
some of her Hair, and^ (...) tude of Relics relating to St. John Baptist, the
(...) Tomb of Saints, was interred Coel King of the Britons, Father of St.
Helena, Mother of Constantine the Great; Caraducus Duke of Cornwall, ^he
renowned King Arthur and Guenevera his Queen, which King died at Glastonbury
about Whitsontide in the Year of our Lord 542. King Kentwynus, King Edmund Son
of Edward the Elder, King Edgar, King Edmund Ironside, with several Bishops and
Dukes who were great Benefactors to this House, and many other Great men. In so
great Reverence was the Church and Churchyard where these were interred, that
our forefathers did not dare to use any idle discourse or to spit therein,
without great necessity, enemies and naughty men were not suffered to be buried
therein, neither did any bring any Hawk, Dog, or Horse upon the Ground,

Bishops and famous Prelates that have gone from this House to govern other
Churches, are as follows, viz. Birthwaldus, Abbot here, was made Archbishop of
Canterbury; Athelmus Monk here, Bishop of Wells, and after that Archbishop of
Canterbury; St. Dunstan, Monk and Abbot here, Bishop of Worcester, then of
London, and lastly of Canterbury; Egelganus Monk here, Bishop of Chichester and
Archbishop of Canterbury; Sigericus Monk here, Bishop of Wells and Archbishop
of Canterbury; St. Elphegus a Martyr, Bishop of Winchester, and after that
Archbishop of Canterbury; Elnothus, Monk here and Archbishop of Canterbury, in
the time of King (...)

To these may be added Gaufridus a Bishop, and Monk here, ob, Anno Dom. 782.
Ethelwinus, a Bishop, who died the same year; Wi^ertus, a Bishop, ob. Anno Them.
800. Wigthagu Bishop, ob. Anno Dom. ^36. Alstanus, Bishop, ob. Anno Dom. 842.
Tumbertus, Bishop, ob. 866. Daniel, ob. 956. Elfricus, Bishop, ob. 988. Also in
the time of King Edgar, Sigegarus Bishop of Wells, Britelmus Bishop of Wells,
(...), Sigefridus, St. Ethilwoldus, Wilsinus, Aelf^anus, Egelricus, Kenwaldus,
(...), Livingus, Brithwius, Britwaldus, who died Anno Dom. 1055. All these, of
(...) in this House became Bishops of diverse places in England.

The Benefactors to this House were, first, Arviragus King of the Brita^is,
who, though a Pagan, gave to St. Joseph and his Companio^os the Isle in which
the Monastery was built, called by the Inhabitants Ynswyrtryn, which, King
Lucius did afterward confirm to Phaganus and Diruvianus, and their Disciples.
King Arthur gave many other adjoining Lands. King Kenwalli, King Kentwinus,
King Baldredus, Bishop Hedda, King Kedwalla, King Ina, gave other Lands. So did
St. Wilfridus Archbishop of York, and abundance of others of both Sexes, among
the Principal of which were King Sigebert. King Offa, King Alfred or Alured,
King Athelstan, King Edmund, King Edwin, King Edgar, King Edmund Ironside, with
several Queens. These and many other names, with the Lands by the several
Benefactors given, may be read of in the Monasticon at large, p. 9, 10, 14. 15.
etc.

St. Patrick, who was born in the year of our Lord 361. after his Conversion of
Ireland to Christianity, became Abbot of this Place, and obtained of Pope
Celestine, twelve years Indulgence to all those who should with pious Devotion
visit the Church of the Blessed Virgin Mary here erected, and honor her with
any part of their Goods.

About the year of our Lord 505. Augustine the Monk was sent into England by
the holy Pope Gregory to preach the Faith to the English Saxons. Fthelbert the
King of Kent and his People. A^terwards being made Archibshop, he established
his Metropolitan Seat at Canterbury, and there placed certain Monks living
according to the Rule of St. Benedict; after this several Monasteries in
England were erected under the same Rule, which obtained so great reputation
that there were no Monks to be found in England but what were of this Order;
and in those time the Rule of St. Benedict began to be first observed in the
Monastery of Glastonbury, they living here before that, after the manner of the
Monks of Egypt.

King Ina began his Reign over the West Saxons Anno 689. and gave much Land to
this Monastery, he also built the greater Church at Glastonbury, in honor of
our Savior, and of the holy Apostles Peter and Paul. And by his Charter
bearing date Anno Dom. 725. Granted to this Monastery many and great
Privileges and Immunities. King Ina dying in a Pilgrimage to Rome, his
Successor, Ethelardus, became also a bountiful Benefactor, West Saxons, etc.

King Edmund granted to the Church of the holy Mother of God at Glastonbury,
and to the venerable Dunstan Abbot there, the Liberty and i. e. Burgbrice
Hundred. Socna, Atb^s, Ordelus, Infangenetheofas, Homsecna, Frithbrice,
Foresteall, Toll and Team, through the Kingdom of England, and that they should
enjoy their Lands as free from all Claims as he enjoyed his own, especially to
the Town of Glastonbury it self, with many other Liberties etc and this was by
his Charter dated Anno Dom. 944.

King Edgar, by his Charter dated at London Anno Dom. 971. granted to Rome, and
that of Canterbury: And gave and confirmed to this Church two hundred and
fifteen Hides of Land given by several Benefactors.

William the Conqueror at his first coming to the Crown, did very much mutilate
the Possessions of this Church. He made one Turstinus a Norman Abbot here, in
the year 1081. And in order to make some amends to the Monks, he confirmed to
them several Lands which they complained to have been unjustly taken from them.

Herlewin, and Henry Brother of Theobald Earl of Blois, and Nephew of King
Henry the I. were two Abbots of this Monastery, who through their industrious
endeavors obtained much good to this House, and the Restoration of many Lands
which had been taken from it.

Vid. Vol. 2. p. 837.

[This Abbey was valued before the Suppression at 3311 l. 7 s. 4 d. ob. per
Annum.]

The Cathedral Church of Canterbury.
IN the time of the blessed Gregory's Papacy, St. Augustine with several other
Monks were sent to convert the English People, who in the year of Grace 600.
(or according to others 596.) coming into England, converted King Ethelbert and
some thousands of his People, which King gave them a Mansion in his Capital
City of Canterbury, then called Dorobernia, there to Preach and Baptize.
Hereupon the blessed Augustine having received a Pall from Pope Gregory, built
a Church there, and dedicated it to the honor of our Savior Jesus Christ, he
also did here institute the Metropolitan Seat of himself and Successors. And
having raised here a Monastery of Monks, the People flowed in to him from all
parts, some for Baptism, and some to become Monks, devoting themselves and all
they had to God's service.

The Principal Benefactors were King Ethelbert, who gave them his Canterbury,
which Pope Gregory decreed to be the Metropolitan Seat, and made it the first
in Dignity, it having first received the Faith, Ethelbaldus Son of Ethelbert.
King Cedwalla, King Offa, Edmundus King of Kent Cenulphus King of Kent,
Beornulphus King of Mercia, King Athelstan, Edmund, St. Edward the Confessor,
William the Conqueror, King Henry the I. Henry the II. Richard the I. Edward
the III. Edward Prince of Wales, his Son; Henry the IV. These and abundance of
others of inferior condition gave and confirmed to this Church many Lands,
Privileges, and Immunities, the particulars of all which Lands, etc. may be
seen in the Monasticon at large.

The Monastery of St. AUGUSTINES in Canterbury.
Augustine being sent by Pope Gregory as aforesaid, arrived at the Isle of
Thanet in Kent, in the year 596. with several Monks and Ministers of God's Word
about forty in number; they were kindly received by King Ethelbert, who
received holy Baptism on Whitsonday Anno Dom. 597. After this Augustine went
over to the Bishop of Arles in France, and being by him ordained a Bishop, he
returned into England. At Canterbury he fixed his Metropolitan Seat as
abovementioned. A little without this City on the East Side had been an Idol
Temple formerly made use of by King Ethelbert, before his Conversion, this
Augustine cha^g'd into a Church; and dedicated in the name of St. Pancrace the
Martyr. Afterward in the year 605. Augustine obtained this Church, and the
adjacent Ground of King Ethelbert, upon which place a new Church was built and
dedicated to the honor of St. Peter and St. Paul; which Church was stored with
Monks, endowed with Revenues by that King, and appointed for the burial place,
of himself and Successors, as also chosen for the burial of Augustine and his
Successors, Archbishops of Canterbury.

King Ethelbert having built and endowed this Monastery he placed there, by the
Council of Archbishop Augustine, one Peter a Monk to be Abbot

The Archbishop Augustine granted several Privileges to this Monastery, and
denounced heavy Censures against any who should violate the

This Monastery was used for a burial place of the Archbishops, the Monks, and
others of Canterbury, for many years; it being in those times not usual to bury
within a City, till the Venerable Cuthbert came to be Archbishop, being the
11th. after Augustine, who being at Rome, obtained of the Pope the liberty of
having burial places in England, within Cities.

On the East Side of Canterbury without the City and near this Monaslery stood
the Church of St. Martin, which Church was the Seat of a Godwyn, who dying in
the time of William the Conqueror, when Lanfrank was Archbishop of Canterbury,
he refused to subrogate any other Bishop in his place, but instead of a Bishop
constituted an Archdeacon there.

[Valued before the Suppression at 1413 l. 4 s, 11 d. ob. q. per Annum:

ROCHESTER, in Kent.
ANno Dom. 600. King Ethelbert founded the Church of St. Andrew the Rochester,
and gave to it several Lands, as did also Eadbert King of Kent, Offa King of
Mercia, and diverse others; denouncing to the Violators of their pious
Donations, heavy Curses and Imprecations. All which Lands and Liberries King
Henry the I. did confirm to the said Church, to Gundulf the Bishop there, and
the Monks serving God in it. William the Conqueror, King William Rufus, Rodbert
Son of King Henry, Robert Fitz Hamon, and William de Albeiney the King's
Butler. Vid Vol. 2. p. 844. Vol. 3. p. 1.

[Valued before the Suppression at 486l. 11 s. 5 d. per Annum.]

WINCHESTER Cathedral Church.
ANno Dom. 608. Kinegilsus Son of Celric, King of the West Saxons, after
Winchester for the space of seven Leucas or Miles. But himself being prevented
by death from periecting what he intended, his Son and Successor Kinwalcus
performed the Work, and confirmed the Lands abovementioned to the said Church.

Other principal Benefactors to this Church were King Ina; Ethelardus, King of
the West Saxons; Egbert, King of all England, who lies buried here; Alured, who
built a new Monastery within the Coemitery of the Episcopal

Church. endowed it with Possessions, and gave the Government of Grimbaldus.
(This King first instituted Hundreds and Tithings); Edward his Son and
Successor, King Ethelstan his Son, King Edred his Brother; King Edgar; Queen
Emma Mother of Hardecanute, and Edward surnamed the Confessor; which Queen
having performed her purgation of supposed Elwin Bishop of Winchester,
according to the Ordel, by going over nine red hot Plowshares, unhurt, gave to
the Church of St. Swithin, here, nine Manors; so also did the said Bishop
Elwin; all which gifts were confirmed by King Edward the Confessor. Anno Dom.
1079. Bishop Walkelinus began to new build the Church from the Foundation,
toward which Work the King gave so much Wood, as could be cut down and carried
away from his adjoining Wood called Hanepinges, in three days and nights; upon
which, such an innumerable Company of Carpenters assembled, that in the time
limited, they conveyed away the whole Wood.

Anno Dom. 963. In the time of Bishop Ethelwold, the secular Clergy of this
Church, living licentiously, were displaced, and Monks put in their room. Vide
infra, p. 979.

[ Valued at 1507 l. 17 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

DURHAM Monastery.
ANno Dom. 635. Eighty eight years from the first coming of the English into
Britain, and thirty nine years from the coming of St. Augustine, pious King
Oswald erected a Bishops Seat in the Island of Landisfarn, of which Agdanus
became Bishop, and placed there the Monks that came along with him.

Cuthbert was Consecrated Bishop, at York, on Easter Day Anno Dom. 685. To him
Egfrid King of Northumberland gave Creec, with the Lands three Miles about it,
and also Lugub^lia, now called Carlisle, with the Lands fifteen Miles about it.
Ob. Cuthbert 687.

Anno Dom. 729. Coelwolf King of Northumberland began his Reign; he was a great
Benefactor to this Church, and became himself a Monk here.

Tyne and Tese, was formerly given to St. Cuthbert, and was subject to the
Government of the Bishop of St. Cuthbert's Church, till the Danes took away a
great part of the Lands, which were however restored again by King Ethelstan.

Aldwinus a Monk and two of his Companions led a Monastic Life at a place then
called Girecum or Girne in Northumberland, from which three Monks, three
Monasteries proceeded, namely one at Durham, in honor of the blessed Virgin
Mary, and of St. Cuthbert, one at Lestingham, and one at a place then called
Streneshalgh, all three within the Kingdom of the Northumbers.

William de Karilepho by his Deed dated Anno Dom 1082. declared the many and
great Liberties granted by Pope Gregory the VII. and adds others to the Church
of St. Cuthbert, with an Anathema to the Impugnors.

William the Conqueror upon the precept of Pope Gregory the VII. and at the
Petition of William Bishop of Durham, removed the Secular Canons out of the
Church of D^^ham, and placed Monks in their room, and confirmed all the
Liberties and Privileges granted to the said Church, and this by his Charter
dated in the 18th. year of his Reign.

Thomas Archbishop of York set forthand declared the Diocese of the Bishop of
Durham to be all the Land betwixt Tyne and Tese, Northumberland, Tevydale,
Tynd^^, Carl^ol, Weredale, with the Church of Hertesham, and Lindis^^rn.

Principal Benefactors to this Church were, King William the Conqueror, who
gave great P^sessions to the Bishop and his Successors, to hold (...)

Edgar Son of Mal^olm King of the Scots, he gave to the Church of Durham, the
Mansion of Berwic, and Coldy^ghamschyr.

King Richard the I. he granted and confirmed to the Bishop of (...) Palatin,
for ever, etc. Vid Vol. 2. p. 845.

[ Valued at 1366 l. 10 s. 9 d. per Annum.]

MALMESBURY, in Wiltshire.
MAyldulp^us, by Nation a S^^tchman, a Philosopher by Ernd^^ion, and a Monk by
Profession, was the first Founder of the Monstery

Anno Dom. 635. King Berthwald, with the Consent and Confirmation of King
Aethelred, gave to this Monastery for ever Summerford, lying upon Thames.

Other Benefactors to this Monastery were Lutherius Bishop of Winchester, who
by his deed dated Anno Dom. 680. gave to it for ever the Town of Malmesbury,
King Athelred in the year 681, gave other Lands; so did King Chedwalla Anno
682. in the year 1065. King Edward the Confessor confirmed all former
Donations, and himself granted to this House great Liberties and Privileges;
the like did King William the Conqueror in the Mauld his Queen became also a
Benefactrice.

Pope Innocent in the year 1248. granted to the Abbot and Monks of Malmesbury
in the Diocese of Salisbury, a Confirmation of all their Lands and Revenues,
which see in the Monasticon at large, together with several great Benedict
should be for ever observed in this Monastery.

[ Valued at 803 l. 17 s. 7 d. ob. q. per Annum.]

WESTMINSTERABBY, in Middlesex.
IN the days of King Lucius the first Christian King of Britain, who was
baptized Anno Dom. 184. this place was first consecrated to God's honor,
Dioclesian's persec^tion, Christianity was expelled from hence, and the place
turned to a (...) Temple of Apollo. Afterward when the Saxons had conquered
this Kingdom and were in possession of it, the blessed Gregory in the year of
Grace 604. sent Augustine the Monk together with Mellitus, Iustus, I aurentius,
and others, to teach the Christian Religion in Britain. He arrived in Kent, as
has been already noted, and having converted and baptized Ethelbert, King of
that province, he afterward did the same to Sebert, King of the East Saxons,
King Ethelbert's Sister's Son; who upon his Conversion to Christianity, cast
down the foresaid Temple of Apollo, and in the same place (then called Thorney
Isle) built a Church in honor of St. Peter Prince of the Apostles.

Augustine, ordained two Bishops Mellitus London, and Iustus Bishop of
Rochester. The History of this Mellitus going to consecrate it, he found the
Work already performed by St. Peter himself.

Edward the King and Confessor, Pope Nicholas granted to it large immunities,
appointing it to be for^ever a Seat of Benedictine Monks, the place of
Consecration of our Kings, and Repository of the Regalia, and exempted it from
the Bishops Jurisdiction, placing it under the sole and immediate Government of
the King and his Successors.

Edward the Confessor, by his Charter dated in the year 1066. reciting that at
the Dedication of this new Church he had placed here certain Relics, viz. Two
pieces of our Lord's Cross, a piece of his Seamless Coat, with other Relics of
the blessed Virgin, and of the Apostles, etc. he renewed and confirmed the
Lands and Privileges formerly granted Roteland after the death of Queen
Edgith, etc. With blessings denounced to those who shall in the future increase
or improve these Gifts, but heavy Curses and Anathemas against those of what
degree or quality soever who shall infringe or diminish the same. Vid. Vol. 22.
p. 847.

[ Valued at 3471 l. 0 s. 2 d. q. per Annum.]

SHERBURN, in Dorsetshire.
Kenewale, Edgar, Offa, Egbert, Sigebert, Ina, and several other Saxon Kings.
In the year of our Lord 1122 Sherburn and Horton made both but one Abbey; but
afterward about the year 1139. Roger Bishop of Salisbury changed the Priory of
Sherburn into an Abbey, that of Horton being destroyed and annexed to this.

See more of this Abbey infra, p. 423.

[ Valued at 682 l. 14 s. 7 d. ob. per Annum.]

LESTINGHAM, in Yorkshire.
ANno Dom. 648. Edilwald Son of Oswald King of the Northumbers, gave to Cedde
Bishop of the East Saxons (or Bishop of London) a piece of Ground on a high
Mountain, called Lestingay, for the building of a Monastery. For the erecting
of which Cedde prepared himself by fasting a whole Lent (except Sundays) eating
nothing till the Evening, and then only a Lindisfarn, where he himself had been
educated. He governed his Diocese for many years after, but died in this
Monastery, and was here buried.

PETERBOROUGH Abbey, in Northamptonshire.
THIS Monastery was begun by Peada the first Christian King of Mercia, by and
with the assistance of a great and eminent man called Saxulphus the first Abbot
here. The place where it was built was in those old Times called Medeshamstede,
but the Church being dedicated to St. Peter, it was afterward called
Peterborough. The Foundation was perfected and the Endowment completed by
Wulfer King of Mercia, and younger Brother of King Peada, who after his
conversion to Christianity An. Do. 664. not only confirmed what had been
already given by his Predecessors, but gave to this Monastery a very great
quantity of Lands lying in the Country round about. King Edgar by his Charter
dated A. D. 972. granted other Lands and many Privileges. Pope Agatha Estfeild
680. These Grants, Liberties and Privileges, were in succeeding Edward the
Elder, King Ethelred, King Cnut, the Confessor, and William the Conqueror.

The Monastery of St. Peter at Medeshamstede, being built A. D. 654. remained
in Peace till the year 870. at which time the Pagan Danes coming down out of
Yorkshire into Lincolnshire, Earl Algar, Morcar, a Lay-Brother of
Crowland-Abby, called Tolius (who had been a famous Soldier before he entered
into Religion) Hardingus of Reihalle, and under his Command all the men of
Stamford, made head against them, and at first Pagans; but they being soon
after reinforced with greater power, they in a second Battle over-threw the
Christians with grievous slaughter; burnt down the Abbey and Church of Croyland,
and from thence marched to Medeshamsted where they slew the Abbot and all the
Monks to the number of eighty four, and utterly destroyed the Church and all
other Buildings. From hence they marched to Cambridge destroying all the
Country as they went.

In the year of Christ 970. St. Adelwold Bishop of Winchester began to
re-edifie the Monastery of Medeshamstede, and called it the Borough of St.
Peter, one hundred year after it was destroyed by the Danes.

The foregoing Particulars of this History have been curiously painted in the
Windows of the Cloisters belonging to this Abbey, with English Verses under each
Picture explaining the Story: Which see in the Monasticon at large.

[ Valued at 1721 l. 14 s. 0 d. ob. q. per Annum.]

WHITBY, (of Old called STRENSHALE,) in Yorkshire.
ANno Dom. 655. Penda the Pagan King of Mercia making War upon Oswy King of
Northumberland, Oswy made a Vow to Almighty God that Penda was slain in the
Battle. In performance o^ (...) Vow, he gave his Daughter named Ethelfleda,
then scarce one year (...), and the Ground then called Streneshal for the
building of a Hilda, a Woman of great Religion; and was at first a Nunnery, but
afterward a House of Monks.

In the year 1067. William de Percy, who came into England with the Conqueror,
and had obtained to himself and Heirs the Town of Whitby and all its Members,
made a new Foundation of the Abbey of Whitby, and gave all the said Town and
Members to God, St. Peter, and St. Hilda of Whitby, and to the Monks there
serving God, in perpetual Alms, with Reinfridus a Monk of Euesham, Prior of the
Danes above two hundred years.

Many were the Benefactors to this Abbey, besides the Founder William de Percy,
a particular of the Lands, Possessions, Forests, Churches, Tithes, and
Liberties by them given, may be seen in the Monasticon at large, p. 74, 75.
Vid. inf. p. 988.

[ Valued at 437 l. 2 s. 9 d. per Annum.]

CHERTSEY, in Surrey.
Chertsey was founded in the Reign of King Egbert, in the year of our Lord 666.
by Frithwaldus a petty King or Governor Surrey, under Wulfar King of Mercia,
and endowed with large Possessions; all which were confirmed by the said Wulfar
King of Mercia.

The Limits of the Lands belonging to Chertsey-Abby may be seen in the
Monasticon at large, p. 77.

Alexander granted to this Abbey many Privileges; among other, that they should
pay no Tithes of their Lands in their own hands, nor of the Beasts which they
themselves kept.

[ Valued at 659 l. 15 s. 8 d. ob. per Annum.]

BERKING, in the County of Essex.
Berking, eight miles from London, was founded by Erkenwaldus Bishop of that
City, for his Sister Ethelburge, who was the first Abbess of this Nunnery.

Hodelredus a Kinsman of Sebby King of the East Saxons gave to this House fair
Revenues, which Gift was confirmed by the said King Sebby.

The Ancient Profits and Expenses of this Nunnery, as they were charged to the
Account of the Celeress, may be seen in the Monasticon at large, p. 80, 81, 82,
83.

[ Valued at 862 l. 12 s. 5 d. ob. per Annum.]

The Monastery of St. Mildred, in the Isle of Thanet, in Kent.
MIldred the Virgin, was the Daughter of Merwaldus Son of Penda Mercia, and
Domneva of the Family of the Kings of Kent. Which Domneva with her Husband's
assistance built this Monastery for Nuns, and placed here seventy Virgins, of
whom their Daughter Mildred was consecrated Abbess. This House was destroyed by
the Pagan Danes A BENEDICTINE NUN
Vol. 1. P. 79

the year 1011. Afterward in the time of King Cnut, it was annexed by that
King's Grant to St. Augustines Monastery, and the Body of St. Mildred
translated from hence of St. Augustines at Canterbury, A. D. 1033. The Thanet,
were confirmed to the said Monastery of St. Augustines by King Edward the
Confessor.

FALKSTONE, in Kent.
EAnswida Daughter of Eadbaldus Son of Ethelbert King of Kent, built this
Monastery in a remote Part from Commerce, situated seven Acers breadth from the
Sea, which in process of time quite wore away the Land, and destroyed this
House; but the Relics of the holy Virgin the Foundress, who lived and died
here; were removed to the Neighboring Church of St. Peter.

See more of this House, infra, p. 560.

[ Valued at 41 l. 15 s. 10 d. per Annum.]

LIMING, in Kent.
THE Monastery here was built by Ethelburge Daughter of King Ethelbert, and
Wife of Edwin King of Northumberland, after whole death she returned into Kent,
and founded this Nunnery, and lies here buried.

RACULFE, in Kent.
BIrthwald Archbishop of Canterbury was before his election to that See,
Raculfe.

In the year 949. King Eadred King of all England, gave the Monastery of
Raculfe and all the Lands belonging thereunto, to the Church of Canterbuy, Odo
being then Archbishop and Metropolitan there. The Lands belonging

ELY Abbey, in Cambridgeshire.
ANno Dom. 627. The blessed Augustine, built a Church at Ely in a place called
Cradindene, a mile distant from the present City, it was consecrated to the
honor of the blessed Virgin, and stored with Ministers for God's service, but
these were all expelled by Penda King of Mercia, and the place turned into a
Desert.

Afterward in the year 673. Ethelreda the Virgin, built a Monastery in a more
eminent place in Ely, for both Sexes, of which she her self became Ely was
again Pagans.

In the year 970. Ethelwaldus Bishop of Winchester bought this Isle of Edgar,
rebuilt the Church and placed Monks in it, under the Rule of H. 1.) Paschal at
the request of that King, changed the Abbey

The foresaid Ethelred was Daughter of Anna King of the East-Angels, and was
buried in Ely together with several other holy Women of her Relations and Blood.

Danes destroyed it to the Ground, An. Dom. 870.

Ethelwald Bishop of Winchester, who bought the whole Isle of Ely, and gave it
and other Lands and Edgar and King Edward the Elder, granted and confirmed to
it many Lands and Privileges, approved and ratified by Pope Victor.

[ Valued at 1084 l. 6 s. 9 d. ob. per Annum.]

WIRMOUTH, and GYRWY, now called YARROW, in the Bishopric of Durham.
Egfrid King of the Northumbers gave a quantity of Ground lying at the mouth of
the River Wyra, to the holy Abbot Benedict an Englishman, who had been five
times at Rome, for the building a Monastery to St. Peter; and other Lands in a
place then called Gyrwy, not far distant for another Monastery to the honor of
St. Paul. Both which he endowed, and filled with Monks.

Gyrwy, is four miles distant from New Castle, of this House Venerable Bede,
was heretofore a Monk, and educated under the abovementioned Benedict.

[ Valued at 25 l. 8 s. 4 d. per Annum.

ABBINGTON, in Barkshire.
AT such time as the wicked Hengist destroyed 460, of the Barons and Great men
of this Land, by fraud and treachery, one of the Noblemen's Sons named Aben,
made a shift to escape the slaughter, and concealed himself in a Wood on the
South Side of Oxfordshire for a great while: but being at last taken notice of
for his great sanctity, people built there for him a House and Chapel, which
was afterward from his name called Abendun. In the year 675. one Heane, a man
of great Riches begun to build in the same place a Monastery (though after
removed to some distance) and gave to it a part of his Inheritance. Sister of
this Heane was Cissa, who built at a place called Helneston near the Thames a
Monastery for Nuns, of which she became her self the Abbess. This Lady had
obtained a small piece of one of the Nails of our Lord's passion, to which she
caused some other Iron to be added, and made of that, a Cross, which she caused
to be placed upon her breast after her death, and so buried. This Cross was in
the time of Adelwold Abbot here (and afterward Bishop of Winchester) found
accidentally, in digging to make an Aqueduct, it was translated into the
Monastery of Monks, and there preserved with great reverence; and called the
black Cross.

The Monks here at their first Institution were but twelve and the Abbot; etc.

The Town of Abbington was in old time called Seuekesham. It was a tam tempere
Religonis fanaticoe, quam tempore religionis Christianoe, are the Words of the
old Historian).

Benefactors to this House were Cedwalla King of the West Saxons; King Ina his
Son An. Dom. 699. Kenulfus King of Mercia, An. Dom. 821. Edred England, An Dom.
955. Edgar King of all England An. Dom. 958. in the Reign of this King, the
abovementioned Adelwold was Abbot here, Benedict, he settled here several good
Orders, and gave great Riches and Ornaments to this Church; after this, he was
by King Edgar chosen to be Bishop of Winchester, An. Dom. 963. Hen. I. was also
a great Benefactor. And Pope Eugenius III. granted to this Abbey great
Privileges by his Bull dated, An. Dom. 1146.

[ Valued at 1876 l. 10 s. 9 d. per Annum.]

GLOUCESTER Abbey.
ANno Dom. 680 or 681. In the Reign of King Aethelred, one Osrich Subregulus,
first founded the Church of St. Peter's in Gloucester, and placed his Sister
Kineburga Abbess of the Monastery there. This M^nastery was built at the
Expenses of King Ethelred and his Wife Elfleda. Which being afterward
destroyed by the Danes, was in the year 1058. restored and consecrated by
Aldredus then Bishop of Worcester, and afterward Archbishop of York.

The foresaid King Ethelred, in the the 30th. year of his Reign became
Bardeney, and after that Abbot; and departed this life in the year 716.

The forementioned Osrich, became King of the Northumbers after the death of
Kenred, and died, An. Dom. 729.

The Nuns of this House were dispersed after the year 767. and Benedictine
Monks were placed here, An. Dom. 1022. by Wolstan then Bishop of Worcester.

This Church was again new built from the Foundation by Serlo the first Sampson
Bishop of Worcester. Two years after which this Church together with Gloucester
was burnt down.

Many were the Benefactors to this Church of all sorts and qualities, whose
Names together with the Lands given, amounting in all to a great Revenue, may
be seen at large in the Monasticon, from p. 111, to p. 120.

See more of this Church infra p, 993, and Vol. 3. p. 7.

[ Valued at 1946 l. 5 s. 9 d. per Annum.]

WORCESTER Abbey.
ANno Dom. 680. In the Reign of King Athelred in the Kingdom of Mercia,
Worcester was first made a Bishops seat; and Boselus the first Bishop.

St. Oswald who was Bishop here in the year 871. or according to others 959.
introduced the first Monks, into this Church, in the room of the Clerks.

King Offa, King Edgar, and many others of the Saxons; were great Benefactors
to this Church, as may be seen in the Monasticon, from p. 121, to p. 136. and
from thence to p. 140. a Recapitulation of their Lands and Endowments.

[Valued at the Suppression at 1229 l. 12 s. 8 d. ob. per Annum.]

BARDENEY Abbey, in Lincolnshire.
Oswald was first buried at Bardeney, there were three hundred Monks in this
Abbey. It was first built by King Ethelred, and destroyed to the Ground by the
Danes, and re-edified again by Gilbert de Gaunt Uncle to William the Conqueror;
whose Son and Heir Walter de Gaunt did, in the year 1115, confirm to the Church
and Monastery of St. Peter and St. Paul, and St. Oswald, at Bardeney, all those
Lands and Possessions which his Father had given in pure and perpetual Alms to
the same: And did also enlarge their Possessions of his own Henry the first.
Vid. Vol. 2. p. 847.

[ Valued at 366 l. 6 s. 1 d. per Annum.]

EUESHAM Abbey, in Worcestershire.
Egwin, who was the third Bishop of Worcester founded this Monastery. Kenredus
King of Mercia, and Offa Governor of the East Angles in the year 709, being
both then at Rome, endowed it with large Possessions. The Towns which St. Egwin
obtained to his Monastery of etc. were created by the Abbot with the advice and
consent of the major part of the Covent, in Chapter. All which Officers had
their several Rents arising from distinct and several

Waldemarus King of Danemark gave and confirmed the Priory of Othenesia in that
Kingdom as a Cell to this Abbey of Euesham.

This Abbey was first founded, as aforesaid, by St. Egwin in the year of grace
692. and dedicated to the honor of the glorious Virgin Mary. The Founder
himself leaving his Bishopric, became the first Abbot here. After whose death
succeeded eighteen Abbots until the year 941. at which time the Monks here were
dispersed, and secular Chanons substituted in their room. In the time of King
Edgar, Anno Dom. 660, the Monks were again restored; but after his death
expelled again, in the year 977. This House and Estate was afterward given to
a potent man called Godwin, and successively it came into several hands, till
at last in the year 1014. King Ethelred made Ailfwardus a Monk of Ramsey, Abbot
of Euesham; he was also Bishop of London at the same time. From his time the
Abbey of Euesham flourisht under diverse Abbots, whose names from the Norman
Conquest till the year 1379. are as follows, Egelwinus, Walterus, Robertus,
Mauricius, Reginaldus, Willielmus de Andivilla, Rogerus, Adam, Rogerus Norreys,
Radulphus. Thomas de Marleberg, Richaadus le Cras, Thomas de Glovernia,
Henricus, Willielmus de Wytechurch, Johannes de Brokehampton, Willielmus de
Chyriton, Willielmus de Boys, Johannes de Ombresseye, Rogerus Zatten 1379. Vid
Vol. 2. p. 851.

[ Valued at 1183 l. 12 s. 9 d. per Annum.]

SHEPEY Monastery of Nuns, in Kent.
FOunded by Queen Sexburga, about the year of our Lord 710. William Archbishop
of Canterbury, after the Conquest restored this Danes. King Henry the II. King
Richard the I. King Henry the III. and others, were Benefactors to this Church
of St. Sexburg, here, and to the Nuns serving God in the same; all whose
Donations of Lands and Liberties were confirmed in the 1st. year of King Henry
the IV.

[ Valued at 129 l. 7 s. 10 d. ob. per Annum.]

SELSEY, in Sussex.
IN the year of our Lord 711. Wilfred Bishop of Hagulstad remaining five years
in the Isle of Selsey to avoid persecution, built there a Monastery in honor
of the blessed Mary, to which Ethelwold King of the South Saxons, gave Lands.

TUKESBURY, in Gloucestershire.
THIS Monastery was founded in the year 715. by two Dukes of great account in
the Kingdom of Mercia named Oddo and Doddo, to Mary.

Robert Fiz-Hamon in the year 1102. new built this Church and Monastery,
Cranburne. His Daughter Mobilla was afterward married to Robert base Son of
King Henry I. who was created Earl of Gloucester; he built the Priory of St.
James at Bristol, and annexed it also to the House. From him descended Gibbert
de Clare Earl of Gloucester and Hertford, who was a great Benefactor to this
House, and buried here; as were the rest of his descendants, Gloucester, and
the Dispencers who descended from one of the Heirs General. All these and more
of their Blood, among whom Henry de Duke of Warwick, were Benefactors to this
Abbey, their pious

p. 161, 162.

[ Valued at 1598 l. 1 s. 3 d. per Annum.]

WINBURNE, in Dorsetshire.
SAint Quinburga, and St. Cuthburga, Sisters of Ina King of the West Saxons,
built here a Monastery for Nuns, Anno Dom. 718.

CROYLAND, in Lincolnshire.
CRoyland is one of those small Islands which lie in the East Fens. Here St.
Guthlac, at the age of twenty five years, became a Hermit, and in his life
time delivered the Island from Devils and evil Spirits, and dying, was here
buried.

Ethelbald King of Mercia, by his Charter dated in the year 716. gave to God,
the blessed Mary and St. Batholomew, the whole Isle of Croyland, containing
four Leucas, or miles in length, and three in breadth, for the erecting of a
Monastery under the Rule of St. Benedict: and endowed the said Monastery with
large Possessions lying about the Place.

Offa King of Mercia, in the year Withlaf King of Mercia, in the year 833.

Danes, was re edified and restored to its former Possessions and Liberties, by
King Eadred, who styled himself King of Great Britain, in the year 948. Vid.
Vol. 2. p. 853.

[ Valued at 1803 l. 15 s. 10 d. ob. per Annum.]

BEVERLEY, in Yorkshire.
John Archibishop of York was the first Dr. of Theology in Oxford. He converted
the Parish Church of St. John in the Town of Beverly into a Monastery, building
to it a new Quire; and made his Deacon Bithunus the first Abbot here. Both
which lie buried in this Church. One hundred years after this the Monastery of
Beverley was destroyed by the Danes, and lay in Ruins three years, before it
was repaired. King Athelstan built here a College of secular Chanons. And
granted and confirmed to this Church of St. John of Beverley many great
Privileges and Liberties An. Dom. 938. King Edward the Confessor was a great
Benefactor to this Church, and augmented the number of the Prebendaries.
William the Conqueror was also a Benefactor. Thomas the first Archbishop of
York, erected a new Dignity in the Collegiate Church of Beverley, viz. a
Prepositus or Provost, who has neither voice in the Chapter nor Stall in the
Quire; of these, there is a List of thirty eight, Thomas Becket being the fifth
in number. Vid. Vol. 3. part. 2 p. 3.

[ Valued at 109 l. 8 s. 8 d. ob. per Annum.]

RIPPON, in Yorkshire.
WIlfrid Archibishop of York founded a Monastery at Rippon, which was Adred
made upon the Northumbers. But being in aftertimes re-edified, King Athalstan
granted to this Church the Privilege of Sanctuary, with the same Liberties
which he had given before to the Church of Beverly; and Rippon should be
believed by their yea, and by their na.

St. FRIDISWADE, at Oxford.
FRidiswade the holy Virgin was Daughter of Didanus a petty King ( Sub-regulus)
of Oxford; her Father built a Church there in honor of St. Mary, and all
Saints, and gave it for his Daughters Habitation, who with twelve other Nuns
led there a religious Life. St. Fridiswade died on the 14th. of the Calends of
November 735. and was buried in the said Danes in it, who had fled thither for
Refuge; but King Ethelred did soon after rebuild it with additions, as appears
by his Charter dated in the year 1004. In the year 1111. Roger Bishop of
Salisbury, in lieu of Nuns, instituted in this Monastery a Prior and Cannons,
to whom King Henry I. Adrian.

Benefactors to this Church of St. Fridiswade in Oxford, were Maud the Empress,
Earl Simon, Ralpt Foliot, and others.

See more of this Monastery, infra, p. 983.

DEREHAM, in Norfolk.
WIthburga Daughter of Anna King of the East Angles, built a Monastery Danes,
the Nuns were all dispersed, and the Church was made parochial. In the year
798, the Body of St. Withburga was found here, uncorrupted, near fifty five
years after her death. Vid. Vol. 2. p. 853.

St. ALBANS-ABBY, in Hertfordshire.
SAint Alban was martyred in this place, then called Verolamium, in the time of
Dioclesian's persecution. Ten years after that persecution ceased, the
Christians built here a Church to his memory; which being destroyed by the
incursion of the barbarous People, Offa King of Mercia, about the year 793.
repaired the Church, built here a Monastery, stored it with Adrian to have him
canonized. And by his Charter dated in the abovementioned year granted to the
said Monastery several Lands and great Privileges. In the year 1154. Nicholas
Bishop of Alba (an English-born man near this Monastery) being chosen Pope by
the name of Adrian IV. granted to the Abbot of this Abbey, that as St. Alban was
the first Martyr of England, so this Abbot should be the first of all the
Abbots of England in order and dignity.

John by his Charter dated the 11th. of June in the first year of his Reign,
granted to God, and the Church of St. Alban, and the Monks there, diverse Lands
and great Liberties.

Honorius, by his Bull dated in the year 1218. confirmed to this Church all
Lands and Liberties granted to it by former Popes, Kings, and etc. reserving as
a Rent to the Apostolic See yearly, for these Liberties, the payment of one
ounce of Gold.

In the Windows of the Cloisters of this Abbey, were formerly painted abundance
of Historical Passages out of the Bible, with Latin Verses underneath each
Story, explaining the same. In like manner were the Windows of the Library, and
Presbytery painted, with the Pictures of famous men, with explanatory Verses,
which Verses may be seen in the Monasticon at large, p. 182, 183, 184.

[ Valued at 2102 l. 7 s. 1 d. ob. q. per Annum:


KING Osric was the first Founder of this Monastery for Nuns, Anno. Dom. 676.
Offa King of Mercia, placed here secular Cannons; and King Edgar introduced
Monks instead of Cannons.

William the Conqueror gave the City of Bath to God, St. Peter, and John Bishop
of Wells, for the augmentation of his Episcopal Seat. King Henry the I.
confirmed the same, and constituted and confirmed the Somersetshire, which was
formerly at Wells, to be at Bath, by Charter dated in the year 1111. and in the
twelth year of his Reign. The said John the Bishop, by his Deed dated 1106.
appointed the Church of St. Peter here, to be the Head and Mother Church of the
whole Diocese, and restored the Lands which the King had given him in Bath, to
the Monastery there, to which they did formerly belong; with an Anathema
against the Violators of his said Gift and Restoration.

Oliver King Bishop of Bath, and Gibbs the last Prior here, built the present
Church, p. 185.

[ Valued at 617 l. 2 s. 3 d. per Annum.]

WELLS, in Somersetshire.
CYnewulf King of the West Saxons, in the year 766. gave to the Monastery at
Wells dedicated to St. Andrew the Apostle, several parcells of Land adjoining.

Edward the Confessor Anno 1065. gave and confirmed to the Church and Bishop of
Wells, the Lands and Liberties formerly to the said Church given, with
additions.

WINCHCUMB, in Gloucestershire.
ANno Dom. 787. Offa King of Mercia, built here a Monastery for Nuns. Or as
others say, it was built by Kenulphus King of Mercia A. D. 798. Wilfridus
Archbishop of Canterbury, and twelve other Bishops; at which dedication that
King released at the Altar, the King of Kent, his Prisoner of War. This
Monastery being almost utterly decayed, in the time of King Edgar, was repaired
by St. Oswald Archbishop of York, and Germanus made Abbot here. King Kenulius
is said to p. 190. Vid. Vol. 2. p. 854.

[ Valued at 759 l. 11 s. 9 d. per Annum.]

WILTON, in Wiltshire.
WVistan Earl of Wiltshire repaired an ancient Church here dedicated to St.
Mary, and (...) therein a College of Priests. After whose Alburga converted
the Foundation to a Nunnery of Virgins, Anno Dom 800. Afterward King Alfred
built at Wilton a new Monastery, and dedicated the Church to St. Mary and St.
Bartholomew; here he placed twelve Nuns and an Abbess, and translated the other
Nuns hither from St. Mary's, which made the number in all twenty six.
Subsequent Benefactors were King Edward the Elder, King Athelstan, King Edgar,
William the Conqueror, etc. Vid. Vol. 2. p. 857.

[ Valued at 601 l. 1 s. 1 d. q. per Annum.]

AMBRESBURY, in Wiltshire.
THE Nunnery at Ambresbury was built by Queen Elfrida by way of expiation for
the murder of King Edward the Younger, called St. Edward of which she had been
guilty. In the Reign of Henry the II. Anno Dom 1177. the Nuns here were
expelled from this House and shut up in other religious Houses under stricter
Custody, for their incontinency and notorious scandal. And other Nuns of
Font-Everard introduced here, by the Authority of Pope Alexander, King Henry
the II. and Richard Archbishop of Canterbury. Which King Henry the II. gave to
the said Nunnery of Font Everard this Church as a Cell, with many other John in
the first year of his Reign; with a Gift of 50 s. per Annum out of the
Exchequer Vid. 2. Vol p. 868.

[ Valued at 495 l. 15 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

MIDLETON, in Dorsetshire.
Athelstan, having upon false accusations unjustly banished his youngest Brother
Edwyn, and put him to Sea in an old Vessel without either Sails or Oars, where
he was drowned; and being afterward extreme penitent, he built and endowed
here a Church and Monastery Mary and St. Sampson the Archbishop; and stored it
with Black Monks, for the Soul of his said Brother Edwyn.

He also purchased from Rome and other places beyond the Seas several holy
Relics; and gave them to this Monastery as a piece of our Savior's Cross; a
Great Cross composed of Gold, Silver, and precious Stones; Sampson the
Archbishop, etc. King Athelstan's Charter of Endowment bears date in the year
843. and was exemplified and confirmed by King Henry the II.

Michel, in Dorsetshire.

[ Valued at 578 l. 13 s. 11 d. ob. per Annum.]

POLESWORTH, in Warwickshire.
EGbert King of the West Saxons built here a Nunnery, and made his Daughter
Edith the first Abbess there. King William the Conqueror Robert Marmyon, whose
chief Seat was at the Neighboring Castle of Tamworth, he expelled the Nuns for
a while, but not long after restored them again to their old Estate, and was
reputed their Founder. The Nuns of Polesworth had a Cell at Olbury, which was
given to their Monastery by Walter de Hastings, and Roger Bishop of Chester
(then the same Diocese with Coventry and Litchfield) and others.

[ Valued at 87 l. 13 s. 3 d. per Annum.]

St. WERBURGS, at Chester.
THE holy Virgin Werburg was Daughter of Wulfer King of Mercia, and Ermenilda
his Wife. She lived and died in a Monastery at Chester, which had been built of
old time for the Habitation of Nuns; but after the Conquest Hugh Earl of
Chester placed Monks there.

The Monastery was built by King Edgar in the year 858. Hugh Earl of Chester
having established Monks here, endowed the Foundation with great Revenues, his
Barons also giving very liberally to the same, whose Charter bears date Anno
Dom. 1093. The Particulars given may be seen in the Monasticon at large, p.
201. 202.

See more of this House, p. 985.

[ Valued at 1003 l. 5 s. 11 d. per Annum.]

ATHELING, in Somersetshire.
KING Elfred being driven out of his Kingdom by the Danes, concealed himself
for some time in this place, then compast about with Marshes and Water, that
it was inaccessable but with a Boat. Upon his restoration he built here a
Church and Monastery. His Charter of Endowment bears date Anno Dom. 878.

About the same time that King Elfred founded this Monastery for Monks, he
founded another for Nuns at Shaftesbury.

[ Valued at 209 l. 0 s. 3 d. q. per Annum.]

PERSHORE, in Worcestershire.
THE Monastery here was built in the time of King Edgar by Duke Egelwardus; but
the greatest part of its Estate was in aftertime transferred by King Edward and
King William to Westminster. Others say, it was founded about the year 604. by
Oswald Nephew of King Athelred. did at first place here secular Canons, which
were after changed to Monks, then Canons restored, and then Monks once again
introduced by King Edgar. Anno Dom. 1223. there happened a grievous fire here,
and the Monks for some time having left the place, their Estate was usurpt by
the Monks of Westminster. The Deeds, and Charters of Privileges of this House
being burnt, Witnesses were examined and made Monasticon at

[ Valued at 643 l. 4 s. 5 d. per Annum.]

HIDE, in Dampshire.
THIS is otherwise called the new Monastery at Winchester, and was designed by
King Elfred, but built after his death by his Son King Edward, who placed
therein secular Canons under the Rule of a holy man called Grimbaldus. This new
Monastery being at first built within the Hide. Great was the Revenue given to
this Monastery, and many the Benefactors besides the Founder, as King
Athelstan, King Edmund, King Edred, King Edgar (who expelled the Canons and
placed Monks here) King Edmund Ironside, Edward the Confessor, William the
Conqueror, Henry 1. and Maud his Queen, etc.

But this House was not without its misfortunes, William the Conqueror at his
first coming finding the Abbot and twelve of his Monks in arms against him,
seized upon their Estate and held it from them almost two years. And in the
Reign of King Stephen, Henry then Bishop of Winchester committed such
extortions upon the Monks here, that he got from them almost all their Church
Plate, and was so oppressive that of forty Monks, there remained but ten in the
House.

Edgars Diploma to this House was written in Letters of Gold, and dated Anno
Dom. 966.

The Privileges of this House were agreed and settled between William Bishop
of Winchester and Gaufridus Abbot here, An. Dom. 1110.

[ Valued at 865 l. 18 s. 0 d. ob. q. per Annum.]


ABout the year 903. Alswitha Wife of King Alfred, began the Foundation of a
Nunnery at Winchester, which was after her death completed by her Son King
Edward the Elder.

[ Valued at 179 l. 7 s. 2 d. per Annum.]


KING Athelstan was the first Founder of this Monastery for Monks; which after
the Conquest, came into the Crown, but was purchased by Alganus, and stored
with Canons regular.

St. GERMAINS, in Cornwall.
KING Athelstan founded a Monastery here, which at that time was the Seat of a
Bishop, but was afterward removed by King Edward the Confessor from hence to
Exeter. Bartholonew Bishop of Exeter introduced into this Church by the King's
Authority, Canons Regular, eight in number, and a Prior.

[ Valued at 243 l. 8 s. per Annum.]

SHAFTESBURY, in Dorsetshire.
KING Elfred built this Town in the year 880. Elgiva Wife of Edmund, great
Grandchild of the said Elfred, built here a Monastery for Nuns. King Edward
the younger, commonly called St. Edward the Martyr, murdered by his
Mother-in-Laws procurement, was here interred, on which account this Church was
afterward called by his name.

Edmund, King Edred, A. D. 948. Etheldred, 1001.

p. 983.

[ Valued at 1166 l. 8 s. 9 d. per Annum.]


ORdgarus an Earl in these Parts, and Father of Elfrid Wife of King Edgar,
built this Monastery in the year 961, for Monks. It was afterward burnt down
by the Danes. King Edelred, in the year 981. endowed Henry the 1. all which was
exemplified and confirmed by King Edward the III. in the twenty second Year of
his Reign.

See more of this Monastery, p. 995.

[ Valued at 902 l. 5 s. 7 d. per Annum.]

RUMSEY, in Hampshire.
KING Edward the Elder, built here a Monastery, in which his Grandson King
Edgar placed religious Nuns, under the Government of Merwina their Abbess, Anno
Dom. 907.

King Edgar, King Henry III. and King Edward I. were Benefactors to this House,
and confirmed the Lands and Liberties to them given.

[ Valued at 393 l. 10 s. 10 d. ob. per Annum.]

HORTON, in Dorcetshire.
ORgarus Earl of Devonshire (formerly mentioned) was the first Founder of this
Monastery, who after his decease, which happened in the year 971. was here
buried.

Roger Bishop of Shirburn, obtained of King Henry the I. that this House and
the Possessions thereunto belonging should be transferred and annexed to the
Monastery of Shirburn, so that in aftertimes it was accounted only as a Cell
of that House, tho'it had been before that reckoned as an Abbey of it self.

EXETER, in Devonshire.
THE Kingdom of the West Saxons having been destitute of a Bishop for full
seven years before, Pope Formosus threatened to curse King Edward the Elder, in
the year 905. unless he would restore Bishops according to the ancient
Tradition. Hereupon that King calling a Synod, in which presided Plegmundus
Archbishop of Canterbury, did by their advice constitute several Bishops Seats,
and set out their several Diocesses; and the Archbishop ordained seven Bishops
in one day to seven Churches, among which Athelstan was made Bishop of
Cornwall, and Eadulf of Cridington. Edward the Confessor united these two
Bishoprics, and soon after at the request of Pope Leo fixed the Seat of the
Bishop in the Monastery of St. Mary and St. Peter at Exeter, the then Bishop
Leofric being introduced into the Cathedral Church betwixt the King and Queen.
Which Bishop finding the said Church much decayed

King Athelstan, soon after his coming to the Crown of this Kingdom, Mary and
St. Peter, and endowed it with twenty six Towns and Villages, and gave to it
the third part of those many Relics which he had caused to be collected beyond
the Seas, viz. some pieces of our Lord's Cross, Sepulcher, Garment, Cradle,
etc. with many p. 225, 226. After him King Athelred, Cnut, King Edward the
Confessor, King John, and King Henry the ill. Henry the I. who restored to this
Monastery


IN the year 969. Ailwinus Duke of the East Angels, at the instigation of
Oswald Archbishop of York, founded the Monastery of Ramsey, which was
consecrated by St. Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury, and the said Oswald, in
the year 974. and the Church dedicated to the blessed Mary and all holy
Virgins, and to St. Benedict.

Ramsey is a small Island, situated among Fens and Marshes, in the East corner
of Huntingdonshire, about two miles long, and near as broad. It was formerly
very much abounding with Alders and other Trees that delight in moist Ground,
from whence it might take its name Ramsey a ramis, quasi Insula Ramorum.

Edgar gave to it five Hides of Land. St. Oswald also gave several Ornaments
and Lands, and procured to it others.

Ailwinus the Founder gave to this Abbey the whole Isle in which it stood with
the adjacent Marshes and Meers, and diverse other Lands. All which, with other
Lands from other Benefactors, King Edgar confirmed etc. The like was done by
King Edward the Confessor, with the addition Henry the I. King Henry Richard,
King John, and King Edward the I. were also Royal

Ailwinus the Founder gave many precious Ornaments besides two 8th. of the
Calends of May. His Epitaph was as follows,

Hic requiescit Ailwinus, inclyti regis Edgari cognatus, totius Angliae
Aldermannus, and hujus sacri caenobii, miraculose, fundato r. ABBOTS OF RAMSE Y.
1 AEdnothus, A. D. 970. 2 Wufilus 1008. 3 Withmannus 1016. 4 Ethelstanus 1020.
5 Alfwinus 1043. 6 Aielsinus 1080. 7 Herbertus made Bishop of Norwich 1087. 8
Aldwinus 1091. 9 Bernardus was Abbot for five years in the life of Aldwinus. 10
Reginaldus 1114. 11 Walterus 1133. 12 Willielmns 1161. 13 Robertus Trianel
1180. 14 Eudo 1200. 15 Robertus de Redinges 1202. 16 Richardus 1214. 17 Hugo
Foliot 1216. 18 Ranulfus 1231. 19 Willielmus Acolt 1253. 20 Hugo de Sulgrave
1254. 21 Willielmus 1267. 22 Johannes 1285. 23 Simon 1316. 24 Robertus 1342. 25
Ricardus 1349. 26 Edmundus 1382. 27 Thomas Botterwick 1400. 28 Johannes
Tychemarsh 1419. 29 Johannes Crowland 1434. 30 Johannes Stowe 1436.
The memorable Occurrances in the times of these several Abbots may be seen in
the Monasticon, p. 241, 242. Vid. 2. Vol. p. 869.

[ Valued at 1716 l. 12 s. 4. d. per Annum.]

THORNEY, in Cambridgeshire.
THIS Monastery was founded in the year 972. by St. Adelwold Bishop Winchester,
in the Reign of King Edgar. In the year 1085. the Church was new built by
Gunterius the then Abbot here, and dedicated by Hervey the first Bishop of Ely.
In the year 973. King Edgar granted to this Abbey several Lands and Privileges.

Principal Benefactors to this House were Nigellus Bishop of Ely, William
several of the Beauchamps, Henry de Merch, William de Albeneis, and John de
Stutavill, etc. The Lands and Alexander dated A. D. 1162.

ABBOTS of THORNEY.
A. D. 1085. Gunterius. 1123. Robertus I. 1151. Gilbertus. 1154. Galterus.
1158. Herbertus. 1163. Walterus. 1176. Solamon. 1193. Robertus II. 1198.
Radulphus. 1216. Robertus III. 1231. Wido Wake. 1237. Ricardus. 1238. David.
1244. Thomas Castre. 1261. Willielmus Yakesley. 1293. Odo de Whitlesey. 1305.
Willielmus Clopton. 1322. Reginaldus de Water Newton. 1347. Willielmus Haddon.
1365. Johannes Depyng. 1396. Nicholaus Islep. 1402. Thomas Charw. 1425. Alanus
Kirketon. 1437. Johannes Kirketon. 1450. Johannes Ramsey.
[ Valued at 411 l. 12 s. 11 d. per Annum.]

CHATERIZ, in Cambridgeshire.
THE Manor of Chateriz was given by King Edgar, to the Abbot of Ramsey.
Ednodus Abbot of Ramsey built a Church and Monastery for Nuns at Chateriz, and
endowed it with necessaries; which Ednodus or Ednothus being Bishop of
Dorchester was murdered by the Danes, 1016.

King Henry the I. gave and annexed this Abbey to the Church of Ely, and Herveus
the first Bishop there. Pope Innocent the IV. confirmed the Estate and
Privileges of this Abbey to the Abbess and Sisters here, about the year 1242.
Vid. 2. Vol. p. 869.

[ Valued at 97 l. 3 s. 4 d. q. per Annum.]


SAint Augustine the Monk after he had converted Kent, traveled with his
Companions over the rest of King Ethelbert's Dominions, which extended as far
as the Northumbers, preaching the Gospel of Christ. And being in Dorsetshire; a
great Company of people offered themselves to Baptism in a place where water
was wanting, whereupon by miracle a Augustin's Fountain. Here Edwaldus Brother
of St. Edmund the King and Martyr, led a Hermits life, and died with the
reputation of great Sanctity; which occasioned that Egelwaldus or Ethelwerdus
built here a Monastery to the honor of St. Peter, which his Son Ethelmer Earl
of Cornwall A. D. 987. endowed with diverse Lands.

[ Valued at 515 l. 17 s. 10 d. q. per Annum.]


IN the year 1001. the Body of St. Ivo being found in this Town then called
Sleep, and translated from his Grave to a Shrine, the Town ever after took name
from the Saint, and Ednothus Abbot of Ramsey, built here a Church. Pope Urban
confirmed the Estate of this Monastery to the Prior and Monks of the same and
to their Successors, granting them many great Privileges, among others, that
they should pay no Tithes of their Lands and Cattle which they should hold in
their own proper hands.

H. 3. that the Parish Church of St. Ives dedicated to the honor of all
Saints, is a Vicarage of the Presentation of the Abbot of Ramsey, that the
Prior of St. Ives as Parson receives all Corn-Tithes, and of the Vicar for his
portion 4 l. 13 s. 4 d. That the Vicar receives all small Tithes, obventions,
Mortuaries ( Testamenta) Plowalms, Rates and other Customs, which see in the
Book at large.

WARWELL, in Hampshire.
KING Edgar hearing extraordinary Commendations of the beauty of Elfrida
Daughter of Odgar Duke of Devonshire, sent Earl Ethelwold, to discover if the
young Lady's beauty was equal to report, the Earl finding it so, disparaged her
to the King, and secretly married her himself. After a while the King
perceiving himself to have been treacherously deceived, took occasion one day
to take the Earl flew him. In expiation of which Deed Elfrida, Edgar, built
here a Monastery for Nuns, in honor of the holy Cross. This Monastery was
after wards endowed with Lands by King Ethelred Son of the said Edgar and
Elfrid in the year 1002, as appears by Inspectimus 44. H. 3. Vid. 3. Vel. p. 9.

[ Valued at 339 l. 8 s. 7 d. per Annum.]

EYNESHAM, in Oxfordshire.
THIS Monastery was situated near the River Thames, founded and Ethe^marus, a
man of Quality under King Ethelred, who confirmed the Lands given to it, and
granted diverse Liberties and Privileges to the same, in the year of our Lord
1005.

To this House a Monastery at Stow near Lincoln, built and endowed by Godiva
Wife of Leofrick Earl of Chester, was formerly annexed as a Cell.

In the year 1109. King Henry the I. repaired this Monastery, at that

[ Valued at 441 l. 12 s. 2 d. ob. q. per Annum.]

BURTON, in Staffordshire.
WVlfricus Spot, an Officer in the Court of King Ethelred built this Abbey and
endowed it with all his paterrnal Inheritance, amounting l. and gave to that
King three hundred Mancas of Gold to purchase his Confirmation of what he had
done. The Names of the several Lands and Monnors given to this Abbey may be
seen, p. 268, 269.

King Ethelred granted to this Abbey great Liberties in all their Lands, by
Lucius the III. in the etc.

The afore-mentioned Wulfricus Spot, the Founder of this Abbey, was Earl of
Mercia, and one of the Blood Royal. Upon the Foundation, (which was in the year
1004.) certain Monks were removed to this House from Winchester. Wulfricus was
slain in a Battle against the Danes, A. D. 1010. and was buried in the Cloister
of this House.

A List of the Abbots of Burton upon Trent from the first Foundation to
1 Wulfgetus. ob. 1026. 2 Britericus. ob. 1050. 3 Leuricus. ob. 1085. 4
Galfridus Malaterra expelled 1094. 5 Nigellus. ob. 1114. 6 Galfridus resigned
1150. to 7 Robertus deposed and expelled 1159. 8 Barnardus ob. 1175. 9 Robert
chosen again ob. 1177. 10 Rogerus Malebraunch ob. 1182. 11 Ricardus ob. 1188.
12 Nicholaus ob. 1197. 13 Willielmus Melburne ob. 1210. 14 Rogerus Normannus
ob. 1218. 15 Nicholas de Wallingford ob. 1222. 16 Richardus de Insula, removed
to be Abbot of St. Edmunds 1229. 17 Laurentius ob. 1240. 18 Johannes Stafford
ob. 1280. 19 Thomas Pakington ob. 1305. 20 Johannes Pisoator alias Stapunhull.
ob. 1316. 21 Willielmus de Bromley. ob. 1329. 22 Robertus Longdone. ob, 1340.
23 Robertus Brickhull. ob. 1348. 24 Johannes Ipstoke. ob. 1366. 25 Thomas
Southam. ob. 1400. 26 Johannes Sudburie resigned 1424. 27 Willielmus Matthew.
ob. 1430. 28 Robertus Ousby resigned 1432. 29 Radulphus Henley resigned 1454.
30 Willielmus Bronston. ob. 1472. 31 Thomas Feylde. ob. 1473. 32 Willielmus
Heigh. ob. 1502. 33 Willielmus Beyne ob. 1525. 34 Johannes Boston. 35 Ricardus
Edes, the last Abbet of Burton.
The remarkable Occurrences during the times of the said several Abbots may be
seen in the Book at large. Vid Vol. 2. p. 869.

[ Valued at 267 l. 14 s. 3 d. per Annum.]


ABout the year 1026. one Orcus a Great man in the Court of K. Canu^us,
together with his Wise Tola, being both without hope or possibility of issue,
built and edow'd the Monastery at Abbotsbury, and dedicated it Peter the
Apostle. The said Orcus did also give a hall to a Guild or Fraternity in this
Town, and by agreement between him and the Brethren, certain Orders were
settled for the Rule and Governance of the said Fraternity, to the glory of
God, and honor of St. Peter. King Edward the William the Conqueror ratified
Orcus and his Wives Benefactions to the Monks here, and granted them certain
Franchises. By inquisition taken before the Escheator and Sheriff of this
County, in the Hen 3. The several Lands, Rents, and Liberties of this Abbey were
found and set forth; the Jury also found that the Abbot here held his Estate of
the King in Capite by the service of one Knight's Fee only, and not, in
Baronia, by the service of a Barony.

In the year 1505. Thomas Strangeways Esquire founded a perpetual Chantry in the
Chapel of the Blessed Mary in the Church of this Abbey, and endowed it with
Rents, for the maintenance of one Mass to be said in the s. 4 d. to the Bishop
of the Diocese, and 3 s. 4 d. to the Heirs of the said Strangeways, for every
omission.

[ Valued at 390 l. 19 s. 2 d. ob. q. per Annum.]

HULME, in Suffolk.
CAnutus the Danish King of England, returning from Rome, built two Monasteries
to the honor of St. Benedict, one in Norwey, and the other this in England.
Which last he founded in a fenny place then called Couholm, where, in
former-times, before the Danes came into Fngland, one Suneman a Hermit did
inhabit, spending his time in devotion there for above fifty years. To the Abbey
here built, the said King canutus gave many Lands and Privileges. All which
King Edward the Confessor confirmed, and granted others, Sacne, and Sokne,
Toll, and Theme, etc. and

St. EDMUNDS-BURY, in Suffolk.
SAint Edmund the last King of the East Angles, being overcome by Inguar, and
Hubba Pagan Danes, was cruelly bound to a Tree, whipped, 29th. of his Age. His
Head and Body were thrown into a thick Wood by the Pagans, but being afterward
found out by miracle, he was buried at a Neighboring place called by the
Saxons Beodrichesworth (now St. Edmunsbury) where the Christians built a small
Church. But afterward King Canutus (who had erected at Rome an English School,
and assigned for its maintenance a Sum of Money which was yearly sent from
England, and called Romescot) by advice of his Bishops and Barons, changed the
secular Clergy, belonging to this Church, to Monks, in the year 1020 and
brought hither from the Abbey of Hulme thirteen religious Benedictines, whose
first Abbot here was one Wius. He also caused half the Books, Vestments, and
Utinsils of that Abbey to be removed hither. King Edmund the Elder in the year
942. gave Lands to this Church, and after him the foresaid King Conutus gave
many Lands to this Monastery, and rebuilt it in a magnificent manner.

Controversies arising in the Reign of King William the Conqueror, Rome, and
found such favor with Pope Alexander the II. that he granted to him and his
Successors Episcopal Jurisdiction, and this special privilege, viz. That so
long as they kept a porphery Altar, which he then gave him, though the whole
Kingdom should fall under Excommunication, yet the Divine Office should not
cease in this Abbey unless specially interdicted by name. His Bull bears date
An. Dom. 107^. In the year 1081. the Contest between the Bishop and Abbot was
examined before King William the Conqueror, and upon hearing both sides, that
King did declare the Edmund, and the Town in which it Stands, to be exempt from
the Bishops Jurisdiction.

The Steward or Seneschall's Office for the Liberty of St. Edmund, was a place
of great honor, and the Family of Hastings held it in Fee. They enjoyed
several great Fees and Advantages by Custom, in case they executed the Office
in their own Person, but if by Deputy or Lieutenant, then the said Deputy
received half. All which particulars were found by inquision in the 30th. year
of Edward the I.

In the year 1010. the Body of St. Edmund was translated to London, this Danes;
but after three years it was brought back again. In the year 1021. soon after
King Canutus had introduced Monks here, Aldwinus Bishop of the East Angles,
began to build a stately new Church, to which work and for the maintenance of
the Fabric, the Inhabitants of Norfolk and Suffolk did freely give yearly 4 d.
out of every Carucate of Land in the Country. This Church was in the year 1032.
dedicated in honor of Christ, the Blessed Mary, and St. Edmund.

King Edward the Confessor, King William the I. King Henry the I. King Steven,
and King Richard, with many Bishops, and other Persons of Q^ality

The Body of St. Edmund remained entire and uncorrupted, and was so


Wius, Monk of Hulme, ob. 1044. 2 Leoffranus, ob. 1065. 3 Baldwinus, ob. 1097.
4 Robert, Son of Hugh Earl of Chester deposed 1102. 5 Robert, Prior of
Westminster, ob. 1107. 6 Alboldus, ob. 1119. 7 Anselmus, Nephew of Anselm
Archbishop of Cant was 1138. chosen Bishop of London, but not received there,
ob. 1148. 8 Ordingus, ob. 1156. 9 Hugh, Prior of Westminster, ob. 1180. 10
Sampson, ob. 1211. 11 Hugo, chosen Abbot 1213. consecrated Bishop of Ely 1229.
ob. 1254. 12 Richard, Abbot of Burton, ob. 1233. 13 Henry, ob. 1248. 14 Edmund
de Walpool, Doctor in the Decretals, ob. 1256. 15 Simon, elected, 1257. 16 John
de Norwold, ob. 1301. 17 Thomas de Tottington, ob. 1312. 18 Richard de
Draugton, ob. 1337. 19 William de Bernham. ob. 1361. 20 Henry de Hunstanston
died before Confirmation: 21 Johannes de Brinkele ob. 1379. 22 Johannes
Tynmouth, created, 7 R. 2. 33 Willielmus de Cratfeild, created 13 R. 2. 24
Willielmus Exeter. 5 H. 6. 25 Willielmus Curteys, 7 H. 6. 26 Johannes Boon,
created Abbot 1457. 27 Richardus Hengham 1475. 28 Thomas Raclesden. 1478. 29
John Reeve, alias Melford, the last Abbot of Bury created 5 Hen. 8.
John Norwood Abbot here on the one part, and the Prior and Convent of this
Monastery on the other, the Manors, Lands, and Revenues belonging to this Abbey
were divided and appropriated to the several Offices of the House, as such and
such Lands and Revenues to the Abbot, such to the Celerarius, for Sacristan for
the Charges incumbant on him, such to the Camerarius, such to the Almoner, such
to the Pitanciarius, such to the Infirmarius, such to the Hostillarius, and
such to the Praecentor. But all Lawsuits concerning any the Lands or Estate of
the Abbey the Abbot was to manage at his own proper Charges. Also the Abbot was
to entertain all secular Guests as well Horsemen as Footmen, in case he was
resident with his Family in Town, but the Convent was to entertain religious
Persons, and in case the Abbot be absent, then the Convent to entertain also
secular persons, if under thirteen Horse. This agreement between the Abbot and
Convent was made in the year 1281. And exemplified by King Edward the I. in the
same year, being the 9th. of his Reign.


Thurstan. In the time of Abbot Baldwin.
2 Tolimus. 3 Godefridus. 4 Radulphus. 5 Harueus. 6 Helias Widewell. 7 Frodo. 8
Willielmus Schuch. 9 Willielmus Wardel. 10 Hugo. 11 Walterus de Banham. 12
Willielmus de Disce. 13 Robertus de Granele, chosen Abbot of Thorney. 14
Richardus de Insula, chosen Abbot of Burton, and at last Abbot here 1233. 15
Dominus de Newport. 16 Georgius, first Precentor, then Sacristan, than Prior
here, reputed a Saint. 17 Nicholaus. 18 Simon de Luyton, chosen Prior, and then
Abbot here 1257. 19 Richardus de Hornins^e. 20 Richardus de Colecester. 21
Simon de Kingston, first Celarer, and then Chamberlain. 22 Willielmus de
Luyton. 23 Richardus le Brun.
Of the Buildings about the Church and Abbey, performed, in the times of the
Sacristans abovementioned, see the Book at large.

To the Cellarer of this House (whose Office was to make provision for

[ Valued at 1659 l. 13 s. 11 d. ob. per Annum.]

COVENTRY, in Warwickshire.
THIS Monastery was built by Leofricus Earl of Chester, and Godiva his Wife (a
most pious Lady) and plentifully endowed with Lands and Revenues. The Church
was so richly adorned with Gold and Silver, and precious Stones, that the Walls
seemed too narrow to contain all the Treasure

The Founder Earl Leofrick died in the year 1057. and was buried at Coventry,
as was also his Wife Godiva, in the Church Porch of their own Foundation^ In
which Church was formerly kept an Arm of the Great St. Augustine^ enclosed in
Silver.

Robert de Limesey (who was made Bishop of Chester, A. D. 1088. and died Henry
the I. The Monastery of Coventry, and constituted it the Capital Cathedral of
that Diocese. Whose Successor in that See, Hugh Bishop of Coventry, A. D. 1191.
expelled the Monks out of the Cathedral Church here, and placed in their room,
secular Canons. But in the year 1198. Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, by order
of Pope Celestine, restored the Monks to the possession of their Church again.

It appears by Earl Leofrick's Charter of Foundation that he built this Church
and Monastery to the honor of God and St. Mary his Mother, St. Peter the
Apostle, St. Osburga the Virgin, and all Saints. And gave to the Maintenance of
the Monks here serving God, twenty four Villages, with the Moiety of the Town
of Coventry in which it stands, with all Liberties and Customs which he himself
enjoyed in the said Estate, and that the Abbot of the said House should be
subject to none but the King. All which grants King Edward the Confessor did
confirm to Leofwinus Alexander by his Bull directed to the said King Edward
bearing date 1043. confirmed all their Liberties and Exemptions, granting them
full power to chose their own Abbots or Deans, without any Let or Hindrance
from the Apostolic Authority.

Leofwinus, the first Abbot of Coventry, being created Bishop of Chester,
ordained with the Consent of the Monks, that his Successors, Superiors of that
Monastery should be called Priors and not Abbots.

PEYKIRK, in Northamptonshire.
IN the year 1048. one Wulgatus then Abbot of a Monastery in this Town, lost
his Abbey and the Lands thereunto belonging, to the Abbot of Peterborough, who
claimed the same as parcel of his Estate. And this was by Judgment given in the
Court of King Hard^ Canute.

SPALDING, in Lincolnshire, a Cell of Croyland, etc.
ANno Dom. 1052. Thoroldus de Bukenh^le Brother to Godiva Countess of Leicester
having obtained six Monks from Wulgate Abbot of Croyland, began the Priory of
Spalding, assigning to it diverse Lands, and annexed it as a Cell to Croyland.

In the year 1074. Tuo Taylboys Earl of Anjou (Andegavia) having married Lucia
Great Grand daughter of the foresaid Godiva became Lord of Spalding and all
Holland; and gave the Cell of Spalding to a Monk of St. Nicholas of Anjou. He
also confirmed the Estate which his Great Uncle Thorold had given to this
House, and procured the like Confirmation Williams and Hen. 1st. Kings of
England. In the year 1085. Yuo Taylboys, by License of King William the
Conqueror, gave this Cell to the Abbey of St. Nicholas of Anjou, with the Lands
and Estate thereunto belonging. All which, with diverse Liberties, was confirmed
to the Nicholas by King William the I. William the II. and Henry John in the
first year of his Reign.

See more, Vol. 2. p. 871.

[ Valued at 767 l. 8 s. 11 d. per Annum.]


IN the year 1067. King William the Conqueror built this Abbey in the same place
where he fought and overcame Harold and his Army, that herein perpetual praise
and thanks might he given to God for the said Victory and Prayers made for the
Souls of those who were here slain. It was dedicated to St. Martin, and largely
endow'd^ with Lands and Privileges.



William designed to have endowed this Abbey with Lands sufficient for the
constant maintenance of sevenscore Monks, but death prevented. However he
granted to it, to be free from the Bishops Jurisdiction, to have Sanctuary, to
have Treasure troue, with many other Royal Liberties and Exemptions. He
translated from an Abbey in Normandy called Major Monasterium, several Monks,
among whom one Gausbertus, who he appointed the first Abbot of Battle. And
gave to this Abbey the Manor of Wi in Kent, Sussex, Surrey, Essex, Barkshire,
Oxfordshire, and Devonshire, with free Warren in all their Lands.

Yet King William gave this caution or restriction to the Abbot, that he etc.

King William Rufus, and King Henry the I. were also Benefactors to this House.

[ Valued at 880 l. 14 s. 7 d. ob. q. per Annum.]

BRECKNOCK, in Wales, a Cell to Battle Abbey.
BErnard de Newmarch was a Noble Norman in the Reign of King Henry the I. and
was the first Conqueror of the Lands about Brecknock. He gave to Battle Abbey
his Church of St. John the Evangelist in his Castle of Brecknock. Roger Earl of
Hereford. Grandson of the foresaid Bernard John of Brecknock, together with
diverse Liberties and Exemptions. All which Maihel de Hereford. and William de
Braiose. Other Benefactors were Herbert Fitz Peter, John Fitz Reginald, etc.

[ Valued at 112 l. 14 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

ARMETHWAYT, in Cumberland.
KING William the Conqueror founded here a Monastery for black Nuns; and
endowed it with diverse Lands, and such Privileges as were granted to the
Church of Westminster. This he granted in pure and perpetual Alms as freely As
heart may it thynk or ygh may it se.

This Nunnery being seated so very near the Borders of Scotland, was so
impoverisht by the Scots frequent Spoils and Inroads, that it was in a Edward
the IV. did in the thirteenth year of his Reign, new grant, ratify, and
confirm their Lands and Estate unto the then Prioress and Nuns here.

[ Valued at 18 l. 18 s. 8 d. per Annum.]

BEAULEIU (Bellus Locus) in Bedfordshire, a Cell of St. Albans.
THE Church of St. Mary in this place, of old called Moddry, was at first a
Hermitage and built by a Hermit called Radulfus. It was afterward given by
Robert de Albeneio, with the consent of his Mother Secilia, to the Abbey of St,
Albans, and became a Cell of that House. Which Robert endowed it with diverse
Lands, all which he gave to God, and St. Alban, and to the Monks of Beauleiu,
in Fee, to hold in free Alms.

WALLINGFORD, in Barkshire, a Cell of St. Albans.
Albans, in the time of Paul Abbot there. King Henry the VI. was a Benefactor
to the Priory of Wallingford. Vid. Vol 3. p. 11.

BELVOIR or Beaver, in Lincolnshire, a Cell of St. Albans.
RObertus de Toteneio Lord of the Castle of Belvoir, gave the Church of St.
Mary, adjoining to his said Castle, to the Abbey of St. Albans to be a Cell of
that House, endowing it with diverse Lands and Tithes; appointing it for the
Burial-place of himself and Wife, in case they died in England, and such it
afterward proved to be for his descendents.

Robert, and lastly by Thomas Lord Ros, in the 8. Hen. 6.

[ Valued at 104 l. 19 s. 10 d. per Annum.]


WIlliam Peverell gave the Church of St. Mary at Hatfeild with his own
Mansion House there, for a Habitation of Monks, and endowed the same with
Lands; all which was afterward annexed to St. Albans, and became a Cell of that
House.

[ Valued at 60 l. 14 s. 11 d. ob. per Annum.]


RAdulfus de Limesey, having erected a Church at Hertford, he gave the same for
a Cell to the Abbey of St. Albans, and with it diverse Lands in Hertford and
elsewhere. The Abbot of St. Albans obliging himself to send thither six Monks
of his House to serve God at Hertford, and in case the Revenue should be
augmented then to send a greater number.

Hadwisia, Wife of the said Radulfus, Alan de Limesey their Son, Gerard his
Son, and John de Limesey his Son, were all Benefactors to this Church of St.
Mary's at Hertford, and to the Monks of St. Albans serving God herein.

[ Valued at 72 l. 14 s. 2 d. ob. per Annum.]


RObert de Mulbray a Norman of noble extraction, to whom King William the
Conqueror gave the Earldom of Northumberland, endowed the Church of St. Mary,
adjoining to his Castle of Tinemouth, and in which the Body of St. Oswin King
and Martyr rested, with fair Revenues, Albans. David King of Scotland was a
Benefactor to this House; so were King Henry the I. of England, King Henry the
II. and King John, who granted to God and the Church of St. Oswin in Tinmouth,
and the Monks of St. Albans serving God here, many Lands, and great Liberties,
which Liberties though seized by King Edward Alban and St. Oswin.

[ Valued at 397 l. 10 s. 5 d. ob. per Annum.]

WYMUNDHAM, in Norfolk, a Cell of St. Albans.
ANno Dom. 1139. William de Albaneio Butler to King Henry the I. built the
Church of St. Mary and Priory of Monks at this Town, endowed the same with
Revenues^ and annexed it as a Cell to St. Albans; yet so as they might choose a
Prior among themselves and present him to their Founder, whom he was not to
refuse without good Cause. And the Albans as an acknowledgment of subjection.

King Henry the I. confirmed the Estate given to this House with the grant of
many great Liberties. The like did also William Earl of Sussex, William the
Founder.

Afterward in the 27th. of King Henry the VI. by Authority of Pope Nicholas
the V. and at the Petition of Sir Andrew Ogard Knight. then Patron of this
Monastery, it was discharged from any dependency on the Abbey of Albans, and
from paying the Mark per Annum, and made an Abbey of it self, and Steven London
then Prior, the first Abbot. All which was allowed and confirmed by the said
King Henry the VI. who at the same Provisors, or any other Statute.

[ Valued at 211 l. 16 s. 6 d. q. per Annum.]

BINHAM, in Norfolk, a Cell of St. Albans.
PEter de Valoniis and Albreda his Wife gave the Church of St. Mary at Binham
to the Abbey of St. Albans, but to be subject only in such manner as St.
Pancrace at Lewis is subject to St. Peter of Clugni, paying yearly to the
Church of St. Alban a Mark of Silver and no more. Rog^r de Valoniis confirmed
to God, and St. Mary, and the Monks of St. Albans serving God at Binham, all
the Lands which his Father Peter had given John Bishop of Norwich.

St. MARY de PRATO, near St. Albans.
THIS was a small Nunnery given, with certain Lands, by Garinus Abbot of St.
Albans, for the maintenance of Leprous Nuns. Confirmed by King John, in the
fifth year of his Reign.

SOPEWELL, in Hertfordshire, a Cell of St. Albans.
ABout the year 1140. two religious Women led a solitary life in a small
Habitation made of Boughs of Trees, near a Wood called Eiwoda, who being taken
notice of for their austerities and pious Lives, Gaufridus the sixteenth Abbot
of St. Albans, built there for them a Cell, gave them the Vail of Nuns, and
constituted their way of living according to the Rule of St. Benedict. He also
endowed the House with Possessions and Rents, and assigned them a Coemitery, in
which none were to be buried but the Virgins of the House, whose number was not
to exceed thirteen.

Henry de Albaneio and Cecilia his Wife, and several of their Descendants, were
great Benefactors to this Cell of St. Mary of Sopewell; and so was Richard de
Tany.

Michael Abbot of St. Albans, made and published here in his Visitation, Anno
Dom. 1338. certain good Rules and Orders to be observed by the Nuns of this
House: among others, that the Door that goes into the Garden, and that of the
Parlour, should not be opened till the Bell sounds to the ninth hour, and that
all the year they should be shut up at night when the Abby-Bell sounds the
Cover^eu, etc.

[ Valued at 40 l. 7 s. 10 d. per Annum.]


IN the time of Gaufridus Abbot of St. Albans, one Roger a Monk of that Abbey,
became a Hermit in a Hermitage between St. Albans and Dunstable, where he
lived in a most austere manner, with the reputation of great Sanctity; at the
same time Christina a Virgin renouncing the World became an Anchoress at the
same place, yet the said Roger never Roger died and was buried in the
Abby-Church of St. Albans; but Christina surviving, became of so great note for
her Sanctity, that the abovesaid Gaufridus, built here from the Foundation a
Monastery for Nuns, and endowed the same with Revenues, of which House
Christina became the first Prioress. Vid. Vol. 2. p. 872.


THIS Church formerly dedicated to St. Olive King and Martyr, was by King
William Rufus given to the Monks of Battel-Abby, for a Cell; and by them new
dedicated to St. Nicholas. King William Rufus, King Henry the I. and King John,
conferred many Lands and Liberties upon this House.

[ Valued at 147 l. 12 s. per Annum.]

MALLINGE, in Kent.
KING Edmund gave certain Lands in Mallinges to the Monastery of St. Andrew the
Apostle, which afterward was by Gundulfus Bishop Rochester, converted to an
Abbey of Nuns here, dedicated to St. Mary; to which King Henry the I. and King
John, and Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, were also Benefactors.

[ Valued at 218 l. 4 s. 2 d. ob. per Annum.]

TUTBURY, in Staffordshire.
HEnry de Ferariis built the Church and Monastery, to the honor of the blessed
Virgin, at his Castle of Tutbury, which by the Grant and Licente of King
William Rufus, he endowed with diverse Lands and Tithes. Earl Robert de Ferariis
the younger, Grandson of the Founder, was a great Benefactor, and so were many
others whose names, with the parcells by them given, may be seen in the
Monasticon at large.

John Duke of Lancaster, being Lord of the Honor and Castle of Tutbury,
granted his Letters Pattents to the King of the Minstalls in Tutbury, impowring
him and his Successors, to arrest all Minstralls within the said Honor and
Franchise who refuse to do their service of minstralsie on the Feast of the
assumption of our Lady ^early, and constrain them to it, according to Custom.
Dated in the 4 Rich. 2.

There is also another Custom of the Place, that the Stage Players who come to
Matins on the Feast of the Assumption, should have from the Prior of Tutbury a
Bull in case they can catch him before he gets over the River there, or else
the Prior is to give them 40 d. in money. Vid. Vol. 2. p. 873.

EYE, in Suffolk.
RObert Malet, to whom King William the Conqueror had given the honor of Eye,
with the assent of that King, built a Monastery there, and to it gave the
Church dedicated to St. Peter, in Eye, with a great quanity of Lands and
Churches, with Liberties and Franchises, to hold as freely as King William gave
them to him. In the year 1138. King Steven William Earl of Boloign that King's
eldest Son. This House was a Cell to the Abbey Bernay in Normandy, so that
neither the Prior nor any Monk could be placed here without the assent of the
Abbot of Bernay; neither upon the death of the Prior here, could the Founder,
or his Heirs or Successors, Patrons of this Priory, meddle with, or receive any
profit from the Goods and Possessions of this House during the vacancy; but
only, in sign of Dominion, he used to place a Porter at the Gate of the Priory,
who during the Vacation was maintained out of the Revenues of the House, and at
the Instalment of the next Prior used to receive for his Fee the Sum of 5 s.
for an Ox.

8th. year of King Richard the II. the Estate of this Priory being then seized
into the King's hands because of his Wars with France, the Prior and Covent
complained that they were extremely impoverished by Foreign Exactions, so that
the Revenues of this House could hardly maintain the Prior and three or four
Monks; that King therefore by his Letters Patents, at their Petition and
Request, discharged them for ever of their Foreign Subjection to the Abbey of
Bernay, and made them a Prior and Covent of themselves independent, like other
English Priories.

[ Valued at 161 l. 2 s. 3 d. q. per Annum.]

HELENSTOW, in Berkshire.
JVdith Countess of Huntington, Wife of Earl Waltheof, built a Church and
Monastery here for Nuns; and dedicated it to the holy Trinity, Mary, and St.
Helen. She and others endowed it with diverse Lands; all which were afterward
confirmed to the Nuns here by King Henry the II. together with large
Privileges and Exemptions.

PENWORTHAM, in Lancashire, a Cell of Evesham.
WArinus Bussell, and Richard Bussell his Son, gave the Church at Penwortham,
and with it diverse Lands, to the Abbey of Evesham, for a Cell of that Abbey. All
which was confirmed to God, and St. Mary, and to the Monks serving God in
Penvercham, by Hugh Buissell, Grandson Warinus, in pure and perpetual Alms.
This was in the Reign of King William the Conqueror.

[ Valued at 29 l. 18 s. 7 d. per Annum.]

KILBURN, in Middlesex, a Cell of Westminster.
IN the Reign of King Henry the I. Herebertus Abbot of Westminster, Osbert de
Clara, Prior, and the whole Convent of Westminster, gave a Hermitage at Kilburn
to three Maids Emma, Gunilda, and Christina, for a Nunnery; and endowed the
same with Lands and Rents. Gilbert Bishop London gave the Jurisdiction of this
Cell of Kilburn to the said Abbot and his Successors, exempting it from the
Jurisdiction of the Bishop of London for ever. But new Contests arising about
this House between the Bishop of London and Abbot of Westminster, they came to
an Agreement in the year 1231. That the Bishop might visit the Nunnery to
preach to them, and to hear their Confessions, but without exacting any etc.

[ Valued at 74 l. 7 s. 11 d. per Annum.]

HURLEY, in Barkshire, a Cell of Westminster.
GOdefridus de Magnavilla gave to God, and St. Peter, and to the Church of
Westminster, and St. Mary of Hurley, the Town of Hurley, with Hurley by William
Bishop of London. In the Godefridus Prior of Hurley and his Covent made an
exchange, with Absolon Abbot of Walden, of some of their Revenues.

[ Valued at 121 l. 18 s. 5 d. per Annum.]

MALVERNE, in Worcestershire, a Cell of Westminster.
IN the eighteenth year of William the Conqueror, one Aldwine a Hermit and his
Brethren began the Monastery here.

King William the Conqueror and others gave Lands and Revenues to Henry the
first who by his Charter Vid. Vol. 2. p. 876.

[ Valued at 98 l. 10 s. 9 d. ob. per Annum.]

AUCOT, in Warwickshire, a Cell of Malverne-magna.
WIlliam Burdet gave all his Land in Aucot to God and St. Mary of Malverne and
to the Monks there, in the year 1159. From among which Monks he was to have, by
agreement betwixt him and Roger, Prior of that House, a certain number for the
Institution of a Monastery here. The Prior of which House was to be constituted
by the Prior of Malverne, by and with the advice of the Abbot of Westminster.

[ Valued at 28 l. 6 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

SUDBURY, in Suffolk, a Cell of Westminster.
KING Edward the III. in the thirty fifth year of his Reign, granted Richard
Roke of Westminster, to settle certain Land in Sudbury and Holgate upon the
Abbot and Convent of Westminster, or the relief of their poor Cell of St.
Bartholomew near Sudbury.

St. NEOTS, in Huntingtonshire.
SAint Neot was Son of King Adulphus, and Brother of King Alured, who founded
the University of Oxford. He was a Monk at Neotestoke, in Cornwall, and from
thence his Body was translated to Anulphesbury, in Huntingtonshire, where Earl
Elfrid converted his Palace into a Monastery of black Monks. Which being
afterward spoild and burnt down by the Danes, was in the Reign of King Henry
the I. An. Dom. 1113. re-edified by Rohesia Wife of Richard Son of Earl
Gislibert; about which time it was given as a Cell to the Abbey of Bec in
Normandy. The foresaid Lady and diverse others gave Lands and Revenues to the
Monks of Bec serving God at St. Neots. It appears by the Bull of Pope
Celestine, directed to the Bishop of Lincoln, that the Prior and Convent of St.
Neots, being their House was situated on a famous and great Road, did use to
bestow meat Eynesbury and Torney.

In the Reigns of Henry the IV. and Henry the V. This Monastery was discharged
of its Foreign Subjection to the Abbey of Bec, and made an English Priory. Vid.
Vol. 2. p. 876.

[ Valued at 241 l. 11 s. 4 d. q. per Annum.]


KING William the Conqueror founded the Abbey here for Benedictine Monks, in
honor of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his blessed Mother the Virgin Mary, and
St. Germain the Bishop. Which King, and several other persons, did endow it
with large Possessions, in particular Guido de Raincourt gave to this Church of
St. Germain in Selby his Town of Stamford in Northamptonshire. Thomas
Archbishop of York, Gilbert T^s^n chief Standard Bearer of England, Gaulerannus
Earl of Mellent, Henry de Lacy Earl of Lincoln and Constable of Chester, etc.
gave other Lands Richard the I. in the first year of his Reign, confirmed to
the Monks here. Also King Edward the III. did in the second year of his Reign,
confirm to them all their Liberties and Exemptions, whereupon in the twenty
second of that King, they were etc.

[ Vaued at 729 l. 12 s. 10 d. q. per Annum.]

SHREWSBURY, in Shropshire.
IN the year 1083. Roger Earl of Montgomery built here a Monastery in Peter. To
this House he gave great Possessions, and after his Example other Barons and
Knights of that County did the like. Roger, Hugh his Son and Heir gave other
Lands and great Liberties and Immunities, with a heavy Curse to the Henry the
I. and King Steven, confirming their said Liberties in so large a manner that
nothing could be added to Matilda de Lungespe Daughter and Walter de Clifford,
Walchelinus Maminot, Willielmus Peverell, and Richard Fitz-Allen Earl of
Arundel, etc. All whose Gifts and Benefactions were confirmed to the Abbot and
Monks of this House by King Henry the III. in the eleventh year of his Reign.

[ Valued at 132 l. 4 s. 10 d. per Annum.]

St. MARY's, at York.
THE History of the Foundation of this Abbey was writ by Stephen who had been
Abbot of Whitby, and was after that made the first Abbot of this House. In
which the most observable matters are as follows,

Alan Son of Eudo Earl of Britain, having built a Church adjoining to York in
honor of St Olave, gave it to the foresaid Stephen and his Companions, with
four Acres of Land, thereon to erect a Monastery. This was about the year 1088.
in the Reign of King William the Conqueror. Who dying, his Son and Successor
King William Rufus, gave them Land whereon to build a larger Church, and gave
to the Monastery, diverse Lands, Liberties, and Exemptions. Also Earl Alan their
first Founder gave them the adjoynig Suburbs lying without the City of York, to
hold freely for ever. And gave the Advowson of this Abbey to the King, that so
he might be the Defendor and Patron of it for the future. Thomas Archbishop of
York claimed the four Acres of Land on which this Abbey was built as belonging
to him, and was a continual vexation to the Monks, till King William Rufus gave
him the Church of St. Steven's in York, in exchange and full satisfaction.

When King William Rufus, seeing the Old Church to be too strait, laid Olave,
and gave it the name of St. Mary.

King Henry the II. granted to this Abbey very great Liberties and Peter's of
York, and St. John of Beverley. And confirmed to them all their Lands and
Revenues given them by their several Benefactors amounting to a very great
number, some of the principal of whom were King William the I. and II. King
Henry the I. Alan Earl of Britaign, Odo Earl of Campania, Berengerius de
Todenei, Willielmus Peverel, Petrus de Ros, Robertus de Brus, Ivo Tallebois,
Walterus de Daincourt, and Conan Earl of Britaigne, etc.

In the year 1343. William Archbishop of York in his Visitation, questioning by
what Right and Title the Abbot and Covent here, did claim York, whereupon they
were by the said Archbishop allowed, and their Title declared good and
sufficient.

A List of some of the ABBOTS of St. Mary's at York.
1088 Stephanus Wittebiensis. 1112 Richardus. 1131 Godfridus. 1132 Sauaricus.
1161 Clemens. 1184 Robertus de Harpham. 1189 Robertus de Longo-Campo. 1239
Willielmus Rondele. 1244 Thomas de Warterhill. 1258 Simon de Warwick. 1296
Benedictus de Malton. 1303 Johannes de Gillyngs. 1313 Alanus de Nesse.
Vid. Vol. 3. p. 9.

[ Valued at 1550 l. 7 s. 0 d. q. per Annum]


SAint Bega was a veiled Nun, born in Ireland, she built a small Monastery in
Caupland in the furthermost parts of England, not far from Carlisle. This
Monastery, together with several Lands and Tithes, was afterward in the Reign
of King Henry the I. given to the Abbey of St. Mary's at York, by William
Meschines, Son of Ranulph, Lord of Caupland, for a Cell to that Abbey; which was
to send hither a Prior, and at least William Forz Earl of Albemarl was a
Benefactor.

[ Valued at 143 l. 17 s. 2 d. ob. per Annum.]


AT the time of the Foundation of St. Mary's at York, Radulph Meschines Earl of
Cumberland, gave the Cell of St. Constantine at Wedderhal, to the said Abbey of
St. Mary's; which gift was confirmed by King William William Rufus in the
first of his.)

Benefactors to this House were David King of Scotland and Earl Huntington, and
his Son Henry Prince of Scotland, with diverse others.

Adelwald, (or Athelwulph, who was the first) Bishop of Carlisle, confirmed to
the Monks of St. Mary's at York the Churches, and Tithes to them given. in his
Diocese. Providing however that the said Monks shall allot a sufficient
proportion out of the same for the Priests in the several Churches, and that
they should also pay the Synodals.

William the Conqueror, upon his Conquest of this Kingdom, gave to Ralph de
Meschines the County of Cumberland, to his Brother Hugh de Meschines, the
County of Chester, and to a third Brother William de Meschines (who founded
this House at Wetherhal) all the Land of Copland, lying between Duden and
Darwent. Which Great men soon after subdivided, and parcell'd out their
respective Territories so given, to certain Barons and Knights their
Dependents, viz. Ralph de Melchines enfeofft Hubert de Vaux of the Barony of
Gillesland, etc. William de Meschines Lord of Copland, enfeofft Waldeuus Son of
Cospatrick of all his Land between Cocar and Derwent, etc. These chief Lords
reserving from their Feoffees certain services, in like manner as they
themselves held their Estates by some services of the King. (Yet were Lands
often granted to the Monasteries, to hold free from all services whatsoever,
except the Divine Service of Prayers for their Founders, etc.)

And note, That after this manner were Lands and Liberties first derived from
the Crown, and Tenures raised in relation to them, since the Norman Conquest.

[ Valued at 117 l. 11 s. 10 d. ob. q. per Annum.

St. MARTINS, at Richmund, a Cell to St. Mary's at York.
WYmar, Sewer to the Earl of Richmund, gave the Chapel of St. Martins at
Richmund, and with several Lands, to God and the blessed Mary at York.

Roaldus Grandson of Alan Constable of Richmund, and diverse others were
Benefactors, and gave Lands and Tithes to God, the Church of St. Mary at York,
and Priory of St. Martins near Richmund, and to the Monks there.

In the year 1146. Pope Eugenius the III. confirmed the Cell of St. Martins.

Peter Capell, Rector of the Church of Richmund granted a Pension of l. per
Annum to the Monks of St. Mary's at York, and 20 l. of Wax to their Cell of St.
Martins of Richmund, yearly.

The several Rents and Revenues of this House; where, and from whom they arise,
may be seen in the Book at large, p. 402, 403.

[ Valued at 43 l. 16 s. 8 d. per Annum.]

ROMBURGH, in Cambridgeshire, a Cell to St. Mary's at York.
ALan (otherwise, as I suppose, called Steven) Earl of Britany and Richmond,
gave the Cell of Romburgh to God, St. Mary, and the Monks of the Abbey at York;
which Gift was confirmed to them by Everard Bishop of Norwich, and that the
Abbot and Convent of St. Mary's at York, might place and displace the Prior and
Monks at their pleasure. The like Confirmations were granted by Theobald
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Gaufridus Bishop of Ely.

SANTOFT and HENES, in Lincolnshire, Cells of St. Mary's at York.
ROger Moubray gave the Isle called Santoft, and large Possessions with it,
Mary's at York, and to the Monks there. And William Earl of Waren gave Henes to
the said Church.

HEREFORD Priory, a Cell of St. Peter's at Gloucester.
IN the year 1101. Hugo de Lacy gave the Church of St. Peter's at Hereford,
which his Father Walter had built from the Foundation, to the Monks of St.
Peter's at Gloucester, with all the Estate belonging to it, given by his said
Father Wal^er de Lacy, and Confirmed by King William the Conqueror.

In the Reign of King Edward the II. great Contests arising in this House
between William de Irby who claimed to be Prior under the Kings Patronage, and
Thomas de Burg^ull who claimed under another Title: the Estate of the Priory
was so wasted and impoverisht betwixt them that there did not remain sufficient
to discharge the Works of Piety, for which it was at first built, and the House
running to utter ruin; that King therefore, to prevent its final destruction,
in the fifteenth year of his Reign, directed his Writ to the Sheriff of
Hereford, commanding him to seize the said Priory with all its Possessions as
well moveable as immovable into his hand, and them safely to keep until
further Order.


THE Church of the holy Trinity in Norwich was founded in the Reign of King
William Rufus, An Dom. 1096. by Herbert Losenge, who had been Prior of
Fischampe in Normandy, then Abbot of Ramsey, and then Bishop of the
East Angles, of which Diocese he fixed the Seat at Norwich, and built this
Church for his Cathedral; erecting on the North-side of it his own Palace, and
on the South Side a Monastery for Monks. Herbert obtained great Privileges and
Franchise from both Regal and Papal Authority. Notwithstanding which, great
Contests arose between the Citizens and the Monks about their Liberties, which
continued for many years, and were never perfectly composed till the sixth
John. The said Bishop Herbert endowed this Monastery, An. Dom. 1101. King Henry
the I. confirmed his Gift, and also gave them Henry the II. also made a large
Confirmation of all their Lands and Liberties.

Vid. infra p. 1003. and Vol. 3. p. 5.


THIS Priory was founded and endowed by Harald Lord of Ewyas, An. Dom. 1100.
whose Gift was afterward confirmed by Robert his Son, who also gave other
Lands; all which was also confirmed by Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury, and
John Bishop of Salsbury.

MIDLESBURG, in Yorkshire, a Cell to Whitby.
RObert de Brus and Agnes his Wife, and Adam de Brus their Son gave the Church
of St. Hylda in Midlesburg, and with it diverse Lands, in perpetual Alms to the
Monks of St. Peter and St. Hilda at Whitby, for a Cell of that House, and that
certain of those Monks might live and reside here for God's service in the
Church of Midlesburg William Malebiss was also a Benefactor to the Church of
St. Hylda at Midlesburg and the Monks there.

HAKENES, in Yorkshire.
IN the Reign of King William Rufus, the Monastery of Whitby being much
infested not only by robbers from the Woods on the Land, but also by Pirates
from the Sea, who carried from them almost all they had, Serlo de Percy then
Prior of that House, and his Monks, applied themselves to William de Percy,
Brother of Serlo, and desired of him a place of Refuge at Hakenes; who readily
granted them the Church of St. Mary in that Town, which had been built by St.
Hildo the Abbess, with License to erect a Monastery there, and in it to remain
till they could return in peace to Whitby; which accordingly they did, and
remained here for some time.

HORSHAM, in Norfolk.
RObert Fitz-Walter and Sibill his Wife, returning through France from Rome,
where they had been in Pilgrimage, were set upon by Theives, robbed, and kept
in Prison. till by their Prayers to Almighty God, and to the holy Virgin St.
Faith, they were miraculously delivered out of their Confinement. After which
they visited in Devotion the Shrine of St. Faith at the Abbey of Couches in
France, where for the space of twelve days they remained, being kindly
entertained by the Abbot and England to their own Manor, to built there a
Monastery in the Worship of God and St. Faith. Which accordingly they did;
endowing the same with Lands, and placing therein two Monks of the Abbey of
Couches, to which Abbey they annexed this House as a Cell. Their Deed of
Foundation and Endowment, was made in the time of Henry the I. and Herbert
Bishop of Norwich, who died 19. H. 1.

Pope Alexander, by his Bull dated in the year 1163. confirmed to the Monks
here all their Lands and Liberties.

In the 14. Rich. 2. this Priory was discharged of its Foreign Subjection to
the Abbey of Couches, and made an English Priory of it self.

[ Valued at 162 l. 16 s. 11 d. ob. per Annum.]

RADINGFEILD, in Suffolk.
THIS was a Priory of Nuns founded to the honor of God and St. Andrew, by
Manasses Earl of Gisnensis, and Emme his Wi^es Daughter and Heir of William de
Arras, and endowed by them with the Manor of Radingfeild, etc. late held by
the said William de Arras; their Deed bears date 1120.

[ Valued at 67 l. 0 s. 1 d. ob. per Annum.]

READING, in Barkshire.
(...) of Nuns. But that having been (...) Henry the I. An. Dom. 1126. built
here a most noble Abbey for Monks, and dedicated it in honor of the Virgin Mary
and St. John Baptist, and endowed it with great Possessions Hen. 2.

Hugh Abbot of Reading and his Covent, reciting by their Deed, that King Henry
the I. had ^rected that Abbey for the maintenance of Monks there devoutely and
religiously serving God, ^for the receipt of Strangers and Travelers, but
chiefly Christ's poor People, they therefore did erect an Hospital without the
Gate of the Abbey there, to maintain twenty six poor People; and to the
maintenance of Strangers passing that way they gave the profits of their Mill
at Leominstre. Also Auc^erius Abbot of Reading, built near this Abbey a House
for Lepers, which was called St. Mary Magdalens, alloting for their sustenance
sufficient of all things, as well Mary Magdalen.

[ Valued at 1938 l. 14 s. 3 d. ob. q. per Annum.]

LEOMINSTER, in Herefordshire, a Cell to Reading.
Merwald one of the Kings of Mercia; but that having been long destroyed by the
Danes, King Henry the I. when he built the Abbey of Reading, gave them also
Leominster, with all the Estate belonging to it, and those Monks made it a Cell
of their Abbey. It was confirmed to them by Richard and Hugh Bishops of Hereford.

RINDELGROS, in Scotland, a Cell to Reading.
DAvid King of Scotland gave this Town to the Abbot and Covent of Reading, to
have and enjoy as freely and quiety as any Abbey in his Kingdom enjoy their
Estates. With a Provision that if he or his Successors shall add to this
Donation sufficient wherewith to maintain a Covent here, that then the said
Abbot of Reading should send a Covent hither.

MAY, in Scotland, a Cell to Reading.
THIS Priory was founded by David King of Scotland, and endowed with several
Lands in Scotland, by the said David, and Malcolm and William successively
Kings of Scotland.

SHIRBURN, in Dorsetshire.
THE Bishops Seat which is now at Salisbury, did of old time, for many years,
remain at Shirburn; but since that time Monks were placed here instead of
secular Canons. The Abby-Church here, dedicated to our Lady, was in the time of
Abbot Bradeford, set on fire, and a great part burnt, in a Dissension which
happened between the Townsmen and the Monks; but the Townsmen were made to
contribute to the Reparation. Hen. 2. granted and confirmed certain Lands to
this Abbey.

[ Valued at 682 l. 14 s. 7 d. ob. per Annum.]

CADWELLI, in the Diocese of St. David's, in Wales, a Cell to Shirburn.
THIS Priory of Cadwelli was given to the Church of St. Mary's of Shirburn^ and
to Thurstan Prior there and his Successors, by Roger Bishop of Salsbury.
Maurice of London and others were Benefactors. Pope Alexander, by his Bull
dated 1163. confirmed to the Abbey of Shirburn all its Lands and Revenues, among
others the Parish Church of St. Mary of Shirburn, which the Abbot of that Abbey
held as a Prebend of the Church of Salisbury, also the Church of St. Mary of
Cadwelli with all the Chapels, etc. all which Grants and Deeds were ratified,
approved, and confirmed, and also exemplified by David Bishop of St. David's,
Anno Dom. 1303.

[ Valued at 29 l. 10 s. per Annum.]

CARHOW, in Norfolk.
THIS was a Nunnery founded and endowed by King Steven near the City of
Norwich. King John in the first year of his Reign granted to the Nuns here a
Fair, to be held yearly at the Nativity of our Lady, with the like Liberties as
the Monks enjoy in their Fair at Norwich. King Henry the III. in the thirteenth
year of his Reign confirmed their Estate.

[ Valued at 64 l. 16 s. 6 d. q. per Annum.]

GRENDALE, in Yorkshire.
AVicia Prioress of the Covent of Nuns in the Church of St. Mary of Grendale,
granted in fee-farm to Ralf Prior, and to the Convent of Giseburn, certain
Lands which had been to the said Nuns given by Eugeramus de Bovington; to hold
at the yearly Rent of four Quarters of Wheat yearly, to be paid half at the
Feast of St. Martins in Winter, and half at Whitsontide. Richard de Percy, then
Patron of this Priory, granted the Advowson thereof to Richard Malebisse and
his Heirs for ever, yiedling,

CLERKENWELL, in Middlesex.
JOrdanus, Son of Radulfus, Son of Brian, gave to God, St. Mary, and all
Saints, and to Robert the Chaplain, in Alms, fourteen Acres of Land lying near
the Clerks-well ( fons clericorum) freed and discharged from all Claims of the
Hospitallers of St. John or Jerusalem; this he gave to the said Robert, to the
end that he might there build a religious House, such as he thought fit for
God's service. Which being built and made a Nunnery, Matilda de Ros, Daughter
of Richard Canvilla, Girard de Canvill, Henry de Essex, and others were
Benefactors; whose Gifts were confirmed by Richard Bishop of London, An. Dom.
1194. and by the Heirs General of Mary de Font Clericorum adjoining to London,
and the Henry the II.

[ Valued at 262 l. 19 s. per Annum.]

WROXHALL, in Warwickshire.
HVgh Lord of Wroxhall and Hatton, being taken Prisoner at the holy War (in
Palestine) and detained in Cha^^s there, was by miracle removed from thence and
set down in his own Estate at Wroxhall; whereupon Benedictine Nuns, in honor
of God and St. Leonard, to whom he had made his Prayers when in distress; and
made his two Daughters Nuns here.

The Names of the Prioresses,
1 Ernborow. 2 Helin. 3 Sabin. 4 Helin. 5 Mawd. 6 Emme. 7 Mawd. 8 Cece^ie. 9
I Would. 10 Amiss Abtot. 11 Annis. 12 Sibill Abtot. 1284.
Henry the II. and several others were Benefactors, all whose Gifts were
confirmed to this House in the first of King Edward the III.

[ Valued at 72 l. 15 s, 6 d. per Annum.]


ALbericus de Veer, the Kings Chamberlain, gave and confirmed to God and St.
Mary, and to the Monks of Abington at Coln, serving God in Andrew there, diverse
Land and Revenues. King Henry the I. in the year 1111. authorized and confirmed
the Subjection of this Church to that of Abington, and all the Estate given
unto Albericus de Veer and others of his Family. Which Albericus, before his
death, became a Monk in this House, and dying, was here buried; as were also
his Sons. In the year 1311 a Composition and Agreement was made between Richard
Abbot of Abington, and John de Campeden Prior of Colun, and their several
Convents, containing that the Prior and Covent of Coln might choose and admit
their own Monks from what parts they please, and that no Monks should be sent
thither from the Convent of Abyndon; that the Convent of Coln might choose
their own Prior, who was to be presented to, and allowed by the Abbot Abyndon;
saying to the Abbot the right of visiting the said Priory of Coln. In
consideration of which Liberty the Monks of Coln, did with the Consent of
Robert de Veer Earl of Oxford their Patron, grant to the Abbot of Abyndon their
Lordship of Kensington. Vid. Vol. 2. p. 877.

[ Valued at 156 l. 12 s. 4 d. ob. per Annum.]

CANEWELL, in Staffordshire.
GEva Daughter of Hugh Earl of Chester, and Wife of Ieoffrey Ridell, founded
the Church in honor of St. Mary, and St. Giles, and All Saints in Canewell,
for Monks; and, with the grant and allowance of her Heirs Ieoffrey Ridell, and
Ralph Basset, endowed it with diverse Lands. The said Ralph Basset was a
Benefactor to this House, and so was Waleran Earl of Warwick.

FAREWELL, in Staffordshire.
ROger Bishop of Chester (whose Seat was since translated to Lichfield) gave
the Church of St. Mary at Faurwelle to Nuns and devout Women; this he did at
the request of three Hermits inhabiting at Faurwelle; and endowed the same with
Lands, to hold as freely as he himself did from God and the King; all which
King Henry the II. confirmed to the said

PINLEY, in Warwickshire.
R de Pila^dinton, gave this place to be a Nunnery, which was confirmed to the
Nuns here by Alured Bishop of Worcester, and by Simon and John his
Predecessors. John Son of Ieoffrey de Langele gave to God and St. Mary of
Pinley and the Nuns there, his Brother Robert de Langely, his Homage, and
Service, and Rent of 6 d. for the maintenance of our Ladies Lamp at Pinley (ad
Lumen beatae Mariae de Pineleia)

[ Valued at 23 l. 5 s. 11 d. per Annum]

STRATFORD Pr^ory.
THE Nunnery here dedicated to St. Leonard, was founded and endowed by
Christiana de Sumeri, and her Son; as seems by the Confirmation of King Steven.
King Richard the I. did confirm other Lands to it, given by Galiena and her Son
Bartholmew de Daumartin, Patrons of the House.

FRESTONE in Lincolnshire, a Cell of Croyland.
ALan de Creun, with Muriel his Wife, and Maurice his Son gave the Clearch of
St. James of Frestone, with several Lands and Tithes, to Croyland. From which
Creun, or Croune, descended the Family of Pedwardyn, who became Heirs of the
Founder, the Male Line ceasing.

St. DOGMELS, in Pembrokshire, (Cella Caenobii Tyronensis.)
THese Monks were Benedictines of the same Order with those of St. Martins at
Tours. The Priory here was founded by Martin de Turribus, a Norman who first
Conquered the Country hereabouts called Kames, or Kemish. Robert the Son of
this Martin, endowed it with Lands, confirmed to it by King Henry the I.

[ Valued at 87 l. 8 s. 6 d. per Annum.]

WALDEN Abbey, in Essex.
THE Abbey at Walden was founded in the year 1136. by Gaufridus de Mandevilia
Earl of Essex. He was Grandson of Ieoffrey who came into England with the
Norman Conqueror, and was of most signal Bohuns Earls of Hereford, Essex, and
Northampton.

This Abbey was dedicated to the honor of the blessed Mary, and St. James the
Apostle.

The Family of Bohuns were great Benefactors to this Abbey, and most of them
buried here.

This Abbey was built on the West Side of the Town and adjoining to the

Rohesia his Widow built a Nunnery at Chinksand, to which she did all good
Offices, and for the sake of that House, became very unkind to this of her
Husbands Foundation.

William de Mandevilla second Son of the Founder, while Ieoffrey his elder
Brother lived, led a military life in Flanders with Philip Earl of that
Country, but upon his Brother's death without issue, he returned into England,
and inherited his Estate. Soon after which he made a Pilgrimage to Jerusalem
and visited the holy Places, from whence being returned into England, he
visited this House, and was here received with great Ceremony, where he
presented at the Altar several Relics which be had purchased in Walden, etc.
and died in Normandy without issue. After whose decease this Barony came by his
Ieffrey Fitz-Peter, who disseiz'd the Monks of what William had given them, and
kept the Estate from them a great while, John's Coronation, being made Earl of
Essex. he restored part of their Lands again, and confirmed them to the Monks
here. This Ieffrey Filius Petri was very vexatious to this Abbey, the manner and
particulars may be seen in the Book at large. Yet did, Gaufridus de Mandavilla,
Steven, Henry the II. And King Edward the III. in the seventeeth year of
William de Bohun Earl of Northampton to give and annexed Bereden in Essex as a
Cell to this Abbey.

[ Valued at 372 l. 18 s. 1 d. per Annum.]

BROMFEILD, in Shropshire.
ANno Dom. 1155. The Canons of Bromfeild, by the Authority of Theobald
Archbishop of Canterbury, gave their Church of Bromfeild to the Abbey of St.
Peter's at Gloucester.

King Henry the II. confirmed all the Estate belonging to the Church of St.
Mary of Bromfeild, to the Prior and Monks there serving God, to hold of him and
his Heirs in perpetual Alms. The like did King Henry the III.

BRETFORD, in Warwickshire.
GAufridus Camerarius de Clintona gave certain Lands in this Lordship to one
Noemi a Nun, for the erecting a Cell of Nuns here.

Afterward, at the request of the said Gaufridus de Clinton, the Nuns viz.
Sebure and Naeumi, gave their House and Estate here to the Canons of
Killingworth.

TALLACH, in the Diocese of St. David's in Wales.
THE Abbey here, dedicated to God, St. Mary and St. John Baptist, was founded by
Resus the younger Son of Resus the younger, of the Family of the Princes of
South Wales, and by him, and others endowed with many Lands, the particulars
may be seen in the Monasticon at large, fol. 466, 467. all which was confirmed
to this House by King Edward the Edward the III. in the fifth year of his Reign.

[ Valued at 136 l. 9 s. 11 d. per Annum.]

BLITHBURY Priory, in Staffordshire.
HVgh Malvisin gave Blytheburgh to Monks and Nuns there dwelling, for the
service of God and St. Giles, to hold in pare and perpetual Alms. Which Estate
though for a while taken away by William Malvisin, Son of the Founder Hugh, yet
it was soon restored again.

EDWARDSTON, in Suffolk, a Cell to Abbington.
HVbertus de Monte Canesi Lord of the Town of Edwardston in Suffolk gave the
Church there, to the Monks of Abbendon, to be a Cell of Henry the I. Which was
also ratified by that King, An. Dom. 1115.

DEPING, in Lincolnshire, a Cell to Thorney.
BAldewinus Wac gave the Church of St. James in Deping with diverse Lands
belonging to it, to God, St. Mary, and the Church of Thorney, Innocent the III.
in the first year of his Pontificate. (1198)

ALCESTER, in Warwickshire.
IN the year 1140. Radulfus Pincerna (or Boteler) founded this Monastery (then
called from its Situation St. Mary's of the Isle) and made Robert a Monk of
Worcester the first Abbot here. At which time it was agreed between the two
Houses, viz. The Abbey of Worcester, and this, that there should be a constant
Love and Brotherhood betwixt them, and that upon Robert Earl of Leicester (of
whom this Estate was holden by the foresaid Founder) confirmed the same to the
Monks here, and granted to them diverse Liberties. Steven. King Henry the II.
confirmed to them Edward the IV. in the fifth year of his Reign, seeing the
Estate of this Monastery to run to decay, it being so far wasted that Evesham,
to which he annexed it for ever; so that from that time it became a Cell of that
Abbey.

[ Valued at 65 l. 7 s. 11 d. per Annum.]

LINGEBROOK Priory, in Herefordshire.
IT seems by an Inquisition taken 24. Edw. 3. that Adam Esgar Clerk, was a
Benefactor to the Monastery of Nuns here, and founded an Anniversary for
William de Power.

[ Valued at 22 l. 17 s. 8 d. per Annum.]

NUNKELLING, in Yorkshire.
AGnes de Archis gave the Church here and diverse Lands to God, St. Mary, and
St. Helen, and to the Nuns of Killing, in pure and ^ree Alms. The Nuns Estate
here was afterward confirmed by Richard de Sancto Quintino, and William de
Fortibus Earl of Albemarle, and by Aeliz de Sancto Quintino Daughter of the
foresaid Agnes, who also gave other Lands; and lastly by the Archbishops of
York.

[ Valued at 35 l. 15 s. 5 d. per Annum.]

SANDWELL, in Staffordshire.
WIlliam Son of Guido de Offney founded a Hermitage in Bromwich, near the Well
called Sandwell for a Habitation of Monks, and endowed the same with diverse
Lands lying about the same. Which was confirmed to the said Monks by Gervais
Paganellus Lord of the honor of Dudley, of which Barony the Lands were holden.

MONKETON, in Yorkshire.
WIlliam de Arches and Iuetta his Wife founded a Nunnery here, of which their
Daughter Matilda was a Nun, endowing the same with diverse Lands. All which was
confirmed to the said Nunnery by Henry Murdac Archbishop of York. (He died
1153.)

[ Valued at 75 l. 12 s. 4 d. ob. per Annum.]

HALISTANE, in Northumberland.
RIchard Bishop of Durham, in the year 1311. united the Churches of Crossanet,
and Harbottell, to the Church of Halistan and the Nunnery there, and gave the
Patronage of the same to Richard de Vmframvill Patron of the said Nunnery. King
Henry the III. in the thirty ninth year of his Reign, confirmed to the Prioress
and Nuns of Halystan, the Lands given to them by Alice de Alneto, and Roger
Bertram.

[ Valued at 11 l. 5 s. 7 d. per Annum.]

DUNSTER, in Somersetshire.
THE Monastery of Monks here, dedicated to the honor of St. George, John de
Mooun Lord of Dunsterre, which John did, in the fifteenth year of King Edward
the III. ratify and confirm to the Monks here all his Ancestors Donations.

[ Valued at 37 l. 4 s. 8 d. per Annum.]

MARGAN Abbey, in Wales.
THIS Abbey was founded by Robert Earl of Gloucester in the year 1147. King John
in the sixth year of his Reign confirmed to the Mary's of Margan, and the Monks
there, all the Lands and Estate given to them by the said Robert and several
others.

[ Vaued at 181 l. 7 s. 4 d. per Annum.]

BLACKBURGH, in Norfolk
ROger de Scales and Muriell his Wise gave to God, St. Mary, and St. Catherine,
and to the Brethren serving them in this place, called Shiplade, otherwise
Blackbergh, diverse Lands and Possessions. The same Roger by an other Deed gave
the same Lands and others to the Sisters here serving God. Vid. Vol. 2. p. 879.

[ Valued at 42 l. 6 s. 7 d. ob. per Annum.]


KEtelbernus de Langedona, gave to God, and St. Margeret the Virgin, and to the
Nuns at Eastwell (so was this Monastery then called by reason of its situation)
part of his Demeans of Langedon in which Lordship this Nunnery stood, with
diverse other Lands and Liberties, to hold as freely as he himself held them of
his chief Lord Hugh of Arden. Pope Innocent in the first year of his
Pontificate incorporated, annexed, and united to this Nunnery of Henwood diverse
Churches given to the same by King Rich. II. and King Henry the IV.

[ Valued at 21 l. 2 s. 0 d. ob. per Annum]


KING Steven confirmed to the Church and Nuns of St. Mary of Cambridge certain
Lands which William a Monk and Goldsmith gave them; and also other Lands given
them by Countess Constance Wife of his Eustace. It was found by Inquisition
taken at Cambridge, 3. Edw. I. that the Prioress and Nuns of St. Radegund at
Cambridge hold a certain piece of Ground called Greencroft, containing ten
Acres on which their Church and House is founded, which was given for that
purpose by Malcolme King of Scotland: and that Nigellus and Eustachius Bishops
of Ely had been Benefactors to this Nunnery.

LANGLEY, in Leicestershire.
THE Nunnery of St. Mary's of Langly was founded by William Pantulphe and
Burgia his Wife. from whom descended Robert de Tatesale Patron of this Priory
5. H. 3. The Nuns here upon the death of their Prioress, had power to choose
another without asking leave of their Patron, who did use during the time of
such Vacation to appoint a Boy (unum Garcionem) with a white Wand to keep the
Gate of the Nunnery, for which he was to have his Diet there.

[ Valued at 29 l. 7 s. 4 d. ob. per Annum.]

SANDFORD, in Barkshire.
KING Edward the I. in the 2 ^st year of his Reign granted to the Prior and
Convent o^ Sandelford, free Warren in their Demeans. Sa^herus de Sancto Andrea
granted to God, and the Church of St. Nicholas Sandford, and to the Nuns there,
a R^nt of Five Shillings per Annum in his Town of Littlemore. Vid. Vol. 3. p.
13.

SETON, in ^umberland.
HEnry Duke of Lancaster, Earl of Derb, Lincoln and Leicester, being informed
that the Revenues of th^^ Priory were so small that they could not maintain the
Pri^ress and Nuns^ gave and annexed to this House, the Hospital of St. Leonard^
in Lancaster, to hold in pure and perpetual Alms. Which Hospital was first
founded by King John for a Master, a Chaplain, and nine poor People, three of
which to be Lepers, and the rest sound.

[ Valued at 12 l. 12 s. ob. per Annum.]

ANKERWIK, in Buckinghamshire.
GIlbert and Richard Muntfichet, Knights, founded a Nunnery here, and endowed
it with Lands. King Henry the III. in the one and fortieth year of his Reign
confirmed their Estate given by many Benefactors, whose

[ Valued at 32 l. 0 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

WINTENEY, in Hampshire.
RIchard, Son of Richard de Hereard endowed the Nunnery here built to God, the
blessed Mary, St. Mary Magdalen, and All Saints, with diverse Lands, which King
Edward the I. confirmed,

[ Valued at 43 l. 3 s. per Annum.]

SNELLESHALL, in Buckinghamshire.
RAlph Martell, and others, gave to the Prior and Monks here serving God in the
Church of St. Leonard, at Snelleshall, diverse Lands, which were confirmed to
them by King Henry the III.

[ Valued at 18 l. 1 s. 11 d. per Annum.]


HAmo de Massy endowed the Church of St. Mary and St. James here with Lands,
and granted and confirmed to the Prior and Monks, and their Successors, power
and liberty to choose their own Prior upon any vacancy, from among themselves,
according as Pope Alexander had granted to them.

[ Valued at 90 l. 13 s. per Annum.]

MARRIGG, in Yorkshire.
TO the Nuns here serving God, Roger de Asco, Conan de Asch, and many others;
among the rest Conan Duke of Britanny and Richmond were great Benefactors;
giving diverse Lands and Liberties, all Edward the III^ in the twenty second
year of his Reign.

[ Valued at 48 l. 18 s. 3 d. per Annum.]

STYKESWOULD, in Lincolnshire.
Edward the I. that the master and Nuns of Stikeswold held several Lands of the
Gift o^ Lucy Mother of Ranulf Earl of Chester, and others. And that they had
been so held for the space of one hundred years.

[ Valued at 114 l. 5 s. 2 d. ob. per Annum^

STODELY, in Oxfordshire.
BErnard de Sancto Walerico, and Thomas de Sancto Walerico his Son endowed a
Nunnery here, and gave power to the Nuns upon the vacancy of the Prioress to
choose another with the assent of the Patron or Thomas de S. Walerico lived in
the time of King John 1207. Richard King of the Romans, and Edmund Earl of
Cornwall, and Godfrey de Craucumbe were Benefactors. Vid. Vol. 3. p. 13.

[ Valued at 82 l. 4 s. 4 d. q. per Annum.]

KIRKLEY, in Yorkshire.
REinerus Flandrensis, gave diverse Lands to the Nuns here, which were confirmed
to them by William Earl of Warren in pure and perpetual Henry the III. in the
twentieth year of his Reign.

[ Valued at 19 l. 8 s. per Annum.]

STANFORD, in Lincolnshire.
WIlliam Abbot of Peterborough, in the Reign of King Henry the II. founded at
Stanford a Priory of Nuns in honor of God and St. Michael, he built their
Church, and placed there forty Nuns. Saving to himself and Successors, Abbots
of Peterburgh, the placing of the Prioress, etc. reserving also a Rent of half
a Mark yearly to be paid to the Church of Peterburgh.

William de Humet gave a Rent often Marks per Annum to the Cistercian Monks in
Stanford, which was confirmed to them by King John in the sixteenth year of his
Reign. Lucy Wife of the said William gave certain Michaels at Stanford.

The Prioress and Nuns here did by their Act and Deed acknowledge and promise
fidelity and obedience to the Abbot and Convent of Peterborough; that the Prior
or Curator of their Monastery might be placed and displaced by the said Abbot
and Convent; that upon the death of the Prioress, no Election of another should
be made without the Abbots License; and that the admitting of the Nuns into the
said House should be wholly in the power of the said Abbot; also that the said
Nunnery should pay a yearly Pention of a Mark of Silver to the said Abbey of
Peterburgh for the buying of Books. Vid. Vol. 2. p. 880.

[ Valued at 65 l. 19 s. 9 d. per Annum.]

WYRTHORP, in Northamptonshire.
IN the 28th. of Edw. 3. Thomas de Holland and Joan his Wife (the Kings
Kinswoman) were Patrons of a Nunnery at Wyrthorp, at which time this House was
so impoverished and decayed, by reason of the Pestilence, and other reasons,
that there was here but one Nun remaining, whereupon, by the King's License the
said House and Church of Wyrthorp, with all its Possessions, were by the Bishop
for ever united and annexed to the Nunnery of St. Michaels by Stanford, and the
Nun here remaining, was removed thither.

IVINGHO, in Buckinghamshire.
KING Edward the I. in the eighth year of his Reign, gave diverse Lands, to the
Prioress and Nuns of St. Margaret of Ivingho, and their Successors, to hold of
the King in free, pure, and perpetual Alms.

WABURN, in Norfolk.
THE Priory of Waburn was founded by Sir Ralph Meyngaryn Knight, from whom
descended by the Mothers side John de Veer Earl of Oxford.

[ Valued at 24 l. 19 s. 6 d. ob. per Annum.]

CAMPESS, or Campsey, in Suffolk.
TEobandus de Valoines gave his Land in Campess to his two Sisters Joan and
Agnes, for the Foundation of a Nunnery there to the honor of God and the
glorious Virgin Mary. Which was confirmed by John. Matilda de Lancaster,
Countess of Vlster, did in the Reign of King Edw. III. by License of that King,
found a Chantry of five Priests to officiate in this Church, which Chantry, was
removed afterward to a Town called Brusseyard in the Manor of Rokhall; the
Revenues and Site whereof was afterward, in the said King's Reign given to a
Prioress and Nuns of St. Clares Order, which Nunnery was there erected (at
Brusseyard) in

[ Valued at 182 l. 9 s. 5 d. per Annum.]

DENNEY Abbey, in Cambridgeshire.
IN the last year of Nigellus Bishop of Ely, who died 1169. one Robert,
Chamberlain to the Earl of Britony and Richmond, founded the Monastery here as
a Cell to Ely, becoming a Monk himself. In the year 1341. Maria de Sancto
Paulo, Countess of Pembroke, gave this Manor of Denney to Sister Katherine de
Bolwyk Abbess, and to the Nuns of St. Clare, or Minoresses, there serving God,
in free, pure, and perpetual Alms. She Waterbeche Denney, and translated the
Nuns of Waterbeche hither. All which she did by License of King Edward the III.
Vid. Vol. 2. p. 883.

[ Valued at 172 l. 8 s. 3 d. ob. per Annum.]


RObert de Pinkeny, and Simon de Pinkeny, gave certain Lands to the Nuns here,
and William de Sancto Iohanne, was also a Benefactor.

[ Valued at 12 l. 6 s. 7 d. q. per Annum.]

LITTLE MAREIS, near Yedingham, in Yorkshire.
ROger de Clear, endowed the Nunnery here with diverse Lands. The Church of
Yeddingham was dedicated in honor of the most blessed Virgin in the year 1241.
on the seventeenth of the Kalends of September, at which time diverse
indulgences were granted. Richard de Breuse became Alice his Wife who was
descended from the Founders. King Henry the III. in the 30th. year of his Reign
confirmed to the Nuns of Yeddingham all the Lands given by their several
Benefactors.

James fourteen Loaves, to three Priests, to four Chaplains, and other Officers
accordingly, etc. among the rest of the Deliveries is set down. -- Canibus in
singulis Maneriis triginta novem panes de pane duriori -- To the Dogs (Waiters
or Attendants) in each Manor thirty nine Loaves of the coursest sort of Bread.

[ Valued at 21 l. 16 s. 6 d. ob. per Annum.]

NUNBURNHAM, in Yorkshire.
THE Ancestors of Roger de Merlay Lord of the Barony of Morpath were founders
of the Nunnery of Brunham. And it was found by inquision 38. Hen. 3. that these
Nuns held Lands here of the Fee of Thomas de Graystoc.

[ Valued at 8 l. 1 s. 11 d. per Annum.]

LYTHOM, in Lancashire, a Cell to Durham.
RIchardus filius Rogeri, or Richard Fitz-Rogers, gave his Land at Lythum with
the Church there, to the Prior and Monks of Durham for the erecting and
establishing at Lytham a Cell of their Order, which he endowed with diverse
Lands. This was confirmed by King John in the second year of his Reign.

CHIRBURY, in Shropshire.
THE Monks here having formerly inhabited at Snede, and removed from thence;
King Edward the I. in the ninth year of his Reign, understanding this place not
to be convenient for them removed them back again to Snede.

ARDEN, in Yorkshire.
PEter de Hotona founded and endowed an Abbey of Nuns at Arden, and dedicated it
to St. Andrew; which was confirmed by Roger de Mowbray Lord of the Fee: and by
Elizabeth Heir of the said Peter in the tenth year of Edward the I. In the 6th.
of Henry the IV. Ieoffrey Pigot, as Heir of Peter the first Founder, and
Elizabeth abovesaid, was admitted by the Nuns here as Founder or Patron.

[ Valued at 12 l. per Annum^]

DAVINTON, in Kent.
KING Henry the II I. in the thirty ninth year of his Reign, confirmed to the
Prioress of the Church of St. Mary Magdalene of Davyntone, and to the Nuns
there serving God, diverse Lands and Rents, given by several Benefactors.


KING Henry the III. in the 21st. year of his Reign gave to the Prioress and
Nuns of Fosse without Torkesey, sixscore Acres of Land and seven Tosts in
Torkesey to hold for ever at the yearly Rent of forty six Shillings.

[ Valued at 7 l. 3 s. 6 d. per Annum.]

WALLING WELLS, in Nottinghamshire.
RAlph de Cheurolcurt, gave to God and St. Mary a place in his Park of
Carletuna, for the building a place of Religion; and to it gave other Lands and
Liberties, in pure and perpetual Alms.

Furneux; the Male Line of which Family is now in Being in Darbyshire under the
name of Rooper.

[ Valued at 58 l. 9 s. 10 d. per Annum.]

St. CATHERINES Nunnery, without Exeter, in Devonshire.
KING John in the second year of his Reign, confirmed to the Church of St.
Catherine without Exeter, and the Nuns there, the Lands given to them by
William de Trascy, and Henry de Pomerya, with the grant of many Liberties.

FLAMSTED Priory, in Hartfordshire.
AGatha, Widow of William de Gatesden, endowed the Church of St. Giles Flamsted
with certain Lands, which Gift was confirmed by King Henry the III. in the
twelfth year of his Reign.

[ Valued at 30 l. 19 s. 8 d. ob. per Annum.]

CRESSEWELL, in Herefordshire.
WAlter de Lascy gave to the Church of St. Mary at Cressewell, and to the Monks
there of the Order called Grandimontenses, diverse Lands and Revenues; confirmed
by King Henry the III. who also granted Edward the III. in the first year of
his Reign. Vid. Vol. 3. p. 17.

DARBY Priory, in Darbyshire.
KING Henry the III. granted to the Prioress and Nuns de Pratis at Derby, an
Augmentation of one hundred Shillings per Annum, out of the Fee-farm of the
Town of Nottingham. It was found upon an Extent in the 15. E. 1. that the Site
of the Abbey at Derby with a Garden s. And that the said Abbey held there, in
Demean, four Carucates of Land, each Carucate containing sixty Acres of Land, (
i. e. Arable Land,) etc.

LAMBLEY Nunnery, in Northumberland.
KING John in the second year of his Reign, confirmed to God, and St. Mary, and
St. Patrick, and to the Nuns at Lambeleya, the Site of the Abbey of Lambeleya
Super Tinam, and the Lands which Adam de Tindale and Helewisa his Wife gave to
the said House.

STEINFEILD Priory, in Lincolnshire.
THIS was a Priory of Benedictine Nuns, founded by Henry Son of Henry de Percy.
The Patronage of this House came to Iocelin de Lovein by Agnes his Wife, one of
the Daughters and Coheirs of William de Percy. King Edward the I. in the one
and twentieth year of his Reign, granted the Prioress and Nuns here, free
Warren in their Demean Lands,

[ Valued at 98 l. 8 s. per Annum.]

MODBURY, in Devonshire.
THE Manor of Modbury, and right of Patronage of the Priory there, being in
Ida Widow of Sr. James Exton, Knight, by Virtue of a Fine in the 9. Edw. 2. the
said Ida through the mediation of Friends released all her title to Richard de
Campo-Arnulphi.

CHESTER Nunnery.
THE Monastery of St. Mary here, was founded for Nuns, and endowed by Ranulph
Earl of Chester with Lands and Liberties.

[ Valued at 66 l. 18 s. 4 d. per Annum.]

ROSSEDALE, in Yorkshire.
RObert de Stutevill founded and endowed the Nunnery at Rossedale to God and
St. Laurence, which was confirmed by King John. Sibilla de Valoniis, Adam de
Neuton, etc. gave other Lands to the Prioress and Edward the III. in the second

[ Valued at 37 l. 12 s. 5 d. per Annum.]


WAlter Marescallus, and William Marescallus both Earls of Pembrok, gave diverse
Lands and Endowments to the Priory of St. Nicholas at Pembroke.

St. CLEMENTS, adjoining to York.
THurstan Archbishop of York gave to God and St. Clement, and the Nuns there,
diverse Lands to hold in pure and perpetual Alms; whose Letters of Endowment
were confirmed by the Dean and Chapter York. Other Benefactors gave other
Lands, all which was confirmed by King Edward the III. in the first year of his
Reign. Anno. Dom. 1192. Gaufridus Archbishop of York gave the Priory of St.
Clements to the Abbey of Godestave, but the Nuns here refused to submit to such
Donation, and appealed to the Pope.

[ Valued at 55 l. 11 s. 11 d. per Annum.]


KING Henry the III. gave to the Prioress and Nuns here all the Lands and
Tenements belonging to the Canons of Cathale, whom he caused to be removed.

[ Valued at 14 l. 10 s. per Annum.]

FINCHALE, in the Bishopric of Durham.
FInchale is a solitary place not far from the City of Durham, where a certain
Hermit named Godricus de Finchale, who in his youth had visited the holy
Sepulcher, spent his old Age in Devotion, and here died with the reputation of
great Sanctity. After the death of this Godficus, Ranulphus Bishop of Durham
granted this Hermitage, and the Lands adjoining, Algarus the Prior, and the
Monks of Durham. Hugh Bishop of Durham founded and endowed the Priory of
Finchale for such Monks of Durham as the Prior of Durham should from time to
time send thither in the service of God and St. John.

[ Valued at 122 l. 15 s. 3 d. per Annum.]

The Priory of St. James at Bristol, a Cell of Tewkesbury.
WIlliam Earl of Gloucester gave to this House diverse Lands and Tithes, and the
Profits of the Fair at Bristol, in Whitsun-week, which with other Lands given
by other Benefactors was confirmed by King Henry the II. The same King gave the
Monks here certain Liberties in his Forest. Robert Earl of Gloucester was
buried in this Church of St. James, at Bristol.

BUNGEY, in Suffolk.
ROger de Glanvill and Gundreda the Countess, his Wife, founded a Nunnery in
the Church of the holy Cross at Bungey. The Endowments Roger and his Wife as by
a great Henry the II. in the ninteenth year of his Reign.

[ Valued at 62 l. 0 s. 1 d. ob. per Annum.]

SYLLEY Isle, near Cornwall.
THIS Isle was given of old by the Kings of England to the Abbot and Monks of
Tauestock, who used to send two of their Monks hither to perform the Divine
Offices, till the Wars with France in the Reign of King Edward the III. And
then that King gave License to the Abbot of Tauestock, in the ninteenth year of
his Reign, to place here two secular Chaplains instead of Monks.

ROWNEY Priory, in Hertfordshire.
IN the 36. H. 6. Agnes Selby Prioress of this House and the Covent of Nuns
here, in respect of the poverty of the place, did by their Deed sealed with
their Common-Seal, resign up their Church, House, and Lands, into the hands of
their Patron John Fray who designed to convert the same in a better manner.
Which John Fray was chief Baron of the Exchequer, and being thus possessed of
this Priory, he would not convert it H. 6. to found and endow here a Chantry
for one Priest.

The first Founder of the Priory was Conan Duke of Britony and Richmond, who,
with others, endowed it with Possessions of the value of ten Marks per Annum.

[ Valued at 13 l. 10 s. 9 d. per Annum.]


THIS House was founded and endowed by Robert Earl of Leicester Son of Robert
de Mellento, in the Reign of King Henry the II. for Nuns of the same Order with
those at Font-Ebraud.

Robert, and by King Henry

The Prioress and Covent of Font-Ebrald granted to this House the immunity to
receive and retain to their own proper use all such gifts as should be made
unto them, without any exaction of the said Abbess and Covent of Font-Ebrald.
Which immunity and several others were confirmed to them by Pope Alexander the
III.

[ Valued at 253 l. 14 s. 5 d. ob. per Annum.]

LUFFELD, in Northamptonshire, a Cell to Westminster.
THE Priory of Luffeild was founded by Robert Earl of Leicester, for the Souls
of King William the I. and Queen Matilda, etc.

Henry the I. his Daughter Maud the Empress, and King Edward the I. were
Benefactors, and Pope Alexander the III. granted to Ralph Prior of St. Mary's
at Luffeild, his Brethren, and their Successors, diverse Privileges by his Bull
dated 1174.

Radulfus de Cahienes, Hugo de Sancto Martino, and others gave them diverse

Henry the III. in the fifty sixth year of his Reign, reciting the Priory of
Luffeild to have been founded by his Predecessors Kings of England, granted to
the Prior and Monks there free Chiminage in his Forest of Whitlewood, for five
years next ensuing.

WILBERFOSS, in Yorkshire.
THIS was a House of Nuns dedicated to St. Mary, founded by Helias de Cotton,
and endowed by' Alan his Son with diverse Lands.

King Henry the II. in the fourth year of his Reign, and King Henry the III. in
the twelfth year of his Reign, confirmed their Lands and Estate.

Vid. Vol. 3. p. 12.

[ Valued at 21 l. 16 s. 10 d. per Annum.]


THE Church here was built by their Prioress Editha, and in the year 1138.
dedicated in honor of the blessed Virgin Mary and St. John Baptist, by
Alexander then Bishop of Lincoln, in presence of King Steven, and Maud the
Queen, with abundance of Bishops, Earls, and Barons, and others of prime
quality, who all gave to the said Church at that time some Rents and
Endowments: Whereupon Albericus Bishop of Hostia the Pope's Legate in England
released to every of the said Benefactors one year of enjoined Penance, and
granted moreover a Remission Pris^a the Virgin, or on the Nativity of St. John
Baptist.

Their Lands and Revenues were confirmed by King Steven, and by King Richard
the I. in the first year of his Reign.

In the year 1191. Hugh Bishop of Lincoln visiting in this part of his Rosamond
Concubine to King Henry the II. he caused her body to be removed out of the
Church, and to be buried in the Churchyard to avoid the scandal of Religion,
and to deter other Women from Whoredom.

About the time of the Suppression of this House, Rosamonds Tomb was opened and
her Bones found enclosed in Leather, and that in Lead. When it was opened a
very sweet smell came out from it. The following Inscription was formerly read
on a Cross near Godstow, Qui meat hac oret, signum salutis adoret,
Vtque sibi detur veniam Rosamunda precetur.


Vid. 2. Vol. p. 884.

[ Valued at 274 l. 5 s. 10 d. ob. per Annum.]

LILLECHIRCHE, in the County of...;
KING John gave to the Abbey of St. Mary and St. Sulpice at Lillechurch, and the
Prioress and Nuns there the Manor of Lillechurch in pure and perpetual Alms,
and granted them a Fair to be there held yearly on the Feast of St. Michael,
and two days after; all which was confirmed by King Henry the III. in the
eleventh year of his Reign, who also in the fiftieth year of his Reign released
and pardoned their Suit-service Martins le Grand, in London.

TYKEHEAD Priory, in Yorkshire.
KING John in the fifth year of his Reign confirmed to God and the Church of
St. Mary of Tykeheved, and to the Nuns there serving God, the Lands and
Possessions then given them by several Benefactors.

In the year 1264. the Prior and Canons of Ellerton, and the Nuns of Tykehead,
exchanged certain Lands and Houses which had been the occasions

Sir Robert de Ask Knight. the Founder, gave to this House the Rent of 7 s. 4 d.
per Annum, for the maintaining of a yearly Obit for himself and Elizabeth his
Wife, conditionally that if the Obit were not diligently observed, then the
said Sum or Rent to be restored to his Heirs. Dated 1522.

[ Valued at 20 l, 18 s. 10 d. per Annum.]

HUNTINGTON Priery of Nuns.
IN the time of Richard de Gravesend Bishop of Lincoln, Elena Walensis was
elected Prioress of the Priory of St. James extra Hunted^n, the Lady Dervorgull
de Galewidia, being then Patroness of the said Priory, and Richard de F^xton
her Sen^schal, or Steward.

CLIVE, in Somersetshire.
WIlliam de Romare, who married Lucy Countess of Lincoln. founded the Abbey of
the blessed Virgin and St. Laurence, at Rewsby in Lincolnshire, 8. Steph.

William his youngest Son by the said Lucy, who married Phillip Daughter Hubert
de Burgh Earl of Kent, founded the Abbey of our blessed Lady of the Cliff, in
Somersetshire, in the 9 Rich. 1. of which one Ralph was the first Abbot.

King Henry the III. confirmed their Lands and Estate, and moreover, granted to
the Abbot and Convent of Clive, the Manor and Hundred of Bramton, in
Devonshire, to be held of the King and his Heirs at the yearly Farm of 22 l.
per Annum.

[ Valued at 155 l. 9 s. 5 d. q. per Annum.]

HALIWEL Priory, in Middlesex.
KING Richard the I. in the sixth year of his Reign confirmed to the Nuns of
Haliwell the several Lands given to them by Galfredus Camerarius and others.

The same King in the first year of his Reign confirmed to the Church of St.
John Baptist of Haliwell, and to the Nuns there serving God, the Ground on
which the said Church stands cum pertin. viz. the Marish or Meadow in which the
Fountain called Haliwell rises, with other Lands given by Richard late Bishop
of London, Walter Precentor of St. Paul's, etc.

Camerwell and Pecham given to them by several Benefactors.

KERSEY Priory, in Suffolk.
NEsta de Cokefeld, Widow of Thomas de Burgo, gave to God, and to the Church of
St. Mary, and St. Anthony of Kersey, and to the Canons there, diverse Lands, of
which she and her second Husband past a fine in the 24. Hen. 3.

KINGTON Priory, in Wilishire.
RObert Burnell Bishop of Bath and Wells founded this House to God and St.
Mary, for Nuns, whose Deed of Foundation was exemplified by Inspectimus 19. F.
I.

Vid. Vol. 2. p. 887.

[ Valued at 25 l. 9 s. 1 d. ob. per Annum.]

BURNHAM, in Buckinghamshire.
ANno. Dom. 1266. Richard King of the Romans founded a Monastery here for Nuns,
which he dedicated to God and St. Mary, and endowed it with his Manor and
Advowson of Burnham and other Lands. Witnesses to whose Deed or Charter of
Foundation, were his Brother Henry the III. and Prince Edward his eldest Son,
with others.

[ Valued at 51 l. 2 s. 4 d. q. per Annum.]

STOKE-CLARE Priory, in Suffolk
THIS House was founded in the year 1248. by Richard de Clare Earl of
Glouce^ter, from whom descended the Mortimers Earls of March, ^ork, as is set
forth in a long Pedigree in Latin English Verse, in Dialogue between a Friar
and a Secular at the Tomb of Joan of Acres Daughter of Edward the (...) and
Wise of Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester. This House being an al^en Priory
and Cell to the Abbey of Beekeherlewyn, in Normandy, King Richard the II. in the
ninteenth Indigena, and gave it as a Cell to St. Peter's at Westminster.

Pope John, in the fifth year of his Pontisicate, translated this House from a
Priory of Monks into a College of a Dean and Secular Canons. This Edwund Earl
of March, Heir of the first Founders, who by his Deed dated 7. Hen. 5. granted
and confirmed to the Dean and Canons here all the Lands and Privileges
belonging to the Priory. Vid. infra, 1004. Vol. 3. part 2. p. 164.

[ Valued at 324 l. 4 s. 1 d. ob. per Annum.]

GLOUCESTER-HALL, in the Suburbs of Oxford.
THIS was founded and endowed An. 1283. (11. E. 1.) for the maintenance of
thirteen Benedictine Monks of the Abbey of Gloucester, by John Giffard Lord of
Brimesfeild. 19. E. 1. That King granted his License of Mortmain.

It appears by the Founders Deed of Foundation, that the House was built upon
certain Ground purchased of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, in a Lane
commonly then called Stockwell street, that the Church here was dedicated to
St. John the Apostle, and St. Benedict the Abbot and Confessor, and that the
House was erected for Benedictine Monks Causa studii.

MISSENDEN, in Buckinghamshire.
IT was found by Inquision taken at Aylesbury, 51. E. 3. that the Abbey of
Mussenden was ^ounded in the year 1293. by William de Mussenden, who held the
Manor of Mussenden of the Earl of Gloucester by Knights service. In the
Chapter House and Church belonging to this Abbey did Missendens descended from
the Founder, whose names may be seen in the Book at large. Vid. Vol. 3. p. 18.

[ Valued at 261 l. 14 s. 6 d. q. per Annum.]

The MINORESSES, at London.
KING Edward the I. in the one and twentieth year of his Reign granted his
License of Mortmain to Edmund his Brother and his Wife, Blanch Queen of
Navarre, to build a House in ^^e Parish of St. Botulphs without Algate, for
Nuns of the Order of Minoresses, there to remain in the service of God, the
blessed Mary, and St. Francis.

[ Vaued at 318 l. 8 s. 5 d. per Annum.]


KING Edward the I. in the twenty second year of his Reign granted to Dionisia
de Monte-Caniso, the Manor of Waterbecke, to build a Rengious House there for
Minoresses of the Order of St. Clare to be brought over from beyond the Seas.
All which was confirmed by King Edward the III. in the eleventh year of his
Reign.

HOLAND, in Lancashire.
HERE being formerly a Collegiate Church or Chapel of St. Thomas the Martyr,
served by Secular Chaplains, Walter Bishop of Coventry Litchfeild, in the year
1319. by consent of Robert de Holland the Patron, altered the Foundation into a
Priory consisting of a Prior and twelve Benedictine Monks. Upon every Vacation
or Death of the Prior, the Monks were to choose three of their House, one of
which being approved by the Patron, and presented to the Bishop, was to be by
him constituted Prior. Vid. Vol. 2. p. 889.

[ Valued at 53 l. 3 s. 4 d. per Annum.]


MOrcant a King in Wales having treacherously killed his Uncle Frioc, after he
had in a most solemn manner sworn an inviolable peace with him before the holy
Alter, was by Oudoceus Bishop of Landaff, in a Synod of his Clergy, which he
had assembled for that purpose, enjoined for the said perjury and homicide, to
perform Fastings, Prayers, and Alms Deeds; and being on his sincere Repentance,
received again in the Christian Communion, he granted and quit claimed to the
Abbeys of Catoc, Ildut, and Docun, and to the Cathedral Church of Landaff,
diverse Liberties and Immunities.

Alien Priories, of Benedictines.
Viz. Such Monasteries here in England as did belong to certain

DEREHURST, in Gloucestershire, a Cell to St. Denis in France.
HERE was an old Abbey destroyed by the Danes. But after the Norman Conquest, in
the year 1069. King William the Conqueror endowed here a new Priory and made it
a Cell to St. Denis in France: or rather confirmed what King Edward the
Confessor had done before. Henry the VI. in the twenty first year of his Reign
made this Priory Indigena.

OTERY, in Devonshire, a Cell to St. Mary's at Roan.
THIS Priory was given to the Church of St. Mary at Roan by King Edward the
Confessor in the year 1060. In the 8. Edw. 3. the Dean and Chapter of St.
Mary's at Roan, by the King's License, granted their Manor of Otery, and
Advowson of the Church there, to John de Bishop of Exeter, who in the eleventh
year of that King founded here a College of Secular Canons.

LEVISHAM, in Kent, a Cell to St. Peter's at Gaunt, in Flanders.
KING Henry the I. in the thirteenth year of his Reign confirmed to the Abbot
and Monks of St. Peter's of Gant, the Manor of Levesham and Greenwich, etc.
with diverse Liberties, formerly granted by King Edward and King William his
Father.

Vid. Vol. 2. p. 890.


RObert Earl of Morton gave St. Michaels Mount, in Cornwall, to God and the
Monks of the Church of St. Michael de Periculo Maris, in Normandy, Anno Dom.
1085.

Vid. 2. Vol. p. 902.


IT was ^ound by Inquisition 4. E. 3. that the Manors of Mersey Fyngrinho and
Peet, and half the hundred of Wenestr, in the County of Essex, were given to
the Abbey of St. Owens, in Normandy, by St. Edward the Confessor, and confirmed
by King William, and King Henry the II.

ANDEVER, in Hampshire, a Cell to St. Florence at Saumurs.
KING O William the Conqueror (or as the Words of the Deed are, Willielmus Rex
qui armis Anglicam terram sibi subjugavit) gave to St. Florence, the Church of
Andever, with diverse Lands and Revenues to the Edward the II. in the eighth
year of his Reign.

BLITHE Priory, in Nottinghamshire, a Cell to St. Catherines at Rohan.
ANno Dom. 1088. Roger de Builly and Muriel his Wife founded and Henry the II.
and by Idonea de Veteri ponte Daughter and Heir of John de Bullei, by her Deed
dated 1232. King John in the second year of his Reign gave the Chapelry of
Blyth, and diverse other Churches and Lands to St. Mary's at Rohan.


KING William the Conqueror Anno 1082. gave this Town situated Lincolnshire,
called Lyndsey to God and St. Karileph. 31. Edw. 1. A Writ of Quod Damnum was
executed at Lincoln, in order to an alienation^ of this Cell, from the Abbot
and Covent of St. Karileph in the Diocese of Man's, to the Abbot and Covent of
Kirkeslede here in England.

ABERGAVENNY, in Monmouthshire a Cell of St. Vincents in Maine.
Hamelinus who came into England William Rufus. William de Brewosa, and others
of the founders Lineage were Benefactors.

Vid. 2. Vol. p. 904.

WOTTON-WAVEN, in Warwickshire.
RObert de Toenio gave this Estate to the Monks of St. Peter at Conchis, in
Normandy; on whom King Henry the I. conferred great

FOLKESTON, in Kent, a Cell to the Abbey of Lolley in Normandy.
NIgellus de Munevilla, An. 1095. gave this Church of Folkston to Ranulph Mary
de Lonleyo, and to the Monks there, in pure and perpetual A^s. Which, with
diverse other Lands and Revenues, was confirmed to them by William de Abrincis
Lord of Folkeston, who descended from the said Nigellus.

KIRKBY, in Warwickshire, a Cell of St. Nicholas in Anjou.
ANno 1077. Gosfredus de Wirchia gave to God and the Monastery of St. Nicholas
in Anjou, Lands in Kirkby with other Lands and Possessions elsewhere; from whom
descended Roger de Mulbraio, who gave to the Church of St. Nicholas of Kirkeby
the Church of Newbold. Afterward Thomas Earl of Nottingham having founded a
House of Carthusians at Epworth in the Isle of Axholme, the Abbot of St.
Nicholas at Anjou was prevailed with to assign his Estate in Monks-Kirkby,
Newbold, etc. to the said House of Carthusians, which was confirmed by King
Henry the V. in the third year of his Reign.

The Priory of the Holy Trinity at York, a Cell to Marmonstier in Tourain.
Majus-Monasterium in France.
RAdulphus Paganellus gave the Church of the holy Trinity at York to the Monks
of St. Martin in the Majus-Monastery, with diverse other York 34. Edw. 1. That
the Majus-monasterium, he did use to enter upon the Possession of his Office,
without fealty or other duty to the Patron.

HEDLAY, in Yorkshire, a Cell to the Holy Trinity at York.
YPolitus de Bram gave to God and St. Mary of Hedlay and the Monks there
certain Lands in Midelton. All which was confirmed to the Prior and Convent of
the Trinity at York, and to their Cell at Hedlay, by Peter de Midleton, in the
year 1290.


ROger Earl of Poictiers gave the Church of St. Mary at Lancaster with diverse
Lands and Revenues to the Monastery of St. Martin. All John Earl of Morton; and
by King Richard the II.

An. 1246. John Romanus Archdeacon of Richmond, appropriated the Church of
Lancaster and Chapels thereunto belonging to this Priory, reserving twenty
Marks per Annum for a Vicar presentative.


THIS Priory was founded by King John for four Monks and endowed with Lands of
100 l. value per Annum. These Monks were to distribute to the Poor at their
Gates, bread to the value of 16 s. every week.


BEnedict de Redueriis gave this Manor to the Monastery of St. Mary de Monte
Burgo; confirmed by King Henry the I.


THIS Priory consisted only of a Prior and two Monks, who were removed by
Command of King Edward the III. to a more Inland Habitation, first to the Abbey
of Hyde, and after that in the 13. E. 3. to Salisbury.

FRAMPTON, in Dorsetshire, a Cell to Caen, in Normandy.
THIS was given to St. Stephens at Caen, and the Monks there, by King William
the Conqueror, and with diverse other Lands and Liberties confirmed to them by
King Richard the II.


THE Church of Swanesey with all manner of Tithes there, and in the Vills
thereunto belonging, were given by Alan Earl of Britain, to Sergius and St.
Bachus at Angiers; who presented the Prior to this Priory, as often as the
Office avoided.

BLAKENHAM, in Suffolk, a Cell to St. Mary at Bec.
THIS was given to the Abbey abovesaid by Walter Giffard, and confirmed by King
William Rufus.

COGES, in Oxfordshire, a Cell of Fischamp.
MAnnasses Arsic gave this Estate with other Tithes and Revenues to the Church
of Fiscampe, Anno 1103.

WESTWOOD, in Worcestershire, a Cell to Font-Ebraud.
OSbert Fitz^ Hugh, and Eustachia de Say his Mother erected here a Convent of
Nuns of Font-Ebraud.

WELLS, in Norfolk, a Cell of the Abbey at Caen, in Normandy.
KING Edward the III. in the forty seventh year of his Reign (being then in War
with France) committed the Custody of the Priory of Paunfeild and Wells to Hugh
Fastolf, to hold at the yearly Rent of 40 l. per Annum to the King, and 10 l.
per Annum to each Monk there, for his support.

This Priory being first given by William de Estois to the Abbey of St. Steven
at Caen, and after seized into the King's hands by Edward the III. it continued
in the Crown till 9. Edw. 4. at which time that King desirous Stephen, he
conferred the whole Estate which did formerly belong to this Priory on the Dean
and Canons of his free Chapel of St. Steven at Westminster.

PATRICKSBURN, in Kent, a Cell to Beau-Lieu, in Normandy.
IT was found by Inquisition taken at Canterbury the 6 Edw. 3. that this Manor
was given to the Priory of Beau-Lieu, in Normandy, by Johannes de Pratellis,
and confirmed by King John.

STOKE-CURCY, in Devonshire, a Cell to Lonley, in France.
HVgh de Novilla gave to God and the Monks at Stok-curcy, the Church of St.
Andrew of Stoke-curcy, with other Revenues. William de Curcy, and John de
Novilla were also Benefactors.

SHIRBURN, in Hampshire, a Cell of St. Vigor Cerasius.
HEnry de Portu, or Port gave the West part of Shirburn with the Church Vigor
Cerasius, all Shirburn by his Descendents. King Edward the III. gave the
Custody of the Hospital of St. Julian, or Domus Dei, at Southamptonto Queens
College in Oxford; to which Hospital King Edward the IV. in the first year of
his Reign gave the alien Priory of Shireburn, in Hampshire.

BURWELL, in Lincolnshire, a Cell of St. Mary Silvae Majoris.
JOhn de Hay gave to God and the Monastery of St. Mary Silvae Majoris; Burwell,
diverse Possessions; from whom descended Gilbert de Vmframvill Earl of Angos,
who lived at Burwell.

LANKYWAN, in Wales, a Cell to the Abbey of Lyra.
EDmund, Son of King Henry the III. discharged this House from all Exactions
and Troubles from his Heirs or their Bailiffs, in the Vacation of a Prior.

SELE, in Sussex, a Cell of St. Florence at Saumurs.
WIlliam de Braiosa, by his Deed dated 1075. gave the Church of St. Peter at
Sele, with other Churches and Revenues both in England and Normandy to the
Abbot and Monks of St. Florence. This Priory of Sele was made Indigena, or
Denison 19. R. 2.

OKEBURN, in Wiltshire, a Cell to Bec, in Normandy.
MAtilda de Wallengfort gave to the Church of St. Mary of Bec, both Okeburns,
viz. the greater and the less. Richard Earl of Cornwall by his Deed dated 1253.
discharged the Abbot and Monks of Bec from all Exactions and Suit of Court in
his honor of Walingford, except only that his Bailiff of Walingford should
once a year keep a view of Frankpledge at Okeburn, and then be entertained for
that day, with four Horses at most.


BY Inquisition taken at Stranford, it was found that the Prior of the Order of
Bec held in Willesford and Ancaster, Lands of the value 16 l. per Annum of the
Gift of Hugh de Evermewe.

WEDEN-PINKNEY, in Northamponshire, a Cell to St. Lucian near Beauvoys in
France.
GIles, Ralph, Gilbert, Henry, and Robert de Pinkeni, successively gave Lands
and Revenues to the Abbey of St. Lucian and the Monks at Mary's of Weden. Anno
Dom. 1392, The Abbot and Convent of St. Lucian conveyed their Priory of Weden,
and all the Estate thereunto belonging to the Abbot and Convent of Bitlesden
and their Successors, in consideration of a Sum of Gold received, and the
yearly pension of ten Marks to be paid to the Abbot and Convent of St. Lucian
and their Successors in the Church of St. Mary at Calais, on the Feast of St.
John Baptist.

TYWARDREIT, in Cornwall, a Cell to Angiers in
RObert de Cardinan gave diverse Lands and Revenues in Cornwall, to the Church
of St. Sergius and St. Bachus at Angiers, and to the Church of St. Andrew of
Tywardrait, and to the Monks there; all which Henry the III.

BIRSTALL, in Yorkshire, a Cell of St. Martins at Albamarle.
THIS was given among other Lands and Revenues to the Church and Monks of St.
Martin without the Castle of Albamarle in Normandy, by Steven Earl of Albamarle
1115. Walter Archbishop of York Albamarle here at Birstal, and granted to them
diverse Immunities. Charles the VI. King of France by his Deed dated 1395.
Martin had past over to his beloved Cousin the Duke of Lancaster their Priory
of Birstal in England for the Sum of one thousand Livers, granted them his
License to purchase Lands of the like value in France. The said Abbot and
Convent of St. Martin by their Deed dated 18. Rich. 2. granted all their Lands,
Tithes and Pensions here in England to the Abbot and Convent of Kirkstal (in
Yorkshire.)

GOLDCLIVE, in Monmouthshire, a Cell to Bec in Normandy.
RObert de Candos gave this Church of St. Mary Magdalen of Goldclive etc. to
the Monks of St. Mary at Bec. All John in the second year of his Reign. This
Priory was afterward united to the Abbey of Teukesbury, which union, was
ratified by Pope Eugenius, Anno Dom. 1402.

Vid. 2. Vol p. 904.


THIS was given to that Monastery, by Ranulph Earl of Chester.

BOXGRAVE, in Sussex, a Cell of I'Essay in Normandy.
THIS Priory was founded in the Reign of King Henry the I. William Earl of
Arundell endowed it with great Possessions, and gave and Trinity at l'Essay The
first ^ounder Mary and St. Blase) at Boxgrave, was Robert de Haya, who placed
here three Monks of the Order of S^^ Benedict; Roger de Sancto Iohanne who
married Cecily, his Daughter, doubled the number of Monks, whose Sons William
and Robert de Sancto Iohanne, still increased them to fifteen, conferring
diverse Revenues for their maintenance, out of which he reserved only an annual
Pension of three M^^ks to the l'Essay. Thomas Abbot of the Holy Trinity at
l'Esay, granted to the Prior of Boxgrave and his Successors, that they might
constantly have fifteen Monks in their Priory, and that upon the decease of
any, they might supply their number with whom they pleased to elect. King
Edward the III. in the thirteenth year of his Reign discharged this Priory of
all seizures as an alien Priory in time of War, and made it Denison.

LONG-BENINGTON, in Lincolnshire, a Cell to Savigny in Normandy.
RAdul^us Filgeriarum gave Belintone to the Abbey of Savigny. The Monks here
held sour Carucates of Land each Carucate worth 4 l. per Annum.

GROMOND, in Yorkshire, a Cell to the Abbey of Gramont in France.
THIS was given to the said Abbey by Joan late Wife of Robert de Turneham, and
confirmed by King John in the fifteenth year of his Reign. Vid. Vol. 3. p. 15.

MONKENLEN, in Herefordshire, a Cell to Conchis in Normandy.
WIlliam Bishop of Hereford did by his Episcopal Authority confirm and
appropiate to the Abbey of St. Peter at Conchis the Manor and Church of
Monekeslen, and other Revenues, given by Ralph de Tony Senior.

TOFT Priory in Norfolk, a Cell to Preaux.
THIS was given by Robert Earl of Mellent, and with diverse other Lands
confirmed to the Abbey of St. Peter at Preaux by King Henry Edward the I. with
great Liberties.

ALVERTON, in Yorkshire, a Cell to the Majus Monasterium.
RIchard Malleverer gave the Church of St. Martin in Alverton to the Majus
Monasterium in Alverton. Confirmed by King Henry the II.

MONMOUTH, a Cell to the Abbey of St. Florence at Saumurs.
WIhenocus de Monemue built in his Castle of Monemue a Church to the honor of
God, St. Mary, and St. Florence, and gave it in perpetual Alms to the Monks of
St. Florence at Saumurs. John de Monemuta Mary of Monmouth, and to the Abbey of
Saumurs, the Hospital of St. John at Monmouth.

HAGH, in Lincolnshire, a Cell to the Abbey de Voto near Cherburg.
KING Henry the II. gave and confirmed to the Abbey and Cannons of Cherburg in
France, the Manor and Church of Hagh with large Liberties, as they were
formerly confirmed by King Henry his Grandfather.

The particulars and values of their Estate was ^ound by Inquisition Edw. 3.
Among other things, that they had certain Rents in Grantham, etc.

HINKLEY, Leicestershire, a Cell to Lyra in Normandy.
RObert Earl of Leicester gave to the Abbey of Lyra, the Church of Hinkelai with
diverse Chapels and other Churches adjoining, with Henry the II.

HORSELEGH, in Essex, a Cell to St. Martin of Troarn.
THE Abbey and Covent of St. Martins at Troarn in Normandy, granted the Churches
of Horselegh and Whitenhirs^, to the Prior and Convent of Bruton, in exchange
for other Lands which the Priory of Bruton had in Normandy, from which time the
Prior of Bruton placed a Prior in Horselegh from among his own Canons, and
presented secular Vicars to the said two Churches. This was confirmed by King
Edward the III. in the forty fifth year of his Reign.

ABBERBURY, in Shropshire, a Cell to the Abbey of Gramount.
FVlco Fitz-Warin ^ounded and gave this Priory to the Monks of Gramount etc.
confirmed by King Henry the II. in the seventeenth of his Reign. And by Thomas
Corbeth in the year 1262.

LEVENESTRE, in Sussex, a Cell to Almenesches.
THE Possessions of the Benedictine Nuns of St. Mary of Almenesches France as
England were confirmed to them by Pope Alexander, and their Lands in their own
hands exempted from Tithes, by his Bull dated 1178.

BY the Stat. made at Carlisle 35. E. 1. commonly called De asportatis
Religiosorum, it is anacted that no Foreign Abbey, etc. shall impose any
Tallage, Payment, or Assesment whatsoever, oo any of their Houses subject to
them in England, under the Penalty of forfeiting their Estate here. In the
Parliament held at Westminster 13. R. 2. it was ordained that no alien of the
French Nation should enjoy any Benefice in this Kingdom; notwithstanding
several Frenchmen having purchased Letters of Denization, continued to enjoy
Benifices, etc. whereby great Treasures were transported out of the Kingdom,
the King's Council discovered France. etc. It was therefore enacted 1 H. 5. chapter
7. that the foresaid Ordinance be but in due execution against all, but such
Priors Alien as are conventual, and such as have Induction and Institution,
provided that such be Catholics, and that they give security not to discover,
etc. It was finally enacted in the Parliament held at Leicester 2 H. 5. for the
Inconveniences abovementioned, and also for that the English had their
Possessions seized in France, that all the Possessions of the Priors aliens
(except Conventuals, etc.) be vested in the King's hands and his Heirs for
ever, to the intent that Divine Services in the places aforesaid may for the
time to come be more duly performed by English people, than they have been by
French.

A CLVNIAC MONK
Vol. 1 P. 611.



OF THE Cluniacenses or Monks of Clugny.
The first Institutor of this Order, or rather Reformation of Berno, to whom
William then Duke of Aquitain, gave the place called Clugny or Cluny in
Burgundy for their first Habitation, in the year of our Lord 890. This was a
Reform of St. Bennet's Order.

WENLOCK, in Shropshire.
HERE was formerly a Nunnery in which Milburg Neice of Wilphere Mercia, lived,
and died Abbess, with the Reputation of great Sanctity. Which House being
totally decayed, Roger Earl of Mongomery, built here a Monastery for the Monks
of Cluny. The Church here was dedicated to St. Mildred. Isabel de Say Wife of
William Fitz-Alan Indigena 18. R. 2.

Vid. 2. Vol. p. 907.

[ Vaued at 401 l. 0 s. 7 d. q. per Annum.]

DUDLEY, in Staffordshire, a Cell to Wenlock.
THE Church here was dedicated to St. James, which with other Churches and
Lands, Pope Lucius did confer and appropriate to

Vid. 2. Vol. p. 907.

JEWS, in Sussex.
THIS House was founded by William de Warren Earl of Surrey in the time of King
William the Conqueror. Which Earl obtained from Peter in Burgundy four Cluniac
Monks, to whom he gave the Church of St. Pancrace adjoining to his Castle of
Lewis, and endowed them with diverse Lands and Possessions, by the License, and
Confirmation of King William; with a Curse to the Violators of his Gift, and
Clugny in Burgundy till the forty seventh year of King E. 3. at which time that
King made it indigena, and independent; so also the Priories of Castleacre,
Prittlewell, Farleigh, Horton, and Stanesgate, which were all Cells belonging
to the Priory of Lewis. Vid. 2. Vol. p. 908.

[ Valued at 92 l. 4 s. 6 d. per Annum.]


RObert Fitz-Suene gave the Church of Prittlewell to the Priory of St. Pancrace
at Jews, to be a Cell of that House, and to be furnished with Monks of the Rule
of St. Bennet, and Order of Clugny from Jews; ordaining by his Deed of
Foundation that the Prior of Prittlewel should pay yearly to the Prior of Jews
one mark for an acknowledgment.

[ Valued at 155 l. 11 s. 2 d. ob. per Annum.]

WESTACRE, in Norfolk, a Cell to Jews.
THIS House was granted and confirmed by Rodulphus de Toneio Lord of the Soil,
to Oliver, Priest of Acre, and Walter his Son, who became Canons regular here.

[ Valued at 260 l. 13 s. 7 d. q. per Annum.]


THIS Priory was founded Anno Dom. 1125. and dedicated to God and St. Mary
Magdalen. It was endowed by Humphrey de Bohun the King's Sewer, and Margery his
Wife, with ^Mannor of Farley and the Park there, and with diverse other Lands
and Revenues. All which was Henry the III.^ in the eleventh year of his Reign.

[ Valued at 153 l. 14 s. 2 d. ob. per Annum.]

HORTON, in Kent, a Cell to Jews.
Robert de Ver Constable of England, and Adeliza his Wife, and subjected to the
Priory of Jews, to which they were to pay a Mark per Annum as an
acknowledgment. In this House did inhabit thirteen, or at least eight Monks:
who were to say three Masses daily, viz. the High Mass, our Lady's Mass, and
the third pro defunctis. Their Seal was kept by three Monks, viz. the Prior,
Sub-prior, and another.

[ Valued at 95 l. 12 s. 2 d. per Annum.]


ANno Dom 1177. Alexander Prior of this House, and the Covent of the same, with
the assent of the Covent of Lewis, granted the Tithes of their Fee at
Clerkenwell, with their Land there, to the Nuns of St. Mary at Clerkenwell,
they paying to the Prior of Stanesgate, a yearly Pension of ten shillings for
the said Tithes and Lands.

CLIFFORD, in Herefordshire, a Cell to Jews.
IT appeared by Inquisition 20. E. 3. that this Priory was founded by Simon
Fitz-Richard Fitz^Ponce formerly Lord of Clifford and Ancestor o^ the Countess
of Lincoln, and that this House was not alien, or dependant on any other beyond
Sea. It was subjected by the Founder to the Priory Jews.

[ Valued at 57 l. 7 s. 4 d. per Annum.]

CASTLE-ACRE, in Norfolk.
FOunded An. Dom. 1090. William de Warren Earl of Surrey, the first of that
name, and his Son Earl William the II. were great Benefactors, and gave to God,
and St. Mary, and to the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, Pancrace (i. e. of the
Priory of Jews) ser^ing God at Achra, diverse Lands and Revenues. Besides whom
many other Benefactors gave other Manors and Lands, Tithes and Churches, as
may be seen in particular in the Book at large. p. 626, 627, 628, 629.

Herbert Bishop of Norwich constituted the Church and Monastery here, Benedict.
Bishop Ebrard impropriated and confirmed to them their several Churches, given
to them by the Earls of Surrey and other Benefactors.

It was certified to King Edw. the I. in the thirty fourth year of his Reign
that the ^rior and Convent of Castle-acre were English, and not Aliens of the
Subjects of the King of France, or his Adherers; and that no Rent or Pension
was paid by them to any of his Dominion or Adherents, nor did they owe
obedience to any such, except only, that when the Abbot of Clugny comes
sometimes into England he uses to visit in the said Priory. Hereupon this House
was allowed to be Indigena and not Alienigena, and to be privileged
accordingly, 18. E. 2.

[ Valued at 306 l. 11 s. 4 d. ob. q. per Annum.]

MENDHAM, in Norfolk, a Cell to Castle-acre.
WIlliam Son of Roger de Huntingfeild gave to God, and St. Mary of Acre, and to
the Monks there, the Isle of St. Mary of Mendham to be in the same manner
subject to Castle-acre, as that House is to St. Pancrace, and that to the
Church of Clugny.

The Prior of Castle-acre and Convent there did grant to Roger de Huntingfeild,
Mendham, and not to depose the Prior here unless for one of these three causes,
Disobedience, Incontinence, or Dilapidation of the House.

BROMHOLM, in Norfolk a Cell of Castle-acre.
THE Estate here, with diverse other Lands, was given to the Monks of Acre, by
William de Glanville, and confirmed to them by Bartholmew his Son.

Bromholm, held Lands in Fee-^arm of the Prior and Convent of Acre, at the
Annual Rent of fourteen Marks, five ^hillings and four pence payable at three
terms by the year, viz. at the Feast of St. Michael 64 s. at the Purification
64 s. and at Penticost 64 s.

Controversy arising between the Priors of Jews, and Acre, and the Prior of
Bromholm, about placing the Prior of this House. The whole matter was referred
by Pope Gregory the IX. to be heard and determined by the Prior Osolveston in
Leicestershire, and the Dean of Rutland; who decreed among other things, that
upon the death of the Prior of Bromholm, the Prior of Acre should nominate six
Monks, three of Acre and three of Bromholm, out of which number, the Convent of
Bromholm should choose one for their Prior, etc. This Decree was made in the
Church of St. Mary near the Stanford, on Wednesday next before Palm Sunday 1229.

Pope Celestin by his Bull dated in the fourth year of his Pontisicate, granted
that this Priory should be free from any subjection to that of Acre.

King Henry the III. in the thirteenth year of his Reign granted to the Prior
and Monks of St. Andrew of Bromholm to have a Fair there yearly at Monday. Vid.
Vol. 2. p. 909,

[ Valued at 100 l. 5 s. 3 d. q. per Annum.]

REINHAM, in Norfolk, a Cell to Castle-acre.
WIlliam de Lisewis ^ounded here a House for three Monks at least in a place
then called Normannesberch, and endowed it with Lands, in honor of the blessed
Virgin and St. John the Evangelist, all which Ieoffrey his Son gave and
confirmed to the Monks of Acre.

Roger Prior of Reinham, granted to Lena, a Nun and other Nuns there serving
Winghale, parcel of the Possessions of this House, to be held by them at the
yearly Rent of twelve pence. To which House of Nuns Riginald Fitz^Hamon gave
other Lands with his Daughte^ whom he made a religious Woman there.


FOunded by William Earl of Warren, and by him given to Monks of Castle-acre.
John Earl of Warren confirmed his Great Grandfathers Foundation Anno Dom.
1309. (3. E. 2.) and granted, that as often as the Castle-acre should have full
power to confer the place on a Monk of that House, which new Prior being first
presented to the said John Earl of Warren or his Heirs, and having (...) his
^ealty, should be admitted with effect.

BERMUNDSEY, in Surrey.
THIS Monastery of St. Saviors of Burmundsey was founded by Alwinus Child a
Citizen of London, in the year 1082.

Many were the Benefactors to this House. King Henry the I. in the Bermundsey,
Rederhith, and Delwich, the hide of Southwark, and other Lands. Walkelinus
Mammynot gave them a Moiety of all Greenwich.

King Henry the II. in the year 1159. confirmed to them the Donation
Camberwell, and others.

Anno 1213. the Prior of Burmundsey raised from the Foundation a new Building
adjoining to the Walls of his House, which was called the Elemosinary, or
Hospitale conversorum and puerorum, in honor of St. Thomas the Martyr.

An^ 1268. King Henry the III. granted to the Monks of Burmundsey a Market
every Monday at their Manor of Charleton in Kent, and a Fair to be held there
at the Feast of the Holy Trinity yearly.

The Manor of Bermundsey was ancient Demesne of the Crown, and all cum pertin.
are impleadable in the Court of this Manor by the King's writ of Right
according to the Custom of the said Manor, and not at the Common Law.

Within the Manor of Burmundsey were comprised the several Towns of
Bermondesey, Camberwell, Rederhith, the Hide of Southwark, Dilwich, Waddon, and
Reyham, with their Appurtenants.

[ Valued at 474 l. 14 s. 4 d. ob. q. per Annum.]

The Priory of St. James by Exeter, in Devonshire.
BAldwin Earl of Devonshire founded this Priory without the Walls at Exeter for
Cluniac Monks, and endowed it with Revenues. Confirmed by Richard Earl of
Devonshire, Son of Baldwin, 1157. and by Robert Exeter, Anno 1146. Also by Maud
the Empress. Infra 1025.

[ Valued at 502 l. 12 s. 9 d. per Annum.]

LENTON, in Nottinghamshire.
WIlliam Peverel built this House for Cluniac Monks, and gave to the Abbey of
Clugny great Revenues for the Maintenance of certain Monks of their Order in
this Priory, providing however that this House should be free and discharged
from all exactions of that Abbey, paying only per Annum as an acknowledgment. To
this Priory of the Holy Trinity at Lenton King Henry the II. was a Benefactor,
so were also King Steven, and King John, which last granted them the Tithes of
his hunting (Decimam venationis nostrae) in the Counties of Nottingham and
Derby. All whose Grants were confirmed by King Edward the II. in the Vid. Vol.
3. p. 30.

[ Valued at 329 l. 15 s. 10 d. ob. per Annum.]

PONTEFRACT, in Yorkshire.
THE first Founder of this House was Robert de Laceio, who built it in a place
then called Kirkeby, in honor of St. John the Apostle and Evangelist,
subjecting it to the Church of Clugny from whence it was Hugo de la Val. Henry
de Lascy Son of the said Robert, gave to these Monks the Custody of the
Hospital of St. Nicholas in Pomfract, in Celestin confirmed the Estate given to
this Monastery, and granted them several Privileges, among others, that in the
time of a general Interdiction it may be lawful for the Monks here to celebrate
the Divine Offices, with a low Voice, their Church-Doors shut, and Adam
Fitz-Swany gave diverse Lands to the Monks of Pontfract, he also gave them for a
Cell, the Priory of St. Mary Magdalen of Lunda, or Monk-Breton, which he had
founded on his paternal Estate. After many Controversies between the Monks of
Pontfract and the Monks of Breton, it was at last agreed and determined by
Breton should pay a Pitance of 20 s. per Annum to the Covent of Pontfract, that
the Monks of Breton should freely choose their own Prior, but that he should be
created Pontfract, etc. To this House were several Persons of great Quality,
Benefactors; whose names and parcels by them given may be seen in the Book at
large. p. 656, 657, 658, 659.

[ Valued at 337 l. 14 s. 8 d. per Annum.]


THIS Priory was founded to the glory of God and honor of St. Mary Magdalen of
Lunda, by Adam the Son of Suanus wh^^ endowed it with the Town of Breton, etc.
The then Prior of the Charity (being the Capital House of this Order beyond
Seas) granted that the Monks of this House, might choose their own Prior, the
Prior of Pontfract Adam Fitz Swane the ^ounder gave this House as a Cell to the
Priory of St John at Pontfract^ and ordered this House to pay to that Priory a
Recognition of one Mark of Silver per Annum. Pope Urban the III. confirmed the
Foundation 1186.

[ Valued at 239 l. 3 s. 6 d. per Annum.]

THETFORD, in Norfolk.
Anno Dom. 1103. by Roger Bigot, whose Gifts and Endowments to this House were
all confirmed and ratified by his Son William Bigot Dapiser to the King; and
also by King Henry the I. and King Henry the II. This Priory was made Denison
50. E. 3.

[ Valued at 312 l. 14 s. 4 d. ob. per Annum.

MONTACUTE, in Somersetshire.
FIRST founded by William Earl of Moriton in Normandy, who endowed this Priory
with three fair Lordships, viz. Montegue and two others. King Henry the I. gave
and confirmed to God and the blessed Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul of
Montacute, and the Cluniac Monks there, diverse Lands, with great Liberties and
Exemptions. The like did King Henry the II. and King Henry the III. in the four
and thirtieth year of his Edward the III. in the fourteenth year of Reign,
granted William de Monte-acuto Earl of Salisbury, and Marshal of England, and
to his Heirs. Vid. 2. Vol. p. 909.

[ Valued at 456 l. 14 s. 7 d. q. per Annum.]

DAVENTREY, in Northamptonshire.
THIS Priory was first founded at Preston by Hugh de Leycestre (called the
Vicount) but that place being found inconvenient, they were by License of Simon
de Seynliz the elder, Earl of Northampton, removed to Daventre, where he built
a Monastery in honor of St. Augustine the Apostle of the English. King Henry
the II. confirmed their Liberties and Franchises Henry the I. to St. Mary of
Charity ( i. e. the Capital House of this Order beyond Seas) and to St.
Augustine of Daventrey and the Monks there. Many were the Benefactors to this
House, as Matilda de Senliz, Richard de Foxton, whose Daughter Ann was married
to Alan Basset Lufphenam (com Roteland) Steven de Welton, Henry de Braybrok
(whose Fo. 677. 678.)

St. ANDREWS, at Northampton.
THIS Priory was founded in the eighteenth year of King William the Conqueror,
by Simon de Seynliz, who came into England in the Army of that King. He married
Maud Daughter and Coheir of Waldelfus Earl of Huntington, with whom he had the
honor of Huntington, Alice the other Daughter was by him given to Ralph de
Tonny with 100 l. per Annum in Land (centum Librarum terrae) out of the said
honor. In the Reign of King Henry the I. the said Simon made a Voyage to the
Holy Land, and died in his return at the Monastery of the blessed Mary of
Charity (to which Monastery he had subjected this of St. Andrew.) After his
death King Henry, having married Maud Sister of Alexander King of Scotland,
gave Maud Earl Simons Widow to David Brother of Alexander, and with her the
Custody of Earl Simons Son and Heir, Simon de St. Lyz, junior. Hugh Bishop of
Lincoln confirmed the Churches and Tithes given Ryal and Exton in Rutland. King
Henry the I. also confirmed the Lands to them given, and granted them many
Liberties and Franchises. This Priory was made Denison H. 4.

To the Hospital of St. David at Kingsthorp built upon the Lands of this
Priory, for the Relief of Travelers and poor People, Walter Prior of this
House with the assent of his Convent, gave two yard Land and a Message, etc.
in Thorp, constituting several Orders for the Government of the said Hospital,
among others that there should be three rows of Beds placed in length before
the Chapel, so as the Poor, and especially the sick People, might most
conveniently hear Mass, etc. subjecting the said Hospial Andrews at
Northampton, and the Abbot of Sullebi. This Deed bears date 1200. being the
second of King John.

(This Priory was valued at 263 l. 7 s. 1 d. q. per Annum.)


THIS House was founded for Cluniac Monks, and dedicated to the honor of God,
and our Lord Jesus Christ, and St. Mary, the holy Apostles St. Peter and St.
Paul, and St. Mary Magdalen, by Joel Son of Alured, who endowed it with large
Possessions, subjecting it to the Church of St. Martin de Campis, in which he
himself became a Monk. Confirmed by King Henry the I. and by Henry de Tracy,
who descended An. 1146. (11. Steph.)

[ Valued at 123 l. 6 s. 7 d. per Annum]

TIKEFORD, in Buckinghamshire.
FVlcodius Paganellus was the first Founder of this Priory, who with other
Benefactors, endowed it with diverse Lands and Rents. All which together with a
Court Leet, King Henry the II. confirmed to the Edward the II. in the fifth
year of his Reign, granted further to William de la Manerere then prior of this
House, and his Successors, to have a Pillory and Tumbrel in their Lordship of
Tikeford, for the punishment of Malefactors.

Vid. Vol. 2. p. 910.

FEVERSHAM, in Kent
ANno 1148. King Steven founded the Abbey here to the honor of of our Savior,
and endowed it with diverse Manors, Lands, Liberties, and free Customs to hold
in perpetual Alms, discharged and quit of all secular Exactions. King Steven
and Maud his Queen, and Eus^acius their Son were buried here. King Henry the
II. confirmed to the Cluniac Monks of Feversham, all their Lands and
Franchises, granting to them a Fair yearly for eight days beginning at the
Feast of St. Peter ad vincula. John in the sixteenth year of Henry the III. in
the eleventh year of his Reign. Peter Abbot of Clugny granted to King Steven,
Clarembaldus then Prior of Bermundesey with twelve Monks of that House, for the
Composing an Abbey at Feversham, and at the same time absolved the said
Clarembaldus and his Monks from all Obedience and Subjection to the Church of
Clugny, and that of the Charity: The like Emancipation or discharge of
subjection was also granted by the then Prior of the Charity.

[ Valued at 286 l. 12 s. 6 d. ob. q. per Annum.]

ARTHINGTON, in Yorkshire.
THIS was a Priory of Nuns, built and endowed by Peers of Arthington, and
confirmed by Pope Alexander; as is set forth in an award made in the twenty
eighth year of the Reign of King Henry the VI. Alicia de Romeli was a
Benefactress to this Nunnery William de Curcy the Kings Sewer, and by Warinus
Fitz^Gerald the King's Chamberlain.

[ Valued at 11 l. 8 s. 4 d. ob. per Annum.]

Of the Cistercian Order.
Anno Dom. 1098. Robert Abbot of Molesme by License of Hugo Lions the Pope's
Legate, first instituted this Order, in a Desert Place called Cistercium in the
Duchy of Burgundy, the Rule of St. Bennet, being not duly observed, in his old
Monastery. In this Order therefore they betook Bennet's Rule, and obtained
great Privileges from the Pope. To avoid Pride etc. The second Abbot of this
Order was one Stephen an Englishman.


THIS Abbey was founded in the year of Christ 1128. by William Gifford Bishop of
Winchester. The first Monks of this Order, being twelve and an Abbot, came to
this House from a Foreign Abbey called Elemosina. The said William Bishop of
Winchester endowed this House with diverse Lands, and with Common in Farnham
Woods, all which was by consent of the King, and the Convent of Winchester, and
confirmed by his Successors. Vid. 2. Vol. p. 912.

[ Valued at 174 l. 8 s. 3 d. ob. per Annum.]


ANno Dom. 1127. being twenty nine years from the first Institution of the
Cistercian Order (26. H. 1.) This House was founded by Steven Earl of Morton
and Boloign, afterward King of England.

The Names of the Abbots of FVRNES.
1. Evanus de Albrincis. 2. Eudo de Sourdeval. 3. Michael de Lancastria. 4.
Petrus de Eboraco. 5. Richardus de Bajocis. 6. Johannes de Cawnesfeild. 8.
Ioslenus de Pennington. 9. Conanus de Bardoule. 10. Willielmns Niger. 11.
Giraldus Bristaldon. 12. Michael de Dalton. 13. Richardus de Sancto Quintino.
14. Radulfus de Flet^ham. 15. Johannes de Newby. 16. Stephanus de Alverston.
17. Nicholaus de Meaux, who was after Bishop of Sodor. 18. Robertus de Denton.
19. Laurentius de Acclom 20 Willielmus de Midleton. 21. Hugo de Bron. 22.
Willielmus de Cockeram. 23. Hugo Skiller. 24. Johannes de Cockeram. 25.
Alexander de Walton. 26. Johannes de Cockham. 27. Johannes de Bolton. 28.
Willielmus de Dalton. A CISTERCIAN MONK
Vol. 1 P. 69^

King Steven's double Relation to Maud the Empress. Edgar Edling had two
Sisters Margaret, and Christiana; who had issue as follows, Steven Earl of
Morton, etc. was Son of Steven E. of Bloys and Adela Daughter of K. William the
Conqueror, and Sister of K. H. I. married Christiana Margaret Wife of Malcolm
K. of Scots. Eustace E. of Bolon Mary Matilda Wife of Hen. I. K. of Eng. Maud
Maud, first married to the Emperior, then to Jeostery Earl of Anjou, by which
last the had issue. Willam Earl of Warren and Bolon Hen. the II. K. of Eng.
Marry
William de Lancaster, the third of that Name was a great Bene^actor to etc.
Which William married Agnes de Brus and had issue Halewisa ux. Petri de Brus
Alicia ux. Williel. de Lindesey. Sorota ax. Alani de Multon Petrus de Brus jun.
ob. s. h. Agnes ux. Walteri de Fawkunbergh. Lucia ux. Marmaduci de Thweng.
Margareta ux, Dom. Rob. de Ros. Laderina ux. Johanis de Belew.

Pope Eugenius granted to John Abbot of St. Mary's of Furnes, among (Anno Dom.
1305.) it was agreed between the Abbot of Furnes and the Prior of St. Mary of
Lancaster (which last was entitled to the Tithes of their Grange of
Bellomonte) that in case the Abbot of Furnes let the said Lands, then the Prior
of Lancaster should receive Tithes of the Lands so let, but in case the Abbot
and Covent of Furnes should occupy the same in their own hands, then the said
Prior to receive only a Pension of two Marks per Annum.

[ Valued at 805 l. 16 s. 5 d. per Annum.]


Russin was founded in the year 1134. Olauus King of Man, a very devout Prince,
gave the Land whereon this Abbey stands to Yvo then Abbot of Furnes, for the
erecting of this Monastery.

Certain Ancient Synodals, and Ecclesiastical Constitutions for the Isle of
Man, made by Simon Bishop of Sodor 1229.

Bradan in Man 1291. under Mark Bishop of Sodor.

Michael the Archangel, by William Russel Bishop of Sodor, and the whole Clergy
of Man 1350. All which see at large in the Monasti^on.

Thomas Lord Stanley, Earl of Darby, and K. of the Isle of Man by his Letters
Patents dated at Lathum, 28. Mar 1505. confirmed to ^uan then Bishop of Sodor
and his Successors, all the Lands, Revenues, Rig^^^s and Privileges belonging
to the Church in the Isle and Kingdom o^ Man.

YNES, in Ireland, a Cell to Furnes.
THIS was first founded in the year 1126. by a King of Vlster named Magnellus
Makenlefe, in a place called Erynach, but that (...) almost destroyed in the
Wars, it was translated by John de Curcy (...) of Vlster, and new founded at
Ynes, and at the same time he subjected ^^is Abbey to Furnes, An. 1180.


RIchard de Grainvilla gave to God and the Church of the holy Trinity at
Savigny, Nethe and other Lands and Posse^^^ons, to the I^^^^on that the Abbot
and Convent of Savigny should institute here a Convent of Monks under an Abbot.
King John confirmed the said Lands to the Church of the Holy Trinity at Nethe
and the Monks there, in the ninth year of his Reign granting them also many
Privileges and Immunities.

[ Valued at 132 l. 7 s. 7 d. ob. per Annum.]


FOunded Anno 1131. by Ranulph Earl of Chester, confirmed by King Henry the II.
and by Lewellin Prince of North Wales The like David Prince of Northwales, Son
of the foresaid Lewelin, who also gave them certain Lands and Revenues, in the
year 1240.

[ Valued at 150 l. 7 s. 3 d. per Annum.]

TINTERN, in Wales.
FOunded 1131. William, Marshall of England, and Earl of Pembroke, in the
seventh year of Henry the III. confirmed to God, and the blessed Mary of
Tyntern, and to the Abbot and Monks there, all the Lands and Roger Bigod Earl
of Norfolk and Marshall of England, Anno 1301. Walter Fitz Richard appears to
be the Anno 1131. Who dying without issue, his Brother Gilbert Strongbowe
became his Heir, and was the first Earl of Pembroke, from whom descended
Isabel; she became the Wife of William Mareschall, who died 1219. and lies
buried in the Temple at London: he left five Sons all successively Earls of
Pembroke, but they all died without issue, Matilda the eldest of their Sisters
and Coheirs, was married to Hugh le Bigod Earl of Norfolk and Suffolk, etc.

[ Valued at 192 l. 1 s. 4 d. ob. per Annum.]

RIEVALL, in Yorkshire.
ANno 1132. Gualterus Especk a Great man in the Court of King Henry the I.
founded this Monastery in a place called Blachomour near the River Rye, for the
receipt of certain Monks of the Cistercian Order sent over by Bernard Abbot of
Clarevallis, whose first Abbot was William.

This Walter Especk, having unhappily lost his Son and Heir who broke viz
Kirkham, Rievall, and Wardon. The rest of his Estate was divided between his
three Sisters and Coheirs, one of which married to Peter Lord Roos, the
Descent of which Noble Family, the Reader may see set forth in the Book at
large, with their several Matches and Issue, down to George Manners, Lord Roos,
who died An. 1513.

Many were the Benefactors, and large the Possessions of this Monastery,
expressed Fol. 729, 730, 731.

Pope Alexander the III. by his Bull dated 1140. granted to Aelredo Abbot of
St. Mary's of Rievalle and his Brethren, and their Successors in etc.

[ Valued at 278 l. 10 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

FOUNTAINS, in Yorkshire, a Cell of Clarevallis. Founded 1132.
THE Rule and Discipline of St. Benedict being relaxt in the Abbey of St. Mary's
at York, and a great Dissension happening therein on that occasion between the
Abbot and Prior, Turstin then Archbishop of York gave leave to thirteen of the
Monks to retire from the said Abbey. for their Habitation, at that time called
Skeldale, since Fountains. Here for a time a great Elm was their only fence
from the Weather, under which they slept, sed, and performed their Offices
according to their Rule. Richard, who had been their Prior at York, being
elected their first Abbot and confirmed by the Archbishop Turstin aforesaid.
They having past a Winter in this manner, sent to the holy Bernard Abbot of
Claravellis submitting themselves to his Rule and Direction. Abbot Bernard
sends back with the Messengers one of his Monks named Galfridus who taught them
the Cistercian Discipline. Hitherto they were in great want, being forced to
dress for their Food the Leaves of the Trees and Hugh Dean of York. Five years
after the first Foundation of Fountains, a certain Nobleman called Ranulph de
Mer^ay built for them a new Monastery to which they sent some of their Monks
under the Government of Abbot Robert formerly a Monk at Witheby. Besides
Woburne, otherwise called Vallis dei, Lisa in Norway, etc.

Alanus de Aldeburg; Roger de Mubrai Constable of Chester, Nigellus de Mubrai,
Alice de Gant, etc. who gave to God and the Mary de Fontibus diverse Manors and
Lands. All which were confirmed to the Monks of the Cistercian Order here, and
their Successors Richard the I.

[ Valued at 998 l. 6 s. 8 d. ob. per Annum.]


RIchard Earl of Exeter, Son of Baldwin, confirmed to God, the holy Virgin, and
Gaufridus Abbot of Savigny, this House and diverse Lands and Revenues thereunto
belonging, first given by his Father. Benefactors to this House were Henry
Fitz-Empress, who writ himself Son of Normandy and Earl of Anjou, Engelgerius
de Bohun; William de Vernun Earl of Devon, etc.

Lyra, and this Church of Quarre about certain Tithes and Revenues in and about
Carisbrok, and other Neighboring Towns here in this Island, the Matter was
agreed and settled by Deed dated in the year 1289.

[ Valued at 134 l. 3 s. 11 d. per Annum]


HVgo Malbanc founded this Abbey in the Honor of the blessed Virgin, and St.
Michael, and endowed it with very large Lands and Possessions; Wiche, and the
Tithes of the Salt and Boylries there. Yet by the same Deed he granted that
Ralph Earl of Chester his chief Lord, should be accounted the Principal Founder
and Defender of the said Church and Monks there. King Henry the III. in the
sixteenth year of his Reign, confirmed all their Possessions; and again in the
fiftieth year of his Reign. In the year 1230. Ralph Earl Chester confirmed
their Estate given by Hugo Malbanc, and granted them several Liberties and
Immunities. Vid. 2. Vol. p. 913.

[ Valued at 225 l. 9 s. 7 d. per Annum.]

GEROUDON, in Leicestershire.
THIS was founded Anno 1133. as Cell to Waverle. The Founder, Robert Earl of
Leicester, endowed this Monastery with all his Lands in Disseley, and with the
Wood of Shepehed. Many were the Benefactors who gave to this Church of St. Mary
of Geroldon, and the Monks here large Possessions, viz. Margaret Countess of
Wynton Sister of the said Robert, Margaret de Ferrariis Countess of Derby,
Roger de Quincy, Gilbert Son of Richard Wareyn, William Peverell, etc. All
Edward the III. in the fourteenth year of his Reign.

[ Valued at 159 l. 19 s. 10 d. ob. per Annum.]

SWINESHEAD, in Lincolnshire. Founded An. Do. 1134.
THIS was founded and endowed by Robert Greslei; whose several Lands and
Possessions were recited and confirmed to God and the Church of St. Mary of
Swynesheved and the Monks there, by King Henry the II.

[ Valued at 167 l. 15 s. 3 d. per Annum.]

CALDER, in Cumberland. Founded An. Do. 1134.
KING Henry the II. confirmed to the Abbot and Monks here all the Lands and
Possessions given by Ralph de Meschin their Founder, and other Benefactors.

[ Valued at 50 l. 9 s. 3 d. ob. per Annum.]

BILAND, in Yorkshire. Founded An. Do. 1134.
THIS House was at first founded for certain Monks of Savigny, by Roger de
Mulbray; which Roger died in the Holy Land. Walter de Sciflings Parson of
Kildale, Hugo de Wake, and others were Benefactors. In the ninth of Richard the
II. Thomas Earl Mareschall and Earl of Nottingham, Mowbray and Segrave, did by
his Deed recite, ratify, and confirm the Foundation of this Abbey by his said
Progenitor Roger de Mulbray. Vid. infra, p. 1027.

[ Valued at 238 l. 9 s. 4 d. per Annum.]


KING Steven in the third year of his Reign (An. Dom. 1139) gave and confirmed
to God and the Church of St. Ceadde, and to the Abbot and Monks here, their
Estate in like manner as Roger Bishop of Chester had given it, and further,
granted them several Immunities. Walter de Dunstanville, Robert Corbet, and
others were Benefactors. Their Estate was confirmed to them by King Richard the
I. in the first year of his Reign.

Vid. Vol. 2. p. 914.

[ Valued at 110 l. 19 s. 3 d. ob. per Annum.]


KING Henry the II. confirmed to the white Monks of St. Mary's near Dublin, all
their Lands and Possessions; and by another Deed Bildewas.

BITLESDEN, in Buckinghamshire. Founded An. 1147.
THE Lordship of Bitlesden escheating in the time of King Steven, from one
Robert de Meperteshall, to the then Earl of Leicester, the said Earl granted it
to his Steward Ernaldus de Bosco, who founded here an Abbey, which the Earl also
confirmed; but after some time the abovesaid Robert de Meperteshal being about
to commence a Suit in Law for this Estate, the Monks here in consideration of
ten Marks obtained from the said Robert also a Charter of Confirmation. This
House was first given Arnold de Bosco for a Cell to the Abbey of Geroudon.

[ Valued at 125 l. 4 s. 3 d. q. per Annum.]

WARDON, in Bedfordshire. Founded An. 1136.
THE first Founder of this House was Walter Espec, who endowed it for Monks
from the Abbey of Rieval, which was confirmed by King Steven Anno Dom. 1135. and
by King Richard the I. in the tenth year of his Reign.

[ Valued at 389 l. 16 s. 6 d. q. per Annum.]


IN the year 1133. Richard Viscount or Sheriff of Devonshire, a near Kinsman of
King William the Conqueror, and to whom that King had given the Castle of
Exeter, and Honor and Barony of Okehampton in Devonshire, gave his Land of
Brightley, within the said Honor of Okehampton, for the founding of an Abbey,
and obtained twelve Monks for the same from the Abbey of Waverly. These Monks
having remaine^ (...) Brightley for five years, were at last forced through the
(...) sterility of the place, to return back to Waverly: Which the Sister and
Heiress of their Founder seeing, she gave them the Manor of Thorncomb for
their maintenance, and her house therein, then called Ford, for their more
convenient habitation. From this Lady did descend Hawisia who was married
Reginald de Courtnay, who was the Grandson of Lewis the Gross of France, from
whom descend the noble Family of Courtnays, Patrons of this Abbey, and great
Benefactors. Whose descent and lineage is set forth in the John Courtnay, was,
through the divine Mercy, his great Faith, and his Hope in the Prayers of these
Monks, miraculously delivered from a terrible Storm at Sea in the Night time,
when all the Seamen despaired of life. Hugh Courtnay the Devonshire, and died 9
E. 3. I^seline de Pomerei, and others, were Benefactors to this Monastery; all
whose Richard I. in the first year of his Reign.

[ Valued at 374 l. 10 s. 6 d. ob. per Annum.]

BUCKFAST in Devonshire.
FOunded for Monks and endowed with Lands by Richard Banzan, to hold by the
30th. part of a Knight's Fee; and confirmed by King Hen. II.

[ Valued at 466 l. 11 s. 2 d. ob. per Annum.]

MEAUX, in Yorkshire. Founded, Anno 1136.
MEaux was so called by its Inhabitants, who came into England with the Norman
Conqueror, and named their new Seat according to the name of the City of Meaux
in Normandy from whence they came. William le Gross Earl of Albemarl, and Lord
of Holderness, and in a manner of all Yorkshire; who having vowed a Journey to
Jerusalem and being by reason of his age, and unweildyness of his Body, not
well able to perform such a Voyage, built this Monastery by way of commutation
of his Vow. This he gave to God and the Blessed Mary, introducing a Convent of
Monks from the Monastery of Fountains, of whom one Adam was made the first
Abbot; which Monks William le Gross was Grandson of Odo to whom William the
Conqueror gave his Sister in marriage, and the Isle of Holderness; the
Archbishop of Roan gave him the County of Albemarl to hold of him by the
Service of being his Standard Bearer in his Expeditions attended with ten
Knights. The Line of this William being not long after extinct, Alb^marl, and
Honor of Holderness escheated to the Crown for want of heirs. This Monastery
was begun, and the Monks first entered there under their Abbot Adam, on the
Calends of January 1150. Richard de Otringham Rector of the Church of Schelford
in the Diocese of Ely, An. Dom. 1317. gave diverse Lands to the Abbot and
Convent here, for the maintenance of a perpetual Chantery of seven Monks of
this House, at the Porch of their Abbey Church. The number of the Monks in this
Abbey were 50. The Lands given to this Abbey John, in the 6th. year of his Reign.

[ Valued at 299 l. 6 s. 4 d. q. per Annum.]

NEW-MINSTER, near Morpeth, in Yorkshire.
THIS was founded and endowed in the year 1138. by a certain Nobleman called
Ranulf de Merley, it was furnished with Monks from Fountains. Their Lands were
confirmed to them by King Henry the III. in the thirty ninth year of his Reign.
Vid. Vol. 2. p. 916.


THIS House was founded and endowed by Sir Robert Gait a K^t. and was furnished
with Cistercian Monks from Waverley. Their Estate was confirmed to them by King
Henry II. in the eleventh year of his Reign, and by King Edward the II. in the
tenth year of his Reign.

[ Valued at 256 l. 13 s. 7 d. ob. per Annum.]


THis Abbey was founded by Mawd the Empress for Cistercian Monks, in honor of
the most blessed Virgin Mary (Regina Caelorum) so are the words of her
Charter.) Endowing it with diverse Lands and Revenues to hold free and quit of
all Secular Service. Besides whom, many Richard the I. in the first year of his
Reign.

[ Valued at 388 l. 9 s. 10 d. ob. q. per Annum.]


THe Founder of this Monastery was Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, who procured
Monks for it from the Abbey of Fountains, but their first Settlement being at a
place called Haverholm, which Seat not being convenient for their Habitation,
he removed them from thence to this Place, Besides the said Bishop they had
diverse other Benefactors, all whose donations were confirmed to God, and St.
Mary, and the Monks de Parcho-Lude, by King Henry the III. in the tenth year of
his Reign.

[ Valued at 147 l. 14 s. 6 d. per Annum.]


THIS House was founded in the year 1139. by Hugh de Bretone a Baron of those
times, and by him endowed with diverse Lands. Other Furnivalls, D' Aencurts, and
D'arci's, etc. Richard de Luvetot gave and annexed to this House the Hermitage
of St. John in the Parish of Ecclesfeild, with the Land thereunto belonging.
Conan Duke of Britain and Earl of Richmund gave to this Abbey the Church of
Gaiton with two Carucates and a half of Land, etc.

[ Valued at 286 l. 2 r. 7 d. per Annum.]

KINGS WOOD, in Gloucestershire. Founded, An. 1139.
THis House was founded by William de Berkeley for Cistercian Monks, and the
Foundation confirmed by Maud the Empress: but afterward for many years it
became a Grange depending on the Abbey of Tettebiry, and a long contest was had
about this Matter, till at last it was from Kingeswode. The Lands and
Endowments given to this Abbey by the Founder, were confirmed by Berkleys, his
noble Descendants.

[ Valued at 244 l. 11 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

PIPWELL, in Northamptonshire.
THis Monastry was first founded, An. Dom 1143. (and then called Sancta Maria
de Divisis.) among thick Woods, which were in after times destroyed. In the
year 1323^ the Monks here were dispersed through Poverty. Their first Founder was
William Boutevileyn of Cottesbrook; Robert Boutevileyn, who did many
unkindnesses to these Monks. This was before their dispersion. Hugh Senlize and
Emma his Wife one of the Daughters and Heirs of the Lord of Braybroke, gave to
the Monks of Pipwell diverse Lands and Tenements in Braybroke, confirmed by the
Capital Lord of the Fee Simon de Foxton, and these seem to be the second
Founders. King Henry III. granted to these Monks pasture on Benifield Laund for
250 Cattle.

[ Valued at 286 l. 11 s. 8 d. q. per Annum.]

STONELEY, in Warwickshire.
MAud the Empress first founded the Priory of Rademere in the Forest Kanoc,
confirmed by King Steven. This Priory was afterward advanced to an Abbey of
Cistercian Monks by Henry Fitz Empress then Duke of Normandy. In the year 1154^
which was thirteen years after Rademore, the^ foresaid Henry Fitz Empress^
being now King of England, they changed their habitation of Radmore for
Stanley, and the whole Lordship of the same, which was before that the Kings
Demesne. The first stone of the Abbey Church there was laid on the Ides of April,
An. Dom. 1154. The said King Henry I. endowed this House with diverse other
Lands and Revenues elsewhere.

[ Valued at 151 l. 0 s. 3 d. ob. per Annum.]

COGESHAL, in Essex.
THis Abbey was founded by King Steven and Maud his Queen, in the year 1142.
William de Humberstane, with the Kings License, gave the Manor of
Tyllingham-Hall for the finding of one Wax light to burn before the High Altar
at the Abbey Church here in the time of high Mass, daily. The Monks of this
House were endowed with great Immunities

[ Valued at 251 l. 2 s. per Annum.]

REVESBY, in Lincolnshire Founded An. 1142.
THe Founders of this House were William de Romara, Farl of Lincoln, and
William his Son, who gave to the Abbot and Monks of Rievalle, Revesby,
Thoresby, and other Lands in Lincolnshire for the building and Laurence. The
Lands and Revenues were confirmed by Ralph Earl of Chester, and by King Richard
I. in the tenth year of his Reign.

[ Valued at 287 l. 2 s. 4 d. ob. per Annum.]

CUMHIRE, in Pembrokshire,
Cadwathel ap Madok in the year 114^, for Henry III, in the sixteenth year of
his Reign confirmed to these Monks all their Lands and Revenues.

[ Valued at 24 l. 19 s. 4 d. per Annum.]


WIlliam de Ipre a great Commander in King Stevens Army founded this Abbey of
Boxley for White Monks in the year 1144. King Richard the I. in the first year
of his Reign confirmed their Estate with Sac and Soc.

[ Valued at 204 l. 4 s. 11 d. per Annum.]

SINNINGTHWAIT, in Yorkshire.
Beriram Haget, and confirmed by Roger de Mubrai his superior Lord. Iessery
Archbishop of York, took these Nuns and their Possessions into his protection,
and denounced a malediction against those who should dare to wrong them, and a
blessing to their Benefactors. Alice Widow of Adam de Stanely gave, with her
self, nine Bovates of Land in Berewik (super Theseiam) which was afterward
changed with Ranulf Fitz Henry for other Lands in Lofthows.

[ Valued at 60 l. 9 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

ESSEHOLT, in Yorkshire, a Cell to Sinningthwait.
POpe Alexander the third, by his Bull dated in the year 1172. confirmed to
Christian Prioress of Sinningthwait, and the Nuns there^ and their Successors,
their House and Estate both at Sinningthayte, and at Esseholt, with all Lands
already given, or to be given to their said Houses. With Privilege of
Sanctuary.

[ Valued at 13 l. 5 s. 4 d. per Annum.]

WOBURN, in Bedfordshire. Founded An. 1145.
THIS was founded and endowed by Hugh de Bolebock, by advice of Henry Abbot of
Fountains, from whence a Convent of Monks was sent to this place. King John in
the second year of his Reign confirmed the Estate of this House, so did also
King Henry the II.

[ Valued at 391 l. 18 s. 2 d. ob. per Annum.]

MEREVAL, in Warwickshire. Founded An. 1148.
THIS was founded by Robert Earl of Ferrariis, and by him endowed with all the
Forest of Arden, with other Lands. All which was confirmed By King Henry the II.

[ Valued at 254 l. 1 s. 8 d. per Annum.]

HAMPOLE, in Yorkshire.
THIS House was founded for Nuns by Avicia de Tanai, and endowed by her with
diverse Lands of her Inheritance, all which were confirmed by Ralph de Till^^er
Grandson, by Roger Archbishop of York, and by William Fitz William, An. 1331.

[ Valued at 63 l. 5 s. 8 d. per Annum.]

VALLE-DEI, alias Vaudey, in Lincolnshire.
THE Abbey here was founded by William Earl of Albemarl in the year 1147. It was
at first called Biham, but afterward Vallis-dei, and was planted with Monks
from Fountains. The same Founder, erected also the Abbey of Meaux of which
supra. p. 792. Many were the Benefactors to this House, among whom Gilbertus de
Gant, Roger de etc. all whose Gifts were recited and confirmed by King Richard
the I. in the first year of his Reign. See the Genealogy of Gilbert de Gant
Nephew of William the Conqueror, and the Noble Families descended

[ Valued at 124 l. 5 s. 11 d. q. per Annum:

SWINE, in Yorkshire.
ERinburch de Burtona was the Foundress of this Abbey, giving diverse Lands of
her Patrimony and Inheritance to God and the Church of St. Mary at Swine, and
to the Brethren and Sisters there serving God. Pope Alexander exempted the Nuns
here from paying Tithes for their Lands in their own Occupation. Vide infra,
fol. 1026.

[ Valued at 82 l. 3 s. 9 d. ob. per Annum]


KING Henry the III. Roger Earl of Warwick, and others, were Benefactors to
this Abbey, all whose Gifts were confirmed to the Cistercian Monks here, by King
John in the sixth year of his Reign.

[ Valued at 134 l. 10 s. 10 d. per Annum.]

RUPE, alias Roche, in Yorkshire. Founded An. 1147.
RIchard de Bulli, and Richard Fitz Turgis, were joint Founders of this Bully,
the Monks here were endowed with Lands and Revenues by other Benefactors, among
whom Edmund de Lacy Constable of Chester, and William Earl Warren, etc. Pope
Urban the III. confirmed their Estate and Lands given and to be given, and
exempted them from Tithes for their Lands in their own Tenure, and this was by
his Bull dated 1186. Their first Abbot was Durandus, who governed twelve years
2. Dionisius 12. 3. Rogerus de Tikehill 8 4. ^iugo de Waddeworth 5. 5 Osmundus
39. 6 Reginaldus 15. 7 Richardus 16. 8 Walter 14. 9 Alanus. 10 Iordanus. 11
Philippus.

[ Valued at 224 l. 2 s. 5 d. per Annum.]


THIS House was founded for Nuns, and endowed by Radulf de Nevil. With the
Licenses of Adam de Brus, and Ernald de Percy.

BASEDALE, in Yorkshire.
JOhn de Ever by his Deed dated An. 1304. released to Joan Prioress of
Basedale, and to the Convent of the same, and their Successors, all homage and
suit of Court for all their Lands holden of him in Kirkeby, Cliveland, and
Ingelby. William de Percy and others were Benefactors to this Nunnery; all
whose Gifts were recited and confirmed by King Henry the III. in the twentieth
year of his Reign. Robert de Longo Campo Abbot of St. Mary's at York and the
Convent there, granted to these Nuns a Coemitery for themselves, but their
Servants and Tenants to be buried at the Parish Church.

Guido de Bouincurt was the Founder of this Priory of Nuns.

( Valued at 20 l. 1 s. 4 d. per Annum.)

SALLEY, in Yorkshire.
THIS Abbey was founded by William de Percy An Dom. 1147. Matilda Countess of
Warwick, Daughter or the said William, was a great Benefactress to this Abbey,
and gave them the Church of Tadcaster, Agnes de Percy her Sister and Heiress,
did add to her bounty. William Vavasor gave and confirmed Malgarus Vavasor had
given to this House, placing his Confirmation (una cum Corpore meo) together
with his own body on the Altar of the blessed Mary de Sallay; providing thereby
that in case he happens to die within the Kingdom of England, that his Body be
John de Lacy Constable of Chester was among others a Benefactor to these Monks,
An. 1223. William de Percy who founded this Abbey, was Grandson to William de
Percy who came into England with Matilda who was married to William Earl of
Warwick, but died without issue, and Agnes married to Goseline Lovain, Brother
to the Duke of Brabant, the issue of this Match kept the name of their Mothers
Family, and are the Progenitors of the Earls of Northumberland. This Abbey was
wasted and part of it burnt down by the Scots in their Wars.

[ Valued at 147 l. 3 s. 10 d. per Annum.]

RUFFORD, in Nottinghamshire. Founded 1148.
THIS Abbey was founded and endowed by Gilbert de Gaunt Earl of Lincoln. Many
were the Benefactors, whose Gifts were confirmed to the Abbot and Monks here,
with the Grant of diverse Privileges in the Forest of Shirewood, by King Henry
the III. in the thirty sixth year of his

[ Valued at 176 l. 11 s. 6 d. per Annum.]

SALTRE, in Huntingtonshire. Founded, An 1147.
SImon Earl of Northampton founded and endowed this Abbey with all his Saltre,
and with all the Marish Ground between that and Witlemare, and in Witlemare,
etc. With very large Immunities and Franchises, such as his Ancestor Judith
Countess of Huntington (Neice of the Conqueror) had formerly obtained of her
said Uncle for this Town and Saltre, as (inter alia) to be exempt from the
County and Hundred Courts, to find neither Man nor Arms for the War, etc. The
abovesaid Countess Judith had a special Love for this place, and did very
Monasticon. Controversy arising between the Abbot of Ramsey and the Abbot of
Saltre, about their Rights in Withlesmare and Vlbemare, the matter was
determined by a final Concord before the Kings Justices at Huntedon, Anno 3.
Rich.

[ Valued at 141 l. 3 s. 8 d. per Annum.]

KIRKSTALL, in Yorkshire.
THIS Abbey was first founded by Henry de Laceio in the year 1147. and first
instituted with a Convent of Monks under their Abbot Alexander, from the Abbey
of Fountains. Their first Habitation was at Bernolswick, but this place proving
to these Monks very inconvenient on diverse accounts, after they had been here
somewhat above six years, they removed to a place called Kirkestall, in a Valley
called Aierdale, which place was then only inhabited by some Hermits: This
William Pictavensis who owned the Soil, at the yearly Rent of five Marks. Their
first Abbot Alexander governed the Monks here thirty five years, and after his
death was succeeded by Radulfus Hageth, and after him Abbot Lambert, to whom
succeed Abbot Helias, who at first was refused by the then Patron Roger de
Lacy, but became afterward much in his favor. King John did some ill Offices
to this Abbey in taking from them some of their Lands. Robert de Lacy, who died
Anno 1194. was accounted a second Founder of this Abbey.

William the Conqueror gave to Ilbertus de Lacy, who came into England in his
Army, all Blackburnshire (in the County of York) with the Lordship and Honor
of Pontfract, and other Lands. This Ilbertus built the Castle at Pontefract,
and in it a Chapel for a Dean and Canons. Son of this Ilbertus was Robert Lacy
who built the Monastery of Pontefract, who was the Father of Henry Lacy the
Founder of this Abbey of Kirkstall, this Henry married the Sister of William
Vesci Rector of Berwick. Of Roger Constable of Chester, who hearing that his
Lord Ranulphus Earl of Chester was distressed in Wales, raised on the sudden a
great Force among the Shoo-makers and Stage Players of Chester, and with them
went and relieved his Lord from the Power of the Welsh; whereupon the said Earl
Ranulph granted to him and his Heirs the Dominion Chester for ever. His Son and
Heir John de Lacy became the first Earl of Lincoln of this name, Anno Dom.
1221. and died 1240. From the Heirs General of this Family did descend Our
Kings of the House of Lancaster.

[ Valued at 329 l. 2 s. 11 d. per Annum.]

DOOR, in Herefordshire.
RObert Earl of Ferrars founded this Monastery, and endowed it with Lands, to
hold free and quit of all secular Service, by the Rent of three shillings
yearly to be paid at the Feast of St. Peter ad vincula: and this was expressed to
be given not only for the Health of the Souls of his (propace and stabilitate
totius Angliae and Walliae) for the Peace and Stability of all England and
Wales. King John by his Deed dated in the seventeenth year of his Reign gave
diverse Lands to the Church of the blessed Mary at Door and the Cistercian Monks
there. Walter de Clifford and others were Benefactors. All whose Gifts were
confirmed to Henry the III. in the seventeenth year of his Reign. Vid. Vol. 2.
p. 918.

[ Valued at 101 l. 5 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

SIBETON, in Norfolk. Founded An. 1150.
William Son of Robert Fitz Walter. The Lands given to the Monks here were
confirmed by King Steven and King Henry the II. The said Robert Fitz-Walter was
Faith's at Horsham, and married Sibill Daughter of Radulfus de Cayneto, who
came into England with the Conqueror; from whom descended the Families of
Cressi and Vfford.

[Vid. Vol. 3. p. 32.

[ Valued at 250 l. 15 s. 7 d. ob. per Annum.]

STANLEIGH, in Wiltshire.
THIS Abbey was first founded by Maud the Empress at Lokeswell in the year 1151.
and three years afterward translated to Stanlegh, by her Son King Henry the
II. The Monks of this House came from Quarre Wight. King Richard the II.
confirmed to them all their Lands, and took them into his protection.

[ Valued at 177 l. 0 s. 8 d. per Annum.]

JERVAL, in Yorkshire.
AKarius Fitz-Bardolf (a potent man in Yorkshire, in the time of King Steven)
gave to Peter de Quinciaco, and certain other Monks of Savigny, a parcel of
Land in Wandesleydale, for the erection of an Abbey of their Order, which Abbey
was at first called Fors, and afterward Iorvalle. Alan Earl of Britan and
Richmond, which Earl Alan, being present at the beginning of the Erection of
the first Buildings, prevailed with several of his Knights to be assistant to
the Work, and this was in the year 1145. Roger de Molbray gave also diverse
Lands to this House before his first Voyage to Jerusalem. The Peter inhabited
this House at first with only two Companions laboring with their hands for
their sustentation, but in a while they had of the said Earl of Richmond's
Gift, five Plows, forty Cows, sixteen Horses, three hundred Sheep, etc. After
this Serlo Abbot of Savigny (having a property in this House of Iorevalls by
reason that the first Monks came from thence) granted the same to the Abbey of
Biland. Whereupon the foresaid Peter submitted himself and Companions being two
Monks and one Lay-brother (conversus) to the Abbot of Biland. Roger Abbot of
Biland appointed John de Kinstan to be Abbot here, instituting him in these
words, I confirm thee Abbot and I commit to thee the care of Souls and the
Government of the Abbey of Joreval, with all its substance Persons and
Possessions now had or to be had, as well in Temporals as Spirituals, in like
manner as Serlo Abbot of Savigny gave the same to me. And then put into his
hands the Rule of St. Benedict etc. An. 1150. Hereupon the said Abbot appointed
to be of his Convent, the aforesaid Peter and his two Companions, with nine
Monks of Biland, who removed from thence to Iorvall. After this the Alan, and
his Son Conan Duke of Britan increased their Revenues, with the Gift of many
other Lands. In the year 1156. the said Conan translated these Monks from Fors,
the place being poor and East-Witton^ upon the River Ior, and this was by
permission and approbation of the Abbot of Cisteaux and the general Convent of
that Order. Alanus Earl of Britan, who was so great a Benefactor to this
Monastery, was Brother and Heir to Alanus Rufus, who was the Son of Eudo Earl
of Britan, who came into England with King William the Conqueror, and had given
him by the said King all Richmondshire. An. 1268, John Duke of Britan and Earl
of Richmond, confirmed the Donations of Henry the III. in the twelfth year of
his Reign.

[ Valued at 234 l. 18 s. 5 d. per Annum.]


RAdulf de Aby gave Lands here and elsewhere for the Foundation and Endowment
of a Nunnery in Greenfeild; which was confirmed by Hugh Bishop of Lincoln, and
Eudo de Greinesby, etc. John Son and Heir of Adam de Well gave to this House
10 l. per Annum for the finding of two sufficient Chaplains to celebrate for
him, and his Ancestors, and all the faithful in our Ladies Chapel in the
Priory Church here for ever, to the finding of which Margaret then Prioress of
this House did oblige her Successors by her Deed dated Anno Dom, 1348.

[ Valued at 63 l. 4 s. 1 d. per Annum]

CUMB, in Warwickshire.
RIchard de Camvilla gave Lands to the Abbot and Monks of Waverley, for the
founding of this Abbey of Cistercian Monks. Roger de Moubray confirmed the
Estate so given, to the Monks of Cumb, quit of all secular service.

[ Valued at 311 l. 15 s. 1 d. per Annum.]

STRATFORD-LANGTON, in Essex.
FOunded Anno. 1135. for Monks by William de Montefichet, endowed with all the
Lordship for Stradford in Westham, etc. All which Gifts were confirmed by King
Henry the II.

[ Valued at 511 l. 16 s. 3 d. per Annum.]


THE Abbey here was founded and endowed by Roger Earl of Hereford, their Lands
were confirmed by King Henry the II.

[ Valued at 112 l. 13 s. 1 d. per Annum.]

BLANCLAND, in Wales.
THIS was founded by John de Toryton: The Lands given to these Monks were
recited and confirmed by King John in the sixteenth year of his Reign. Vid.
Vol. 2. p. 918.

[ Valued at 135 l. 3 s. 6 d. per Annum.]

HOLMCOLTRUM, in Cumberland Founded An. 1150.
KIng Henry II seems to have been the Founder of this Abbey, King Richard the I.
in the first year of his Reign confirmed their Lands, as (...) also K. Henry
III. in the 39. year of his Reign. John Gernoun and Margaret John than held two
parts of the Manor of Wyggeton, by Cornage. As was found by Inquisition, 6 E.
3. Vid. Vol. 3. p. 34.

[ Valued at 427 l. 19 s. 3 d. ob. q. per Annum]

TARENT, in Dorsetshire.
THis Abbey was founded for Nuns of the Cistercian Order, by Richard Bishop of
Durham. John Queen of Scots gave to this House (cum corpore suo) with her Body,
Lands in Stanton in Cambridgeshire to the value of 20 l. per Annum. All the
Estate belonging to this Monastery was Henry III. who was also himself a
Benefactor.

[ Valued at 215 l. 7 s. 9 d. per Annum]

TILTEY, alias Wudeham, in Essex.
FOunded Anno 1152. This was first given by Maurice Son of Ieffery to the
Canons of the Church of St. John Baptist of Wodeham, and endowed with several
Lands, confirmed by King Henry II. After wards King Richard the first confirmed
the same Estate to the Monks here settled of the Cistercian Order, in the tenth
year of his Reign.

[ Valued at 167. 2 s. 6 d. per Annum.]

DEULACRES, in Cheshire.
ANno 1153. The Abbey of Pulton in Cheshire was founded by Robert Pincerna, it
was furnished with Monks of the Cistercian Order from Cumbermere, and was
therefore called a Daughter of that House. In the year 1214. the Convent was
translated from Pulton to Deulacres by Ralph Earl of Chester. This Ralph
afterward coming from his Expedition in the Holy Land, was in a great Storm at
Sea in the Night, confident of deliverance at Midnight, through the Suffrages
of these Monks, then at their Nocturnal Devotions, accordingly the Storm did
then begin to cease to the wonder of the Seamen. This Ralph and his Successors
Earls of Chester gave and confirmed diverse Lands and Possessions to this Abbey.

Vid. Vol. 2. page 919.

CLUNOK-VAUR, in Wales.
THe Original of this Monastery was by S. Benow of whom mention is made in the
Life of St. Winefrid. The White Monks here were of a newer Foundation. Guithin,
Uncle to one of the Princes of Northwales gave the Village of Clunok to Benow.
Vide Vol. 2. page 119.


FOunded and endowed with diverse Lands by Reese Prince of Southwales. The
Estate of this House, (called also Strata florida) was confirmed by King Henry
II. and King Edward I.

[ Valued at 118 l. 7 s. 3 d. per Annum.]


THis Abbey was founded for Nuns by Robert de Lekeburn, who was buried in the
Chapter house of this Nunnery; at whose Interment, his Son and Heir William,
declared publicly his confirmation of his Fathers Donations and Endowments,
adding of his own gift the yearly Rent of Franckalmoign. King John in the first
year of his Reign confirmed the Estate of this House.

[ Valued at 38 l. 8 s. 4 d. per Annum.]

STRATMARGEL, or Strata-Marcella, in Montgomeryshire.
FOunded An. 1170. by Madock ap Griffin; By his Deed dated An. 1222 he endowed
it with diverse Lands and Revenues.

[ Valued at 64 l. 14 s. 2 d. per Annum.]


THe first Founder of this House was John Constable of Chester, who endowed
Stanlaw were afterward translated to the Church of Whaley, at which the Abbot
and Convent of Salley in Torkshire were very much grieved, alleging among
other things that they were nigher to their Abbey Ryvalle and Belland. The
Church of Whaley was in being in the time when St. Augustine the Monk came into
England. The Rectors of which Church were in after times called Deans and not
Parsons, and were married men, who also had the ordinary Jurisdiction of the
Whaly, and the Chapels, which went from Father to Son, and the Cure of the
Churches was supplied by certain Priests, whom the Deans provided and presented
to the Bishop for his License. The Names of these Deans may be seen in the Book
at large. But after the Council of Lateran (1215.) it was no longer permitted
that this Church should go as an inheritance. Not long after this the Church of
Whaley was given by Henry de Lacy Earl of Lincoln, and Lord of Blagbornshire,
to the Monks of Stanlaw, who entered upon this their new Seat in the year 1296.
Dom. George de Norbury being then Nicholas the IV. The Deed of the said Henry,
whereby he gave this Church of Whally with all its Rights, Liberties and
Appurtenants, bears date in the year 1283. In the thirty fourth year of Edward
the III. Henry Duke of Lancaster, Earl of Derby, Lincoln, and Leicester, gave
diverse Lands to the Abbot and Convent of Whalley, for the maintaining of a
Recluse, or Anchorite, and his Successors, dwelling in a place within the
Churchyard of the Parish Church of Whalley, and for two Women their Servants;
who shall be there continually praying for the said Duke his Ancestors and
Heirs, viz to find them every Week throughout the year fifteen Loaves of the
Convent Bread, each Loaf weighing fifty shillings sterling, and seven Loaves of
the second sort, of the same weight; eight Gallons of the best Ale of the
Convent, and three pence for their Companage; to deliver them yearly at the
Feast of all Saints ten Stock Fish, and ten great Ling fish, one bushel of Oats
for their Potage, one bushel of Salt, two etc.

The first Founder of this House, John de Lacy, Constable of Chester and Lord
of Halton married Alice Sister of William de Mandeville, and Henry de Lacy
Founder of the Abbey of Kirkstall (of whom before.)

NUNAPLETON, in Yorkshire.
THIS Priory of Nuns was founded by Adeliza de Sancto-Quintino, and Robert her
Son and Heir, dedicated to God, St. Mary, and St. John the Apostle, and
confirmed by Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury. The John, in the sixth year of
his Reign. Among An. 1489. These were some. That the Cloister Doors be shut up
in Winter at Seven, and in Summer at Eight a Clock at night, and the Keys
delivered to the Prioress. That the Prioress and all the Sisters lodge nightly
in the Dorter, unless sick or diseased. That none of the Sisters use the
Alehouse, nor the Waterside where course of Strangers daily resort. That none
of the Sisters have their service of Meat and Drink to the Chamber, but keep
the Frater and the Hall, unless sick. That no Sister bring in any Man,
religious or secular, into their Chamber or any secret place day or night, etc.
That the Prioress License no Sister to go Pilgrimage, or visit their Friends
without great Cause, and then to have a Companion. That the Convent grant no
Corodies or Liveries of Bread, or Ale, or other Victual, to any Person, without
special License. That they take no Perhendinauncers or Sojourners, unless
Children, or old Persons, etc.

[ Valued at 73 l. 9 s. 10 d. per Annum.]

CODENHAM Priory, in...
COdenham was given to God, St. Mary, and St. John, by Eustachius de Merch, for
Nuns of the Profession and Order of the Nuns of Apeltun.


FOunded An. 1172. by Roger de Novo Burgo and Matilda his Wife, endowed with
diverse Lands by them and other Benefactors. All which was confirmed to the
Church of St. Mary of Bynedone and the Henry the III. in the eighteenth year of
his Reign. Henry de Novo Burgo granted power to the Abbot and Monks to choose
whom they pleased for their Patron, who thereupon chose King Henry the III. and
Alianor the Queen for their Patrons, which King accordingly took to him the
Patronage, Advowson, and Protection of this Abbey in the fifty sixth year of his
Reign.

[ Valued at 147 l. 7 s. 9 d. ob. q. per Annum.]

CROXDEN, in Staffordshire.
BErtram de Verdun built an Abbey for Monks at Chotes, Anno Dom. 1176. Anno
1179. The Convent removed from thence to Crokesden.

Abbots of this House.
1. Thomas, ob. 1229. 2. William de Choucomb. 3. William de Esseburn, ob. 1237.
4. John de Tilton. 5. Walter de London, ob. 1268. 6. William de Howton, ob.
1278. 7. Henry de Moysam. 8. John de Billesdon, ob. 1293. 9. Richard de
Twiford, ob. 1297.
A vacancy of above seven Months.

10. William de Evera. Richard de Esseby restored 1320. 11. Richard de Esseby,
displaced, 1313. 12. Thomas de Casterton.
The Founder of this House Bertram de Verdun died in the Holy Land, and was
buried at Acon, but most of his descendants were buried in the Church of this
Abbey. Vid. Vol. 3. p. 40.

[ Valued at 90 l. 5 s. 11 d. per Annum.]


THE Abbey at Keldeholm was founded for Nuns by William de Stutevill, and
endowed by the same William and several others of that Family. Confirmed by
King John in the second year of his Reign.

[ Valued at 29 l. 6 s. 1 d. per Annum.]


FOunded for Monks by Robert de Sancto-Martino, in the Reign of King Henry the
II. Anno Dom. 1176. Their Estate was confirmed by King Edw. the III. in the
tenth year of his Reign. Vid. Vol. 2. p. 920.

[ Valued at 248 l. 10 s. 6 d. per Annum.]

WICKHAM, in Yorkshire.
THIS Nunnery was founded by Paganus de Wicham, whose Son Theobald, Alan
Buscell de Hoton, and the Prior of Bridlington, were Benefactors. King John
confirmed their Estate in the 2 d. year of his Reign.

[ Valued at 25 l. 17 s. 6 d. per Annum.]


THIS Abbey of Monks was founded by Lewelin Son of Gervasius, Prince of North
Wales, and by him endowed not only with large Possessions in Lands, but with
great Immunities and Privileges, as to be An. 1198. King Edward the I. in the
twelfth year of Aberconway to a place called Maynan which he had built to the
honor of God, St. Mary, and all Saints, endowing it with Lands and Franchises.

[ Valued at 162 l. 15 s. per Annum.]


INgeram de Muncels confirmed the Gift of his Father Alan de Muncells of the
Town of Cotun, and other Lands, to the Church of the blessed Mary of Cotun and
the Nuns there. Pope Alexander granted them diverse Hugh Bishop of Lincoln
settled the Constitutions of their House, ordering among other things, that the
number of the Nuns should not exceed thirty, that no Nun after Profession
should have property in any thing, that no Nun should be or speak with any
Person, whether secular or religious, alone, without witness, etc.

[ Valued at 46 l. 17 s. 7 d. per Annum.]


FOunded An. 1201. By William Briwer. Their Lands were confirmed to the Monks
of this Abbey, by King Hen. III. in the 11th. year of his Reign.

[ Valued at 294 l. 18 s. 6 d. per Annum.]

BEAU-LEIU, in Hampshire.
KING John being offended with the Cistercian Order in England, and the
Beau-leiu in Newforest, for thirty Monks of that Order, An. 1204.

Vid. Vol. 2. p. 921.

[ Valued at 326 l. 13 s. 2 d. ob. q. per Annum.]

MENDHAM, in Buckinghamshire.
THIS was a Cell to Woburne, founded by Hugh de Bolebec, and confirmed John in
the second year of his Reign. The Convent of this Abbey came hither from Woburne
in the year 1204.

[ Valued at 20 l. 6 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

GRACE-DIEU, in Wales.
THIS Abbey was founded by John of Monmouth An. 1229. or according to others
1233. King Edw. 3. in the thirty fifth year of his Reign granted to this Abbey
the Hermitage of St. Briavello in the Forest of Dene for the finding and
maintaining of a Chantery of two of their Monks, to celebrate there for the
Souls of his Ancestors.


ANon 1246. Richard Earl of Cornwall and King of the Romans founded this Abbey
of Hayles for twenty Monks who came from Beau-lieu. An. 1251. the Abby-Church
was dedicated, the King, and Queen, and thirteen Bishops, being present at the
Solemnity.

[ Valued at 357 l. 7 s. 8 d. ob. per Annum.]

NEWENHAM, in Devonshire.
FOunded An. 1241. by Reginald de Moun, in his Manor of Axeminster, Edw. 3.
This Reginald de Mohun was the Son of Reginald Lord of Dunsterre, and Alice
Daughter of William Bruer, by whom he inherited the Manor of Axeminster. See
in the Book at large the Progeny of the noble Family of Mohuns.

Abbots of this House.
John Godard. Henry Sper sholt. John de Ponte-Roberto. Ieffrey de Blanchvil.
Hugh de Cokeswell. John de Northampton. William de Cornubia. Richard de
Chichestre. Richard de Piderton. William le Fria. Ralph de Shapewike. Robert de
Puplysuirie. John de Cokyswill. John de Geytingtone, ob. 1338. Walter de House.
[ Valued at 227 l. 7 s. 8 d. per Annum.

GRACE-DIEU, in Leicestershire.
FOunded by Roesia de Verdun, for Nuns. Endowed by her with her Manor of
Beleton, etc.

LETLEY, in Hampshire.
KING Henry the III. was-the Founder of this Abbey of Letley, otherwise called
Locum Sancti Edwardi, and endowed it with Lands in the thirty fifth year of his
Reign.

[ Valued at 100 l. 12 s. 8 d: per Annum.]

REWLEY, in the Suburbs of Oxford.
THIS was founded in the year 1281. for Cistercian Monks, by Richard Earl of
Cornwall, and King of the Romans, who endowed this Abbey with diverse Lands. They
were found by Inquisition to be exempt from suit to the County and Hundred
Courts.

[ Valued at 174 l. 3 s. ob. per Annum.]

DERNHALL, in Cheshire.
KING Edward the I. founded and endowed this Abbey in performance of a Vow made
in a great danger at Sea, his Deed of endowment bears date before he came to
the Crown, in the four and fiftieth year of his Father's Reign. King Henry the
III. granted his Letter of Request to all Religious Houses in England for the
furnishing this House with Books. After King Edward came to the Crown in the
seven and twentieth year of his Reign he translated these Monks to Vale-Royal,
and granted them

Vid. 2. Vol. p. 921.

[The Abbey of Vale-Royal was valued at 118 l. 7 s. 6 d. ob. per Annum.]


FOunded by Amicia Countess of Devon, for Cistercian Monks; endowed by her and
her Daughter Isabella de Fortibus Countess of Albemarl and Devon, with many
Lands and Liberties. Confirmed by King Edward Anno 4.

[ Valued at 241 l. 17 s. 9 d. ob. per Annum.]


ANno. 1223. Henry de Audiddeley founded and endowed this Abbey with many Lands
and Liberties to hold in pure and perpetual Richard the II. in the 19th year of
his Reign, at the request of Elizabeth relict of Sir Nicholas de Audley,
Licensed the Abbot and Convent of Blanchland in Normandy, to transfer to this
House the Priory and Manor of Cameryngham, which was thence forward united to
this Abbey.

[ Valued at 75 l. 14 s. per Annum.]

The Abbey of Grace, near the Tower at London.
KING Edward the III. founded this House in the Churchyard of the Holy Trinity
near the Tower at London, and endowed it with all the Messuages and Gardens
lying on and about the Tower Hill, Anno Reg. 24. (1350.) Afterward in the
fiftieth year of his Reign he gave the Gravesend, and other Manors in Kent to
be settled upon this House. All which was after done and confirmed by King
Richard the II. Anno Regn. 22.

[ Valued at 546 l. 10 s. per Annum.]

A CARTHVSIAN MONK
Vol 1 P. 949



Of the Carthusians.
Anno Dom. 1080. By a certain learned man named Bruno, who professing
Philosophy at Paris and hearing the dead Body of his Friend, who had the Esteem
of a very good Man when living, cry out as they were about to bury him, Iusto
dei judicio damnatus sum, he and six Companions forsook the World; and betook
themselves to a most austere Life in a Desert and Melancholy Place called
Cartusia, in the Diocese of Grenoble in France. Their inward Habit is of
Hair-Cloath; they never eat flesh; on Fridays fast with Bread and Water; never
stir out of their Monasteries, except the Prior and Procurator; observe almost
continual silence; and suffer no Women to enter into any part of their Houses,
no, not their Churches. See more of their Rules in the Monasticon at large.

WITHAM, in Somersetshire.
KING Henry the II. founded this Monastery in the honor of the blessed Mary,
St. John Baptist, and all Saints, for the Order of Carthusians, and endowed it
with diverse Lands and Franchises. Imprecating

HENTON, in Wiltshire.
ELa Countess of Sali^bury, Widow of William Longespee Earl of Salisbury,
founded this Monastery in her Park of Henton, for Carthusians, to the honor of
God, the blessed Mary, St. John Baptist, and all Saints; and endowed it with
Lands and Liberties.

King Henry the III. in the four and twentieth year of his Reign granted and
confirmed to this House the same Liberties and free Customs which his
Grandfather King Henry the II. had formerly granted to the Carthusians of
Witham, with other Exemptions.

The Carthusians in the Suburbs of London.
KING Edward the III. in the forty fifth year of his Reign granted Walter Lord
of Manny, to found this Monastery for Carthusian Monks in a certain place
without the Bars of West-Smithlsied, called Newe-cherche-hawe, which House was
to be called la Salutation mere dieu, and to endow the same with twenty Acres
of Land there adjoining.

Pope Urban, reciting that in the time of a great Pestilence Sir Walter Manny
purchased this ground for a Churchyard to bury poor People in, and there
intended to erect a Chapel and a College of twelve Chaplains, by the License
of Pope Clement the VI. but afterward the said Sir Walter changing his
intention, and erected here a Convent of Carthusians: the said Pope Urban
granted his Bull of License for uniting to the said House of Carthusians,
Ecclesiastical Benefices to the value of 200 l. per Annum.


IN the year 1343. Nicholas de Cantilupo Lord of Ilkeston, by License of King
Edward the III. founded this House in his Park of Gryseleve, in the County of
Nottingham, for a Prior and twelve Carthusian Monks, to the glory of God, the
blessed Virgin Mary, and all Saints, and endowed it with Lands and Rents in
Greseleye and Seleston.

Nicholas de Cantilupo was lineally descended from Robert de Muskam, Seneschal
or Steward to Gilbert de Gaunt that famous Soldier in the Army of William the
Conqueror, from which Gilbert the said Robert de Musk^m enjoyed the Lordship of
Ilkeston, conferred upon him in the Reign of King Henry the I.

Elizabeth Widow of Brian Stapleton Knt. and William Ryther Knt. and Sibilla
his Wife, by License of King Richard the II. founded in this Church a Chantry,
for the maintenance of two Chaplains, Monks of this House, to celebrate daily
for the Soul of William de Aldeburgh, etc.

St. ANNE, adjoining to Coventry.
THIS was first founded in the year 1381. by William Lord de la Zowche, and
first supplied with three Monks from the Carthusians London, and with three
others from Bellevalle. Besides the said Lord Sowche they had many other
Benefactors, as Richard Luff Mayor of Coventry, John Holmeton of Sleford, John
Bokington Bishop of Lincoln, Thomas de Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, etc. who
erected several parts of their Buildings. In the year 1385. King Richard the
II. became the principal Founder, with his own hands laying the first Stone in
the Foundation of their Church, protesting publicly to be the Founder and to
finish the Buildings. Ediweston in the County of Rutland, by the Abbot and
Convent of St. George de Bauquerville, in Normandy, with other Prior alians
Lands, etc.


MIchael de la Pole Knt. Lord of Wingfeild, by his Deed dated at Kingston upon
Hull 1378. Founded and endowed this House without the Walls of Hull for a Prior
and twelve Carthusians, Monks, in lieu of Minnoress Nuns of the Order of St.
Clare, as his Father in his life time had once intended. The House was founded
to the honor of God, and the glorious Mary, and of St. Michael the Archangel,
and all Angels, and holy Spirits, St. Thomas the Martyr, late Archbishop of
Canterbury, and of all other Saints of God. And by assent of the Prior of the
Great Carthusians in Savoy, the chief House of the Order, Walter de Kele was by
the Founder made the first Prior of this House.

Vid. 2. Vol. p. 930.

MOUNT-GRACE, in Yorkshire.
THomas de Holland Duke of Surrey, Earl of Kent. and Lord Wake, sounded this
House for Carthusians in his Manor of Bordelby, near Cleaveland in Yorkshire,
to the honor of God, the Virgin Mary, and St. Nicholas, willing the House to
be called the House of Mount-Grace of Ingelby, and by assent of the Prior of
the Grand Carthusians, made Robert Tredewy the first Prior of the same.

King Henry the VI. ratified and confirmed this Foundation, in Parliament, in
the ninteenth year of his Reign.

EPWORTH, in the Isle of Axholme, in Lincolnshire.
KING Richard the II. in the twentieth year of his Reign granted his License of
Mortmain to Thomas Earl of Nottingham Marshal of England to found a Convent for
Carthusian Monks on his Land at Epworth, in the lsle of Axholme, in
Lincolnshire, and to name it the Visitation of the Mother of God, to the honor
of God, the Virgin Mary, St. John the Evangelist, and St. Edward the King and
Confessor, and to endow the same with one hundred Acres of Land; Licensing also
to the Abbot of St. Nicholas in Angiers. of the Order of St. Benedict, to grant
over to this House their Priory of Monks Kirkeby, in Warwickshire, etc. to be
appropriated to Carthusians for ever, in pure and perpetual Alms.

Pope Bonisace the IX. in the eighth year of his Pontificate granted Indulgence
to such who should visit this Church of the Carthusians on the second of July
being the Feast of the Visitation of the blessed Mary, and contribute

This was a plenary Indulgence, and of the same manner with that which was
formerly granted to the Church of the Angels without the Walls of Assisium in
Italy, of which you may read in the Monasticon at large, p. 971, 972, etc.

SHEEN Monastery, in Surrey.
ANno Dom. 1414. King Henry the V. founded three Monasteries near Schene, one
of Carthusians, one of Celestin Monks professing the Rule of St. Bennet, and
one of Brigettines under the Rule of St. Augustine. The last was a Monastery of
sixty Nuns, thirteen Priests, four Deacons, and eight Lay-Brothers; the Men and
Women had two separate Convents, but one Church, in which the Nuns kept above
in a kind of Gallery, and the men below.

King Henry the V. by his Charter of Foundation dated in the third year
Carthusians, which he founded at Shene, on the North-side of his Manor there,
to be called the House of Jesus of Bethleem at Shene; and to this House he gave
the Lands of England, belonging to Abbeys in France, granting in the said
Charter that if any of the Lands so given should in time to come be evicted or
recovered from the Prior and Monks of this House or their Successors, that then
they should receive the like value yearly out of the Profits of the Hanaper in
the Chancery, and out of the Customs arising in the Ports of London, St.
Botulphs, Southampton, Lenn, and Cicester. Shene, four Pipes of Gascon Wine
yearly at the Purification of the blessed Mary for ever, with diverse great
Liberties and Exemptions from all manner of Taxes and Impositions, granting to
the said Prior, and Monks, and their Successors Felons Goods, etc. and that
they should have the return and execution pro Licencia Concordandi, and all
Amerciaments etc. Deodands, Treasure-trove, etc. Clerk of the Mercate, Wreck of
the Sea, etc. Free Warren in all their Demesnes and Lands already given or to
be given, though within the Bounds of a Forest, Soc and Sac, Insangenthef, and
Out fangenthef, and view of Frankpledge of all their Tenants and Residents,
with a Pillory and Tumbrel, and that they may erect Gallows on their Lands for
the execution of Malefactors, whom they should apprehend on their Lands
according to the said Liberty of Infangenthef and Outfangenthef, and that they
should have a Market weekly every Tuesday at their Town of Esthenreth in
Berkshire, and two Fairs yearly, with other such like great Privileges and
Immunities.

Additions, relating to the Benedictine Order.
WINCHESTER Cathedral Church. Supra p. 38.
SOme Remarks of the Founder and Royal Benefactors to the Church of Winchester,
Kings and Saints buried there, out of Leyland. Pope Innocent confirmed to this
Church all their Possessions with the grant of diverse etc. King Edgar restored
Monks in this Edward the Elder conferred on them certain Lands to hold free
from any secular service except what related toward the building of Forts and
Bridges.

SHAFTESBURY, in Dorsetshire. Supra 217.
KING John in the seventh year of his Reign confirmed to the Church of St Mary,
and St. Edward at Shaftesbury, and to the Nuns there, their Lands and
Liberties, among which was the whole hundred of the Manor of Bradford, etc.

St. FRIDISWIDE, in Oxford. Supra 174.
THE Possessions of this House were enjoyed by secular Canons for many years,
till in the year 1122. (22 H. 1.) they were again restored Maud the Empress
confirmed to the Church of St. Fritheswithe and the Canons Regulars, diverse
Lands and Churches, and granted them a Fair. The like did King John in his
first year.

St. WERBURG, at Chester. Supra 199.
ANno 1119. Richard Earl of Chester confirmed the Possessions of this House
given by many Benefactors, granting to the Abbot of this Monastery a Court of
Pleas, and that the said Abbot should not be sued nor be forced to sue out of
his own Court. Ralph de Meschines Earl of Chester, and his Son of the same
name, were great Benefactors to the Abbot and Convent of St. Werburg; so also
were Richard de Rullos and Robert his Brother.

WHITBY, in Yorkshire. Supra 75.
WIlliam de Percy having built and endowed in a Grove or Wood at Dunesle, a
Hermitage in honor of St. James the Apostle, he gave it for ever into the
Obedience and Subjection of the Church of St. Peter and St. Hylda of Whitby, so
that they continually cellebrate the Divine Office there by some Priest of
their House.

WULVERHAMTON, in Staffordshire.
IN this Town of Hampton, one Wulfruna, a religious Matron erected a Monastery
to the honor of God, the ever blessed Virgin Mary (then termed Stella maris
and Domina gentium) and of all Saints, and endowed the same with diverse Lands,
all which was ratified and established by Sigerich Canterbury, in the year 996,
by the Consent of King Ethelred. The Estate of this House was afterward
confirmed by King Edward the William the Conqueror, King Henry the II. and King
John, who gave Timber out of his Woods toward the buildings in this Abbey.


GLoucester became a Bishop's Seat in the year 189. soon after the Conversion
of King Lucius. Eldadym in the year 489. and Dubricius in the year 522. were
Bishops there. But the Seat was afterward removed to Menevia, now called St.
David's. Wolpherus Son of Penda King of Mercia, according to Malmesbury, laid
the first Fonndations of the Monastery here, after whose death Ethelred his
Brother and Successor carried on the Work, committing it to the care of Osric,
who for this purpose he made his Prorex or Lieutenant of this Province. This
House was first a Nunnery Bernulphus King of Mercia, placed here secular
Canons, who, though Clerks and Preachers, were married-men, and differed not
much in their Habit from secular Christians; thus it continued till in the year
1022. King Canutus displaced the Canons, and in their room put Regular Monks of
St. Benedicts Order. This Monastery being afterward burnt down, Aldredus
Bishop of Worcester rebuilt it in the time of King Edward the Confessor,
something distant from the place where it first stood, and more to the outside
of the Town. It was twice destroyed by fire since the Conquest, viz. in the
years 1214. and 1223. in the Reigns of Henry the III. and Edward the I. The
Buildings in and about this Church were increased and beautified by Thomas
Seabrook, Richard Haulaces; and Parker, who was the last Abbot here, and built
the South Porch of this Church.

TAVISTOCK, in Devonshire Supra 219.
IN the time of King Edgar, Earl Otdulphus Son of Ordgarus begun this Ethelred,
An 981. Pope Celestine in the year 1193. granted Plympton, of the Order or St.
Augustine, did oblige himself and Successors to the Abbot of Tavestock and his
Successors for the performance of diverse Services and Offices in his Deed
mentioned. King Henry the VIII. Richard Banham then Abbot of Tavistock and his
Successors to be Lords of Parliament, and to enjoy all Honors and Privileges
of such; and moreover in case they should at any time be absent from Parliament
on the Affairs of their House he pardoned such their absence, they paying for
every whole Parliament that they shall be absent five Marks.

NORWICH. Supra 413.
HErbert Bishop of Norwich translated the Monks hither from Thetford. This
Bishop besides the Church at Norwich, caused to be built the Churches at
Elmham, Lyn, and Yarmouth, and died An. 1119.

STOKE-CLARE. Supra 535.
RIchard de Clare Earl of Hertford gave to this House the Hermitage of
Standune, that Divine Service might be there celebrated for him and his. The
Donations and Endowments given to this House were confirmed by Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury; and by Pope Alexander, 1174.

St. Mary de Pratis, at Northampton.
THIS was a Priory of Cluniac Nuns founded by Simon de St. Liz, Earl of
Northampton, which Foundation, and all the Lands given thereunto as well by the
said Earl Simon as others, was all at large recited and confirmed by the
Charter of King Edward the III. in the second year of his Reign. Which may be
seen from p. 1011. to p. 1019.

[ Valued at 119 l. 9 s. 7 d. q. per Annum.]

PILLA Priory, in Wales.
ADam de Rupe founded here a Priory for Benedictine Monks of Tiron, which
Priory he endowed with diverse Lands and Liberties. Dedicated to God, St. Mary,
and St. Budoco.

HENINGHAM, in Essex.
FOunded and endowed for Benedictine Nuns, by Abericus de Ver, Earl of Oxon,
and dedicated to God, St. Mary, St. James, and the holy Cross. Hugh de Ver Earl
of Oxford founded without the Gates of the Castle of Hegham, an Hospital for
poor and impotent People; which that it might Hegham, nor to the Parish Church
there, was to be governed by certain Ordinances then made, among others, that
the said Hospital should pay Tithes as well great as small to the Parish
Church, and that the Chaplains of the said Hospital before they are admitted,
should swear fealty to the Prioress of that Priory.

[ Valued at 29 l. 12 s. 10 d. per Annum.]

LAPLEY, in Staffordshire, a Cell to St. Remigius, at Rhemes.
GIven by Algarus an Earl of England; the Appropriations belonging to this
Priory were allowed by Walter Bishop of Coventry and Litchfeild, 1319. King
Edward the I. in the twentieth year of his Reign, granted to the Abbot and
Convent of St. Remigius at Rhemes, a Market in their Manor of Aston in
Staffordshire on the Tuesday, weekly, and a yearly Fair on the Eve and Day of
St. Peter Ad vincula; with free Warren in their Demesnes of Lapley, Merston,
and Aston.

TOTNES, in Devonshire.
JVhellus Son of Alured gave the Religious House here for a Cell to God and the
holy Martyrs St. Sergius. and St. Bachus, and to the Abbot of that Monastery at
Angiers in France That they should pray for the good Estate of King William the
Conqueror while living, and after his death for his Soul, and for him the said
Iuhellus and all his Relations.


THIS was founded for a Prior and six Monks; given by the said Iuhellus, and
confirmed by King William the Conqueror to the Cluniac Monks of the Abbey of St.
Martin de Campis at Paris. The Church of St. Peter at Barnstaple was
apppropriated to this Priory by William Bishop of Exeter, by Deed dated, An.
1233. The same William Bishop of Exeter did also by his Deed recite and confirm
the Lands and Privileges given to this Priory by Joel Son of Alured, before
named.

The Priory of St. James without the Walls at Exeter, for a Prior and four
Monks. Supra 643.
THIS Priory, with diverse Lands and Privileges, were given by Baldewin de
Riveriis Earl of Exeter, to the foresaid Cluniac Monks Martins Abbey at Paris,

The Priory of St. Clare, in Wales.
FOR a Prior and three Monks. This was given with nine Houses at Lundon, by
William Giffard Bishop of Winchster, to the foresaid Clunia^ Monks of St.
Martins Abbey at Paris. Confirmed by King Hen. the I.

SWINE Abbey, in Yorkshire. Supra p. 834.
MAtilda Prioress of Swine, and the Convent of Nuns there, did covenant with
Sir Alexander Hilton, Knight, who had given them nine Bovates of Land in Swine,
that in case the said Sir Alexander should die in the year 1241. or in the
second year after, that then three Bovates of Alexander; in case he die in the
third year, then six of the said Bovates should return to the Heirs of the said
Knight, but in case the said Sir Alexander should keep the said Nuns
indempnified for the said three years, then the Nuns to give back the said Land
with the Deed of Feoffment after the expiration of the term of six years, etc.

BYLAND, in Yorkshire. Sup. 775.
THE History of the Foundation of this Abbey was writ at large by Phillip the
third Abbot of this House; and is in short as follows, In the Reign of King
Henry the I. Anno Dom. 1134. After the Foundation of the Abbey of Furnes, whose
Monks came from Savigny in France, an Abbot and Convent of twelve Monks went
from the Abbey of Furnes, to Called in Copland, then newly erected, the Abbots
name was Geraldus; here they remained for about four years, till in the year
1137. being plundered and their House almost wholly destroyed, they were forced
to return back to Furnes, but being refused entrance there, and distressed for
want of a Thurstan Archbishop of York, and partly out of pity to their
Condition, relieved by Gundrea relict of Nigellus de Albeney, and Roger de
Molbray her Son; which Roger settled them for a time at a place called H^de, a
Hermitage belonging to one Robert de Alneto a Hermit; who upon their arrival
resigned the place to them, and became a Monk among them, this was in the year
113^ The said Roger gave these Monks for their maintenance the Tithe of all the
Provision spent in his House, for the collecting of which they had a
Lay-brother (Conversus) always remaining in his House, who collected the said
Tithe, and sent it to the Monastery; but this being found, in time,
inconvenient, was not long after changed into an Endowment of Land, An. 1140.
After this Abbot, Geraldus seeing the Estate of his Monastery increase, and
fearing that the Abbot of Furnes would claim it, by Savigny, the Mother House
of Furnes, and obtained from the Abbot there in a general Chapter of the whole
Order (An. 1142.) to be discharged of all subjection to Furnes, and to be
immediately subject to Savigny. This Abbot Geraldus dying in his return home,
Roger then Master of the Novices, was unanimously chosen Abbot, and so
confirmed by the Archbishop of York, at the Presentation of Roger Molbray their
Patron. After this the Abbot of Furnes placed another Abbot and Convent at
Called. An. 1143. Roger de Molbray gave to these Monks the Town and Church of
Bellalanda, or Biland, with the Appurtenants, whether they afterward removed
their Habitation. When Abbot Roger perceived the Inhabitants of Scalton (a Vill
belonging to Biland) to suffer diverse Inconveniences in coming to the Mother
(...).

THE Allen Priories, suppressed in the second year of Henry the V. An. Dom. 1414.
were in number one hundred and forty two, whose names see in the Book at large.

The Religious Houses suppressed by Pope (...) the VII. and granted to Wolsey by
King Henry the VIII. in the seventeenth year of his Reign for the building of
two Colleges, at Oxford and Ipswich, were in number one and twenty; and
afterward six more by another Bull of the same Pope, which were granted also
to the said Cardinal for the same purpose, by King Henry the VIII. in the
twentieth year of his Reign.

An exact Catalogue of the Religious Houses was made in the twenty Henry the
VIII. ^sque ad
with the Annual Values of almost Wales as England. Which Catalogue was (...)
incerted into the Books of First Fruits and Tenths.

Out of which Catalogue I have set down the Valuation of the Annual Rents of
each House, under the proper Head, in the foregoing (...) except some few not
then valued.

Having said something in the beginning, of the Institution of the Monastical

The Augustine Confession, says, That Monasteries were heretofore Schools of
sacred Learning, advantageous to the Church, and that Pastors and Bishops came
from thence. Calvin in his Institutions, says, Monastic Colleges were then as
Seminaries of the Ecclesiastic Order; and gives a very great Encomium of their
manner of Life and Piety, Charity to the Poor, and Humanity, out of St.
Augustines Epistles.

Hyperius says, That Monasteries at their Institution were no other than
Convents of Good men, and Students; Schools where the Elder did teach the
younger Religion, where they did spend their time in writing, and disputing,
and instituting those who afterward arrived to eminent places in the Church,
as to be Bishops or Priests, etc. William Perkins, says, That

The Preamble of the Stat. 27 H. 8. c. 28. (omitted in the printed Act,) for
the Suppression of certain Religious Houses, (viz. under the value of 200 l.
per Annum) has these Words, Forasmuh as manifest sin is daily used, and
commonlycommitted in such little and small Abbeys and Priories, etc. where the
Congregation of such religious Persons is under the number of twelve persons,
etc. Considering also that diverse and great solemn Monasteries of this Realm,
wherein, thanks be to God, Religiou is well kept and observed, be destitute of
such full numbers of religious Persons as they might and may keep, etc.
Therefore the said lesser Monasteries were dissolved, and their Lands given to
the King.

Sir Edward Coke, in his 4th. Institut. p. 44. says, In the Reign of Henry etc.
It was therefore projected, that if the Parliament would give unto him all the
Abbeys, Priories, Nunneries, etc. that for ever in time then to come, he would
take order that the same should not be converted to private use, but first that
his Exchequer for the Purposes aforesaid should be enriched. 2dly. The Kingdom
strengthened by a continual maintenance of forty thousand well trained
Soldiers with skillful Captains and Commanders. 3dly. for the Benefit and Ease
of the Subject, who should never afterward in any time to come, be charged
with Subsidies, Fifteenths, Loans, or other common Aides. 4thly, Least the
honor of the Realm should receive any diminution (there being nine and twenty
Lords of Parliament among the Abbots and Priors, who held of the King per
Baroniam) the King would create a number of Nobles. The said Monasteries and
their Possessions were given to the King, his Heirs and Successors. Now observe
the Catastrophe; not long after the dissolution of the Monasteries, the said
King demanded and had two Subsidies, and exacted diverse Loans.

There were in the Reign of Henry the VIII. 645. Monasteries and Religious
Houses, forty of which being granted to Cardinal Wolsey for the Endowment of
his two Colleges: Soon after, as the Pope had given these to the Cardinal, the
King with the Parliaments assent took the rest. An. 1536. those under 200 l.
per Annum, were granted, amounting to 376, and soon after the Remainder, being
in all 605 Monasteries. Besides them, were given 96 Colleges, 110 Hospitals,
and 2374 Chantries and free Chappells. The Revenue of all which, is wished to
have been bestowed for the Advancement of the Church, Relief of the Poor, etc.
rather than conferred with such a prodigal Dispensation on those who stood
ready to devour what was sanctified. To this purpose one Henry Brinklow a
Merchant of London, made a Complaint to the Parliament of the Abuse that
followed in relation to Appropriations, which as he said were the best
Benifices, and did amount to the third part of all the Parish Churches in
England. Touching the Alms (says he) that they dealt, and the Hospitality that
they kept, every man knows that many thousands were well received of them,
and might have been better, if they had not so many Great men's Horses to feed,
and had not been overcharged with such idle Gentlemen as were never out of the
Abbeys. But now that all the Abbeys with their Lands and Impropriated
Parsonages are in Temporal men's hands, where 20 l was given formerly to the
poor yearly, in more than one hundred places in England, is not one meals meat
given; where they had always one or other Vicar that either preached or hired
some to preach, now there is no Vicar at all, but the Farmer is Vicar and
Parson too.

Herbert in his History of Hen. VIII. says, That the King was petitioned that
some of the Houses, both for the Virtue of the Persons in them, and for the
Benefit of the Country, (the Poor receiving thence great Relief, and the richer
sort good Education for their Children) might be left for pious Uses; Bishop
Latimer also moved that two or three might for those ends be left in every
Shire. But Cromwell (by the King's permission) invaded all. However the King
thought fit to have this Proceeding confirmed by Act of Parliament. But the
Christian World (says my Lord Herbert) was astonished at these doings. Beside
the Houses and Lands taken away, there was much money made of the present Stock
of Cattle and Corn, of the Timber, Lead, Bells, etc. and chiefly of the Plate
and Church Ornaments, which is not valued, but may be conjectured by that one
Monastery of St. Edmunds Bury, whence was taken five thousand Marks of Gold and
Silver, besides diverse Stones of great Value.

The End of the First Volum.
MONASTICON ANGLICANUM, ABRIDGED.

VOL. II.

OF THE Canons Regular Of St. AVGVSTIN, HOSPITALERS, TEMPLARS, GILBERTINES,
PRAEMONSTRATENSES, and MATURINS, or TRINITARIANS

OF THE ORIGINAL OF CANONS.
OF the Author of this Institution there is great variety of Opinion. In the
Proem.
Some ascribe it to the Aportles, others to Pope Urban the I. about the year of
Christ 230. Others to St Augustine; Others to Pope Gelasius the I. about the
year 495. etc. Canons were first introduced in England by one Berinus, An.
Christi 636. The Canonical Life being by little and little relaxt and fallen
off, Canonical Clerks were in the Council of Mentz, An. 813. reduced back to
their first manner of living, viz. to live in Common, to have but one Table,
one Purse, and one Dormitory. About An. 1083, it was enjoined that no Canon
should dare to become an Abbot or Monk under the penalty of Excommunication. In
process of time Canons becoming loose and disorderly, another sort of Canone
began to be taken notice of, who observing a stricter Discipline, were called
Canons Regular, and the others Canons Secular. The Canons Habit is a white
Tunick with a Linen Go^^ under a black Cloak. St. James the Apostle and the
first Bishop of Ierussaem, is said first to have assumed the Linen Tunick,
after the manner of the ancient Levitical Priests.

This Order had formerly in Europe four thousand five hundred and fifty five
Monasteries, In Italy seven hundred. Popes of this Order there have been thirty
six, Cardinals three hundred, Holy men and such who have been reckoned in the
Catologue of Saine seven thousand five hundred.

For the Canons of this Order were made three Rules.

The first Rule which St. Augustine made for his Brethren, who promised to live
together in Common, consists of nine Chapters; and treats of the Community of
Goods, Self-denial, etc.

The second Rule of St. Augustine appoints the manner and time of Praying,
Singing, Reading, Working, Living, and Conversing, and consists of Five
Chapters.

The third Rule of St. Augustine, treats more largely of those things which
appertain to the Community of living among Clerks, and consists of Forty Five
Chapters.

A CANNON REGVLAR OF St AUGUSTINE.
Vol. 2. p 1.



MONASTICON ANGLICANUM.
Vol. II.
Of the Order of St. AUGUSTINE.
DOVER, in Kent.
JVlius Caesar having Conquered Britain (now called England) forty seven years
before the Birth of Christ, built a Tower at Dover where the Castle now stands.
In the year of Grace 180, King Lucius then reigning in Britain, became a
Christian under Pope Elutherius, and among other Pious Deeds built a Church in
the Castle of Dover. An. 469, King Arthur repaired the said Castle, and built
the Hall there called Arthur's-hall. After this the Saxons came out of Germany,
Conquered Britany, beat the Britons into Wales, who afterward were called
Welchmen, and the Saxons Englishmen, and being Pagans, demolis^t Churches, and
suppressed Christianity throughout the Land. An. 586. Pope Gregory sent St.
Augustine the Monk with others into England, who converted to Christ the King
then reigning in Kent, named Adelbert, whose Son and Successor Adelbold placed
twenty four Secular Canons in the said Castle to serve in his Chapel there.
An. 686, Withred King of Kent built the Church of St. Martin, in the Town of
Dover, and removed the said Canons thither, from the Castle; here they remained
400 years after. He built also three other Churches for the use of the
Parishoners, which were however Chapels subordinate to St. Martins. Henry the
I. in 1130. did give the said Church of St. Martin to the Archbishop of
Canterbury and his Successors, and though William Corboil then Archbishop, built
the New Minster, and designed to have made it an Abbey of Canons of St.
Augustine, yet after his death Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury, in the Henry
the II. put Monks of St. Bennet therein. The said King Henry the II. by his
Charter subjecting the Government of this House to the Archbishop of Cantebury
entirely, and that no other Order but that of St. Bennet should be herein. King
Edward the III. in the thirtieth year of his Reign did unite and annex this
House to the Priory of Christ-Church in Canterbury for ever, so that none for
the future should be Prior here, but a Monk of Canterbury.

[Valued at the Suppression at 170 l. 14 s. 11 d. ob. per Annum.]


KING Henry the III in the seven and fiftieth year of his Reign confirmed to
the Prior and Canons of Bodmine, the Manor of Newton, in the County of Devon,
formerly given them by King Eadred, with Exemption from suit to the County of
Devon and Hundred of Shefbury, etc.

[ Valued at 270 l. o s. 11 d. per Annum.]

St. GERMAINS, in Cornwall.
IT was found by Inquisition in the thirtieth of Edw. the III. That King Canute
endowed this Church, and that here was then a Bishops Seat for Cornwall, which
was after united to Cryditon, and in the Reign of Edward the Confessor, removed
from thence to Exeter; and that soon after, Leofricus then Bishop of Exeter did
remove from hence the Secular Canons, and did found here a Priory of Canons
Regular, and that hereupon the Bishops of Exeter for the time being became
Patrons of this Priory, and enjoyed the Profits of the Vacations of the said
Priory when they happened.

[ Valued at 243 l. 8 s. per Annum.]


HERE was formerly a College consisting of a Dean and four Prebendaries,
founded by some of the Saxon Kings, which Canons or Prebendaries were displaced
by Will. Warwist Bishop of Exeter, because they Plimpton, and the said
Foundation confirmed by King Hen. Edgar gave them diverse Lands for the
Maintenance of two Canons, ad divina ibidem celebranda, and pro peregrinis and
aliis hospitandis. -- Afterward Edward the I. granted to the said Canons, that
for the future they might appoint and place in the Church of Landoho, where the
said Revenue did arise, a Secular Vicar and Chaplain to celebrate there, and to
perform the said Alms and Hospitality, nomine dictorum Prioris and Canonicorum.

[ Valued at 912 l. 12 s. 8 d. ob. per Annum.]


THIS Monastery was built to the praise of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the
holy Cross, by Earl Harold (afterward King) who endowed the same with diverse
Lands and Goods. All which were confirmed, with the Grant of great Liberties,
by King Edward the Confestor, An. Dom. 1062. Which Harold being slain in
Battle, by William the Conqueror, was buried in this Abby-Church. An. Dom.
1177. The Secular Henry the II. who confirmed their Estate and Liberties, and
ordained Richard.

[ Valued at 900 l. 4 s. 3 d. per Annum.]

PENTNEY, in Norfolk.
FOunded to the honor of God, the glorious Virgin Mary, and the blessed Mary
Magdalen, by Robert de Vauz, and by him endowed with diverse Lands and Churches.
This Robert came into England with the Conqueror, from whom descended by an
Heir General the Lords Roos

[ Valued at 170 l. 4 s. 9 d. per Annum.]

WALSINGHAM, in Norfolk.
GAlfridus de Favarches endowed a Chapel here, which his Mother had founded in
honor of the perpetual Virgin Mary, with diverse Revenues; confirmed by Robert
Brucutt, and Roger Earl of Clare. The Chapel Edward the Confessor, but the
Canons introduced in the time of William the Conqueror. Here was a Thomas de
Felton, etc. in the Chapel of St. Ann in the Priory, consisting of four
Chaplains. 8. R. 2.

[ Valued at 391 l. 11 s. 7 d. per Annum.]

THREMHALE, in Essex.
GIlbert de Montefixo, or Munfichet, who was a Roman by birth, and Kinsman to
the Conqueror, came into England in his Army, and having attained large
Possessions here, gave Land in Thremhale for the building a Religious House
with some small Possessions; and returning to Italy, the place of his Nativity,
lest issue Richard de Munfichet who gave to God and the Church of St. James the
Apostle at Thremhale, diverse Lands and Privileges; from this Richard are
descended by an Heir General the Veres Earls of Oxford, who became Benefactors
to this House.

[ Valued at 60 l. 18 s. 7 d. ob. per Annum.]

The Priory of Huntington.
EVstachius the Viscount, who also held the Barony of Lovetot, founded the
Priory of St. Mary of Huntingdon, and endowed it with diverse Henry the I. In
the Town of Huntingdon were in former time ^i^teen Parish-Churches, though at
present there remains but four. David Bruce Earl of Huntingdon was buried in
this Priory. Pope Eugenius confirmed to the Canons here all their Lands and
Privileges, An. Dom. 1147. and so did King Henry the III. in the seven and
thirtieth year of his Reign.

[ Valued at 187 l. 13 s. 8 d. per Annum.]


FOunded by Ethelred Earl of Marches and Ethelfleda his Wife before the
Conquest, for Prebendaries, who translated hither the Body of St. Oswald from
Bardney. But soon after the Conquest, this College being impropriated to the Sea of York that Archbishop changed the Prebendaries here to Canons Regular.

[ Valued at 90 l. 10 s. 2 d. ob. per Annum.]

BARNEWELL, near Cambridge.
IN the time of William the Conqueror lived one Picot, a Norman, a Person
Hugolin his Wife being much devoted to St. Giles, made a Vow in her sickness to
erect a Monastery to that Saint, which Vow her Husband confirmed; this was
erected near the Castle in Cambridge, and six Canons Regular placed therein
under the Rule of one Galfridus de Huntedon. But Picot and his Wife dying
before their intended Charity was fully completed, and Robert their Son being
after their death accused of Treasonable Practices for which he fled the
Kingdom, King Henry the I. seized upon his Barony, and gave it to a Paganus
Peverelle, who finding this House fallen to decay, undertook to restore it, and
increase the Canons to the number of thirty. To this end he obtained of the
King a Cambridge, called Barnewell, of sweet and delicate Situation: here he
built a very fair Church, and removed the said Canons hither with great
Solemnity from the place of their first Foundation in Cambridge, Anno Dom.
1112. after they had continued there just twenty years. From this Paganus
Peverell the Patronage of this Priory descended by an Heir General to the
Peches An. Dom. 1284. Gilbert Peche gave the Patronage of this Monastery to
King Edward, for ever. The abovesaid Paganus Peverell was Standard Bearer to
Robert Son William the Conqueror in the holy Land. The Particulars of their
Revenue was found by Inquisition 3 E. 1. which see in the Book at large. The
foresaid Gilbert Peche, by his Deed dated 1256. granted to the Canons of this
House liberty to choose their own Prior, but that upon the death of the Prior,
one or two of the Canons should come to him, if in England, and acquaint him
therewith, and desire his leave (as Patron) to proceed to a new Election, that
thereupon they should proceed, and

[ Valued at 256 l. 11 s. 10 d. per Annum.]

NOSTELL, in Yorkshire.
RObert de Laci founded the Church of St. Oswald at Nostell, and endowed the
same with diverse Lands and Revenues, for Canons Regular, granting them free
liberty to Elect their own Prior. King Henry Henry the II. to this Priory, by
the name of the Church of Oswald the King and Martyr adjoining to the Castle of
Pontefract, in a place called Nastle. In the year 1231. the Prior and Convent
here leased their Estate at Canonthorp to William de Runeys, Knt. for his s. 4
d. per Annum, the said William causing Divine Service to be celebrated at the
Chapel there three days in every Week, viz. Sunday, Wednesday, and Friday,
with other Covenants.

[ Valued at 492 l. 18 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

BREDON, in Leicestershire.
RObert Earl of Nottingham gave to the Church and Canons of St. Oswald of
Nostla, the Church of St. Mary, and St. Hardulf of Bredon with diverse Lands and
Revenues to the same appertaining. Whereupon this House became a Cell to that
of Nostell immediately before treated of; yet by subsequent agreement between
the Prior and Convent of Nostell, and Walter, Advocate, or Patron of Bredon,
the said Prior should upon a Vacancy at Bredon, choose two of the Canons there,
or in case there should not be two fit Persons there then two of his own House,
of which two the said Walter should choose one, and then the said Prior and
Walter jointly to present the party so chosen to the Diocesan, to be Prior of
Bredon. Vid. Vol. 3. p. 41.

[ Valued at 24 l. 10 s. 4 d. per Annum.]

ANother Cell to Nostell was Woodkirk (or Wodechurche) in Yorkshire, endowed
for Canons by the Earls of Warren.

HYRST, in the Isle of Axholme, in Lincolnshire.
THIS was a Cell belonging to Nostell, endowed with Lands by Nigellus de
Albani, and Roger de Moubray.

[ Valued at 5 l. 10 s. 1 d. per Anunm.]

SCOKIRK, in Yorkshire.
Was another Cell to the foresaid Priory of Nostell. To which Gaufridus
Fitz-Pagan and others gave Lands and Tithes. William de Archis granted to the
Canons here half the Tithe of his Bread made in his House for ever in pure and
perpetual Alms.

[ Valued at 8 l. per Annum.]


KING Henry the I. gave to the Church of St. Julian, and St. Botolph of
Colchester, and to the Canons there the Tithes of all his Demesnes in Hetfeld,
with diverse Lands in and about Colchester; confirming to them other Lands which
they had of the Gift of Hugh Fitz-Stephen to hold in Serjeancy by the finding
of one Horse of the price of five shillings, and one Sack and one Prick, at the
King's charges when he makes War against Welsh for forty days. Pope Paschall
the II. by his Bull dated A D. 1116. granted to the Canons of this House, that
as they were the first of this Order in England, so they should be the first in
Dignity, and exempted them from all Secular or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
other than that only of Rome, and finally that they should choose their own
Superior, but present him when chosen to the Bishop of London to be Consecrated.

[ Valued at 523 l. 17 s. per Annum.]

HAGHMON, in Shropshire.
THIS was founded in the year 1100. (1. H. 1.) by William Fitz-Allen. King
Edward in the thirteenth year of his Reign confirmed to the Church of St. John
the Evangelist of Haghman, and to the Canons there, all their Lands and
Revenues given by several Benefactors, among whom were some of the Welsh
Princes. Vide infra 933.

[ Valued at 259 l. 13 s. 7 d. per Annum.]


FOunded and endowed by William Peverell. Confirmed by King Henry the II. With
the grant of diverse Liberties.

[ Valued at 175 l. 8 s. 2 d. ob. per Annum.]


FOunded and endowed by William de Lovetot, 3 Hen. 1. and dedicated to God and
St. Cuthbert: Which Estate was confirmed and increased by his Heirs. Pope
Alexander the III. by his Bull dated An. Dom. 1161. Hen. II. Vid. infra 937.

[ Valued at 239 l. 10 s. 5 d. per Annum.]

FELLEY, in Nottinghamshire.
THIS was a Cell belonging to Wyrksop (alias Radeford) given to that House by
Radulphus de Annesley and Reinold his Son, An Dom. 1152. (2. H. 2.) In the year
1343. William Archbishop of York appropriated Adingburgh to this Priory of
Felley for the increase of four Canons more, there being but five before, so
that for the future there should be nine, of which one to be Prior, reserving
out of the Fruits and Profits of the said Church a sufficient subsistence for a
perpetual Vicar,

[ Valued at 40 l. 19 s. 1 d. per Annum.]

LANTHONY, in Wales (after Translated to Gloucester.)
HERE was of old time a small Chapel of St. David, in a very solitary place,
where a Knight called William, belonging to the Family Hugh de Lacy, forsaking
the World, led an Heremitical Life; whose Ernisius Chaplain to Queen Maud, Wife
of King Henry the I. who became his associate in his Devotions and Austerity;
this was An. Dom. 1103. under the Reign of King Henry the I. In the year 1108.
they erected here a mean Church which was dedicated to St. John Baptist, by the
Bishop of that Landaff.
Diocese, and the Bishop of Hereford. Of these two Heremits Hugh de Lacy became
a Protector and Benefactor. After some time, these two, through the Advice
Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury were willing to increase their number and to
alter their poor House from a Heremits Cell to be a Monastery, and they chose
from all the Religious Orders then in being, that of the Canons Regular. A
certain number of Canons were thereupon assembled from the Monasteries of
Mereton, the holy Trinity at London, and Colchester, and established here at
Lanthony, over whom the foresaid Ernisius was made Prior; the number of Canons
being about that time forty, or more. And many their Benefactors besides Hugh
de Lacy, who conferred on them more Revenues than they were willing to receive.
Walter the Constable, being the chief Officer in the King's Court, and one
Ernisius, Robert de Retun was chosen Prior, but he being afterward made Bishop
of Hereford, Robert de Braci was chosen to succeed him. After the death Henry
the I. the Canons of this House were much afflicted and disturbed in their
Possessions here, whereupon Milo Earl of Hereford, the Kings Constable (and Son
of that Walter who became a Religious man among the Canons) gave them a piece
of Ground without the Walls of Gloucester for a new Seat, here they built a new
Church, which in the year 1136. was solemnly dedicated by the Bishops of
Worcester and Hereford, in honor of the blessed Mary, yet still this House
retained the name of Lanthony. After this Robert de Braci died and was buried
in the new Monastery at Gloucester, to whom succeeded William de Wycumb. And
now it was, that Mary at Gloucester was confirmed as John Baptist at Lanthony.
However the Canons being better pleased with their new Habitation, which was
much braver and richer than their old Seat in Wales, chose to inhabit at
Gloucester, removing and spoiling what they had at Lanthony. They became also
very licentious in their way of living. During this William their Prior falling
into Troubles and Vexation as well with the Canons of his own House, as Roger
Earl of Hereford the Patron, was forced to resign his Office; to Clement the
Sub-prior. This man reformed the Abuses that were in the Monastery, especially
as to the Church Service. From the aforenamed Milo Earl of Hereford, descended
by an Heir General the Noble Bohuns Earl of Northampton, Hereford, and Essex,
who by reason Hugh de Lacy, came into England with the Conqueror, but died
without issue, and his John in Lanthony the several Lands and Revenues given
them by their Benefactors. The Edward the II. in his eighteenth year. King
Edward the IV. in the one and twentieth year of his Reign gave the Priory of
Lanthony and all the Lands, etc. belonging to the same, to Henry Deen, then
Prior of the Priory of the blessed Mary of Lanthony at Gloucester, and to the
Canons there to be consolidated and united thereunto for ever, providing that
the Prior and Canons at Gloucester shall for the future maintain at Lanthony
one Prior dative and removeable at will, with four Canons to celebrate

[ Valued at 648 l. 19 s. 11 d. per Annum.]

CARLISLE, in Cumberland.
KING Henry the I. gave the Churches of New Castle upon Tyne, and Newbourne, to
the Canons of St. Mary of Carlisle. Besides that King, Scotland and many others
were Benefactors, all whose Gifts were confirmed by King Henry the II. And
others given by King Edward the I. and II.

[ Valued at 418 l. 3 s. 4 d. per Annum.]


THE Church here was built in honor of the blessed Virgin Mary by Iuga Baynard
Lady of little Dunmow, whose Son and Heir Golfridus Baynard by the assent of
Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury placed Canons herein, An. Dom. 1106. The
Estate here and that at Castle Baynard, in London, being forfeited by William
Baynard (An. 1111.) was given by King Henry to Robert Grandson of Gilbert Earl
of Clare, whose issue became Robert Fitz-Walter refusing to consent to King
John's unlawful love to his Daughter Matilda the Fair, that King seized upon
his Estate and Barony, and his Castle of Baynard at London; and Matilda, who
was then here at Dunmow, not admitting the Kings Suit, was poisoned in a mess
of Broth. These things occasioned the Barons Wars, which after a while were
again composed, and Robert Fitz-Walter restored to his Barony and the Kings
Favor as formerly, An. 1268. John Prior of this Church was suspended, and the
Conventual Church interdicted, because his tenth was unpaid the space of four
days, but Appeal being made, the Suspension was denied, and disowned.

Priors of DUNMOW.
(...) ob. 1120. (...) ob. 1163. (...) ob. 1179. (...) ob. 1208. (...) ob.
1219. Willielmus, ob. 1221. Thomas, ob. 1238. Johannes Pateford, ob. 1245. Hugo
de Steveinheth, ob. 1246. Edmundus, ob. 1247. Galfridus, ob. 1248. Johannes de
Codham, ob. 1270. Hugo de Posslington Cessit, 1279. Richardus de Wicham.
Stephanus de Noble, ob. 1312. Robertus.
10 August 1502. The Bells in the Steeple at Dunmow were consecrated; Michael;
the second in honor of St. John Evangelist; the third in honor of St. John
Baptist; the fourth in honor of the Assumption of the blessed Mary; the fifth
in honor of the Holy Trinity and all Saints.

Here was an ancient Custom continued till the dissolution of this Priory, that
if any married man would come and take his Oath before the Prior and Convent,
kneeling in the Churchyard upon two hard pointed Stones, That he never
repented of his marriage, nor had any brawls or contention with his Wife within
a year and a day, nor ever made any nuptial Transgression in that time, then he
was to have delivered to him with great Solemnity, a Gammon or Flitch of Bacon.
The Records of the House mention three People that have performed this, Steven
Samuel of Essex, 7 E. 4. Richard Wright of Norfolk, 23 H. 6. and Thomas le
Fuller of Essex, 2 H. 8.

[ Valued at 150 l. 3 s. 4 d. per Annum.]

The Priory of the Holy Trinity, in London.
THIS Church was founded by Richard Beumeys Bishop of London; and as it seems,
then called Christ-Church, who placed herein many Canons. Maud Wife of King
Steven, David King of Scots, and many others gave Lands to this Priory. King
Henry the I. gave to these Canons of the holy Trinity the Soke called
Cnihtengild, and the Church of St. Butulph, Soc and Sac, Tol and Theme, etc.
King Henry the III. in the eleventh of his Reign recited and confirmed the
several Lands and Revenues given to this Priory, in which Deed he mentions
Queen Maud Wife of King Henry the I. to be the Foundress of this House.

TAUNTON, in Somersetshire.
An. 10. E. 2. that this Monastery was founded by William Gifford Bishop of
Winchester, on a piece of Ground on the North-side of the Town of Taunton,
without the Eastgate. Among other of their Benefactors, was William de
Monteacuto Earl of Salisbury, who granted to the Canons here, the Manor and
Hundred of Dulverton, cum pertin. to hold in Fee-farm, at the yearly Rent of 10
l. Which demise is dated in the Chapter of the Priory of Taunton, 11. E. 3.

[ Valued at 286 l. 8 s. 10 d. per Annum]


THIS Priory was erected here, by one Sir Walter Bricet a Knight, and dedicated
to the holy Trinity. But by reason of the Inundation of the Sea the Canons were
not able to remain here, whereupon Sir John Pelham Knight, by License of King
Henry the IV. founded for them another Church and Habitation at Warbilton,
toward the Support of which the said King Henry the IV. in the fourteenth year
of his Reign granted the Manor of Withiam, then valued at 25 l. 5 s. 5 d. per
Annum, for twenty years, which Estate was part of the Possessions of Morteyn an
alien Priory, at that time ^eized into the King's hands by reason of his Wars
with France.

[ Valued at 51 l. 9 s. 5 d. ob. per Annum]

St. MARY-OVERIE, in Southwark.
FOunded by William Gifford Bishop of Winchester, who here instituted Warren,
and of the Moubrays were Benefactors to his Priory. King Steven gave the Canons
here (then Regulars) the tenth of his Farm of Southwark; Cicely Hereford gave
them her Lands at Ketebrok, confirmed by King John. Vid. infra, 940.

[ Valued at 624 l: 6 s. 6 d. per Annum.]

BRISET, in Suffolk.
THIS Priory was sounded in time of Herbert Bishop of Norwich by Radulphus
Fitz-Brian and Emme his Wife, to God, St. Mary, and the holy Confessor St.
Leonard. Which Founders endowed it with diverse Smithfield at London. From this
Radulph Fitz-Bryan descended Almaricus Peche, who confirmed Walter Bishop of
Norwich granted to this Almaric Peche to have a Chantery in his Chapel at
Briset, but that the Chaplain at his first admittance should make Oath in
presence of the Prior or his Procurator ( inspectis sacrosanctis Evangeliis)
that he would pay over all the Oblations which he should receive in the said
Chapel, to the Mother Church; and that he should not admit any Parishoner of
the Mother Church to any Sacrament unless in imminent peril of death; and in
sign of subjection to the Mother Church, that the said Almaric and all his
Family should repair thither to the Great Mass on five days yearly, viz.
Christmas day, Easter Day, Whitsunday, the Assumption of the glorious Virgin,
and St. Leonards-day.

CIRENCESTER, in Gloucestershire.
KING Henry the I. founded this Priory, by the Consent and Authothority of Pope
Innocent; (N. 2.)
and by the Council and common Applause of the Archbishops and Bishops, Princes
and Barons of the Kingdom, endowed it with diverse Lands and Revenues, as well
in the Town of Cirencester and County of Gloucester, as in Wiltshire,
Somersetshire, Dorsetshire, Oxfordshire, and Northamptonshire, also with the
Liberties of Soc and Sac, Toll and Theme, etc. Whose Royal Grant bears date A.
D. 1133. John was also a Benefactor to this House. (N. 2.)


[ Valued at 1051 l. 7 s. 1 d. per Annum.]

HEXHAM, or Hagustald in Northumberland.
THIS Town situate on the South Banks of Tine, was of old time magnificent and
great, and made a Bishops Seat by the blessed Wilfrid in the year 674. and so
it continued for above one hundred and (N. 3.)
viz. 1. Wilfridus, 2. Eata, 3. Tunbertus, 4. John, 5. St. Acca, 6 Fredbertus,
7. St. Alcmundus, 8. Tilbertus, 9. Ethelbertus, 10. Eadfredus, 11. Osbertus,
12. Tydferdus, after which it ceased to be governed by a Bishop of its own. The
Bishop of Durham exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction here, till in the Reign
of King Henry the 1. it was given to the Sea of Tork. In the year 1113. Thomas
then Archbishop of Tork placed here Canons Regular. John de Normanville, and
Robert de Insula were Benefactors to the Canons here. It was found by
Inquisition taken in E. 1. That Thomas the second, Archbishop of Tork, did
found and endow this Priory, the Lands by him given and by many other
Benefactors, were all found and set forth in particular; which see in the Book
at large, p. 93. 91, etc.

[ Valued at 122 l. 11 s. 1 d. per Annum.]

STODELY, in Warwickshire.
THese Canons were first established at Wicton by Peter de Stodley, and Stodley,
(O. 2)
and by him endowed with Lands, confirmed by King Henry the II. and King Edward
the III. in the first year of his Reign. To this House William de Cantilupo,
William Comin, and others were Benefactors.

[ Valued at 117 l. 1 s. 1 d. ob. per Annum.]


THE Priory here was founded by Richard Basset and Matildis Ridel his Wife, (O.
2.)
for Canons Regular, and dedicated to St. John Baptist. It was endowed with the
Town and Manor of Lodington (within the Bounds of which it stands) as also
that of Friseby, with the Tyths of several Churches, in the Neighborhood,
among others with the Church of Warleg and Chapel of Belton, and the Church of
Glaeston, in Rutland. Confirmed by King Henry the 1. and King Henry the II.

[ Valued at 399 l. 3 s. 3 d. per Annum.]

THURGARTON, in Nottinghamshire.
Peter at Thurgarton was founded and endowed with diverse Lands and Tithes by
Radulphus de Ayncourt. Many were the Benefactors to this House, among whom
several of the Family Vilers, all whose Gifts were recited and confirmed by
King Henry the II. Edward the III. in the seventeenth year of his Reign.

Valued at 259 l. 9 s. 4 d. per Annum.]

DRAX, in Yorkshire.
Nicholas, was founded and endowed with diverse Lands and Liberties by William
Paganell. By Indenture An. 1383. The Prior and Convent of this House did oblige
themselves, in consideration of twenty Marks received, to perform a yearly Obit
on the day of the Epiphany, for the Soul of Gilbert de Ounfravile late Husband
of Maud Countess of Northumberland.

[ Valued at 104 l. 14 s. 9 d. per Annum.]


FOunded and endowed by Bertram de Bulemer, and confirmed by his Grandson Henry
de Nevill. This Priory, as appears by the Charter of King Henry the II. was at
first given to Canons and Nuns, but the Nuns were afterward translated to a
place called Molesbi.

[ Valued at 151 l. 5 s. 4 d. per Annum.]


KING Edward the I. in the fourteenth year of his Reign confirmed the Estate
and Lands given to this House by Lewelin the Great, and others.

[ Valued at 70 l. 3 s. 8 d. per Annum.]

BOLTON, in Yorkshire.
ANno 1120. William Meschines, and Cecilia his Wife Lady and Heiress of the
honor of Skipton, founded and endowed a Monastery of Canons at Emmesey. which
House was dedicated in honor of the blessed Virgin and St. Cuthbert the
Bishop. In the year 1151. these Canons were Bolton, which Alice de Rumelli gave
them in exchange for other Lands of theirs. Which Alice being Heiress to their
Founder, Craven^ Their Lands given by their several Benefactors were recited
and confirmed by King Edward the II. in the fifth year of his Reign. This
Priory was in some sort subject to that of Huntingdon till discharged Celestin
the III. The Prior and Convent here granted to John de Insula Lord of
Rougemount to maintain a Chantery of fix Chaplains in the Church of Harewood,
etc.

[ Valued at 212 l. 3 s. 4 d. per Annum.]

KIRKHAM, in Yorkshire.
WAlter Espec and Adelina his Wife by the consent of King Henry the I. founded
the Priory of Canons of the Holy Trinity at Kirkham, and endowed the same with
diverse Lands and^ Tithes; inter alia, with the Tithes of Venison, and ferarum
silvestrium, which he and his posterity should take, and of all Foul taken in
his Rivers. Likewise the said Walter granted them the tenth Penny, or Tith, of
his Rents of his Lands in Northumberland. This Walter Espec was a man of a
Giant-like stature, Kirkham for Canons Regular. In the year 1261. William Lord
of Hamlak, among other things, granted to the Prior and Convent of Kirkham and
their Successors, in lieu of the Tithes of his hunting, three good wild Beasts
( tres seras competentes) also the Rent of 100 s. per Annum for other Tithes,
for which consideration the said Canons did quit their claim of Free-chace in
Hamelak.

[ Valued at 269 l. 5 s. 9 d. per Annum.]

LAUNCESTON, in Cornwall.
THIS Priory did stand on the West South-West part of the Suburb of the Town,
and was erected by William Warwist Bishop of Exeter, for which he suppressed a
Collegiate Church of St. Steven, having Prebendaries, and gave the best part of
their Lands to the Priory, and took the Residue himself. King John, and King
Henry the III. confirmed the Lands given

[ Valued at 354 l. 0 s. 11 d. per Annum.]

St. DENNIS, near Southampton.
THIS Priory was founded by King Henry the I. endowed with Revenues Henry the
II. King Seven, King Richard the I. Humphrey de Bohun, etc.

[ Valued at 80 l. 11 s. 6 d. per Annum.]


THIS Monastery was founded An. 1119. by Robert de Crepito Cord, in French
Creveceur, Anglice Creutor, for Canons Regular. Dedicated to St. Mary and St.
Nicholas. Diverse of the Name and Family of Creveceur Edward the III. in the one
and fortieth year of his Reign.

[ Valued at 362 l. 7 s. 7 d. per Annum.]


IN the Reign of King Henry the I. lived at Haselburge a certain Priest much
famed for Sanctity and for the Spirit of Prophecy, called Wulfrieus. In his
time William Fitz Gualter instituted Canons Regular here, and endowed them with
Possessions. But at his first undertaking this Foundation, Wulfricus told him,
that Those whom he designed to introduce here would not prosper in this place.
The said Wulfric died An. 1154.


GAlfridus de Clinton, Chamberlain to King Henry the I. sounded this Church for
Canons Regular, in honor of St. Mary, to whom he gave all his Lands at
Kenilworth, (except what he had retained to his Castle, and for making a Park)
with many other Lands and Liberties, all which he enjoined his Heir to observe
and not to violate on pain of his Gaufridus his Son confirmed his Father's
Gifts, and granted them Tithes of all manner of Provisions whatsoever that came
Killingworth. Henry his Son made the like Confirmation, Henry the I. recited
and confirmed all former Henry the II.

[ Valued at 538 l. 19 s. per Annum.]

STONE, in Staffordshire.
WVlfer King of Mercia, was Son and Successor to Penda, a Pagan and Ermenilda a
Christian Lady, Daughter of Exbert King of Kent, by whom the had two Sons
Wulfad, and Ruffin; and a Daughter named Werburg: which two Sons being baptized
by St. Cedda then a Hermit, and Wulfer who had apostatized from the Faith of
Christ, Cedd's Cell, he killed them both with his own hands, their Martyrdom
happened on the 9th. Calend. August. This sad News being known to the Queen,
she caused their Bodies to be Wulfer the King being horribly tormented in mind
could find no ease till he repaired to St. Cedd, who upon his repentance and
contrition, absolved him and enjoined him Mercia, and establish the Christian
Religion. This King hereupon built many Churches and Monasteries, among others
Peterborough Abbey; and in the place where the Martyrs suffered, was erected a
College for Canons then called Stanes, now Stone. In aftertimes one of this
House went to Rome as a Procurator from the rest, and obtained from the Pope a
Canonization for St. Wulfad and St. Ruffin. In the time of the Normans Conquest
Robert Lord of Stafford, (from whom the Barons of Stafford did descend) was
chief Lord of this Place; here did Inhabit at that time two Nuns and a Priest,
who were all slain by one Enysan de Walton, after which Murder, the abovesaid
Robert by advice of Geffry de Clinton, did Establish here, Canons instead of
Nuns. Nicholas de Stafford Son of Robert, gave this House as a Cell to
Kenilworth. King Henry the II. confirmed Wulfad.

[ Valued at 119 l. 14 s. 11 d. per Annum.]

BROKE, in Rutland, a Cell to Kenilworth.
HVgh de Ferrariis granted to the Canons of Kenilworth the Land of Broch, with
the Wood-ground and Essarts, and this was by the assent of Walchelin his
Nephew, and William his Brother, all which was confirmed to the said Canons by
King Henry the II.

[ Valued at 40 l. per Annum.]

LANERCOST, in Cumberland.
THIS House dedicated to God and St. Mary Magdalen, was founded and endowed
with large Revenues by Robert de Vallibus Son of Hubert de Vallibus, he granted
to the Canons here, inter alia, Pasture and feeding in his Forest of Walton,
for thirty Cows, and twenty Sows; with all the Bark of his Timber Trees in the
Woods of his Barony, with all all the dry Wood lying any where in his Forest
for the support of their Bernard Bishop of Carlisle, An. 1169. King Richard the
I. confirmed the several Lands, etc. given Herbert de Vallibus was the first
Baron of Gillesland, which Barony went by a Daughter to the Name and Family of
Multon, and in like manner from them to the Family of Dacres.

[ Valued at 77 l. 7 s. 11 d. per Annum.]

DUNSTABLE, in Bedfordshire.
HEre was formerly a very Woody place just in the meeting of those two Royal
Ways of Watling, and Ickneld, which made the Passage so unsafe and full of
Thieves, that there was hardly any Traveling. King Henry the I. desirous to
rectify this, caused the Woods to be cut up, and a Royal Mansion to be built
near the place which was called Kingsbury. He also caused Proclamation all over
the Kingdom that who ever would come and inhabit in that place, should have
Land for 12 d. an Acre per Annum, and enjoy the same Liberties and Freedoms as
the City of London does, or any other ancient Borough in the Kingdom, by this
means Dunning a noted Robber, who used to rob here, was named Dunningstable.
Besides the Liberties abovementioned this Town had two Markets weekly, and a
Fair at St. Peter ad Vincula for three days, and a Gallows for Felons. Within
the Limits of this Borough that King erected a Church in honor of St. Peter,
and built a Monastery for Canons Regular, to whom he gave the said Church, and
all the Borough with its Markets, Fairs, and Liberties, retaining only in his
own hands the Capital Mansion. All which, with the Grants of other Matters,
were afterward confirmed to them by King Hen. the II. and King Rich. the I.
King John did the like, and granted them also his House of Kingsbury, the said
Canons had also a Court of Pleas there of their own. Some of the Tenants held
in Capite of the Abbot, and some by Services to be done to the said Canons, but
all were Freemen.

[ Valued at 344 l. 13 s. 4 d. per Annum.]


THIS Monastery was founded and endowed with diverse Lands by King Henry the I.
who granted them all sorts of Liberties, and Freedom from Tributes, Taxes, and
Exactions, and that they should not be impleaded for any matter or thing unless
in the presence of him or his Heirs.

[ Valued at 257 l. 4 s. 4 d. per Annum.]

MERTON, in Surrey.
FOunded by King Henry the I. An. 1121. and by him endowed with the Town of
Merton belonging to his Crown, and large Liberties.

[ Valued at 957 l. 19 s. 5 d. per Annum.]

OSENEY, near Oxford.
RObert de Oilley (whose Uncle of the same name came into England with the
Conqueror, and obtained from him the Baronies of Oxford, and St. Waleries)
founded this Priory for black Canons among the Isles made by the River Isis
near Oxford. It is said that his Wife Edith took occasion to incite her Husband
to this Foundation, from the constant assembling and chattering of certain
Magpies in that place whenever she walked our thither for her recreation. The
Church here dedicated to St. Mary was built, An. 1129. Which said Robert
endowed the Canons Oxford, and several Lands and Churches in the Neighboring
Towns. Robert one of the natural Sons of King Henry the I. having married a
Daughter of the Founder, devoted himself to these Canons alive, or dead; and
gave them 10 l. of Land in his Manor of Waneting. The like did Henry de Oily
his Brother-in-Law out of his Manor of Hocnorton. The other Lands granted by
diverse Benefactors

[ Valued at 654 l. 10 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

RONTON, in Staffordshire.
THIS Priory was founded by Robert the Son of Noel, in a place then called St.
Mary des Essarz, and was a Cell to Haghmon in Shropshire. Whose Foundation and
Endowment was afterward confirmed by Thomas his Son, and by R. Archbishop of
Canterbury. Vid. inf. 940.

[ Valued at 90 l. 2 s. 11 d. ob. per Annum.]

PYNHAM, near Arundell in Sussex.
ADeliza, second Wife, and Widow of King Henry the I. (afterward married to
William Earl of Arundel) gave a parcel of Land then called Pynham adjoining to
Arundell, for the maintenance of two Chaplains. William Earl of Arundell gave
the same Land and more, for the maintenance of Regular Canons, and building a
Church to the honor of God and St. Bartlemew; he gave them also Common of
Pasture in his Meadow of Arundell for fourteen Cows, and two Bulls, etc. All
which Gifts Ranulph Bishop of Chichester.

LILLESHULL, in Shropshire.
THE Church here, dedicated to St. Alcmund, is said to have been first founded
by Adelfleda a Queen of Mercia, but afterward much amplified, and endowed with
ten Prebends, by King Edgar. Afterward Richard Beumeys Dean of this Church, by
assent of King Steven, and Authority of the Pope, gave this Church over to
Canons Regular, coming from St. Peter's at Dorchester, which new Monastery was
ded^cated Mary ever Virgin. Benefactors to this House were Alan la the Lady
Hillaria de Trussebut, etc. King Henry the III. confirmed their Estate. Vid.
inf. 941.

[ Valued at 229 l. 3 s. d. per Annum.]

GISEBURNE, in Yorkshire.
RObert de Brus, by the Council of Pope Calixtus the II. and Thurstin Achbishop
of York, founded this Priory to the honor of God and Mary, and endowed it with
diverse Lands as well at Gyseburn as elsewhere, and with the Churches of
Skeleton, and Heart, etc. Robert de Brus was a noble Norman Knight, who came
into England with the Conqueror, An. 1066. and obtained to himself the Castle
of Skeleton, the Lordships of Danby, Kendal, Anendule, Heart and Hertnesse,
Karlton, and diverse other Lands in the North. This Robert gave to his second
Son, of his own name, Anandal in Scotland, and Heart and Hertnesse in England,
and dying An. 1141. lies buried at Gisburne Priory of his own Foundation, to
whose Estate succeeded Adam de Bruise, from whom descended Peter de Bruise, who
dying without issue, An. 1273. his inheritance became divided among his four
Sisters, viz. Agnes, married to the Lord Walter Fauconberg, who had for her
purparty the Castle of Skeleton, etc. Lucia married to the Lord Marmaduke de
Tweng, who had with her Danby, etc. Margaret who Robert de Rose, and with her
went Kendale, and lastly Laderina married to the Lord John de Bellew, and had
for her part Charleton, etc. From Robert the second Son of the first mentioned
Robert de Brus, descended lineally Robert de Brus King of Scotland, who making
Edward the I. that King seized upon his Lands of Heart Hertnesse, as forfeited,
and granted them to the Lord Clifford. These Bruses of the younger House gave
diverse Churches in Scotland to this Priory, confirmed by William King of
Scotland. Vid. Vol. 3. p. 46.

[ Valued at 628 l. 3 s. 4 d. per Annum.]


THIS House founded and endowed by Steven de Manilio, was given as a Cell to
Guisburne by Hugo de Rudby, Chaplain to the said Steven, and by him appointed
Trustee for this purpose.

NUTLEY, in Buckinghamshire.
THIS Abbey, otherwise called, Sancta Maria de Parcho, was founded and endowed
by Walter Gifford Earl of Buckingham, and Ermigardis his Wife. Confirmed by
King Henry the II. and by King John with William Marescal and his Heirs, the
Gift of the Pastoral Staff of the Abbey of Nuteley. To the Canons here was given
the Church of all Saints at Bradley in the Diocese of Sarum; in which Parish
was founded a Chapel for Leperous Women; which Chapel, before it could be
dedicated by Iocelin then Bishop of Sarum, was publicly and solemnly declared
by Oath not to be any ways prejudicial to the Mother Church in Tithes or
Obventions, etc.

[ Valued at 437 l. 6 s. 8 d. per Annum.]

BISSEMEDE, in Bedfordshire.
HVgh de Bellocampo founded, and endowed this Priory with diverse Lands and
Commons, etc. He granted the Canons here besides other things, the Privilege
to have their Corn first ground at his Mills at Hetune, after that which should
be found on. All which was confirmed by Roger de Bellocampo. He granted also
the Tithes of his Park of Ettune, as well of his Woods as arable Lands. Pope
Gregory granted to this House diverse Privileges, as not to pay Tithes of

[ Valued at 71 l. 13 s. 9 d. ob. per Annum.]

BRIDLINGTON, in Yorkshire.
WAlter de Gant established Canons in the Church of St. Mary of Bridlinton, and
gave them all his Estate in that Town, and confirmed to them all other Lands
which his (homines) Tenants who held of him, had given them. Gilbert de Gant,
his Son, Earl of Lincoln, confirmed Henry the II. Gilbert de was born,
baptized, and educated in this Priory, and therefore disposed Richmond did use
in time of his Visitation to come to a Church belonging to these Canons with a
train of ninety seven Horse, one and twenty Dogs, and three Hawks, and in an
hours time all their Provision was utterly consumed, till at last this great
Oppression was prohibited by the Bull of Pope Innocent the III. Ralph de Nevil
granted to these Canons to take Stone out of his Quarry of Fivele, with a way
over his Ground, for the use of their Monastery, for ever.

[ Valued at 547 l. 6 s. 11 d. per Annum.]


RAherus founded the Church here in honor of St. Bartholmew for Canons of St.
Augustin's Rule, and himself became their Prior for Rome; while he remained
there he fell sick, and in his sickness made a Vow upon his return to Health,
and his Country, to build there an Hospital for the Relief and Solace of Poor
People. After this being restored to his Health, he began his journey homeward.
On the Way St. Bartholmew appeared to him in a Nocturnal Vision or Dream, and
directed him to build a Church in Smithfield at London, and name it to him.
London, he ob^ain'd the King's License for this Foundation, without which it
could not be effected, the Ground where the Building was appointed, being
within the Kings Marketplace. He began hereupon a double Work of Piety, the
Hospital in performance of his Vow, and the Church according as directed, both
not far distant; which last was founded, An. 1123. in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and memory of St. Bartholmew the Apostle. It is said that this
very Foundation in this place, was foretold long before in a Vision, to King
Edward the Confessor. Before Raberus began the Foundation of this Monastery,
the Ground here was all overspread with Filth and Dirt, and was the common
place of Execution of Malefactors. The Priory being built and Cannons Raherus
became their Prior, who obtained for their maintenance sufficient from the
Oblations of pious People, and from the King as large Liberties as any Church
in England enjoyed. Henry the III. confirmed all the Lands and Churches given
them by diverse Benefactors, namely, the place called Smithfeld, the Church of
St. Sepulcher de Ballio, London, cum pertinentiis suis infra Burgum and extra,
the Church of St. Michael Bassingshagh, etc. and that the Hospital of St.
Bartlemew in Smithfield should be in the Disposition and Subjection of the said
Prior and Canons.

[ Valued at 653 l. 15 s. per Annum.]


FOunded An. 1132. by Galfridus Trusbut, and by him endowed with the Church of
Wartre, and eleven Bovates of Land in the Field of that Town. Confirmed by Pope
Innocent the II.

Priors and Abbots of this House.
1. Joseph, Prior. 2. Radulphus, Prior. 3. Richard, Abbot. 4. Yuo, Abbot. 5.
Nicholas, Prior. 6. Richard, Prior. 7. Thomas, Prior. 8. Radulphus. 9. John
Lestyngham. 10. John de Dunelmia. 11. Robert de Lunde. 12. John Queldreke, in
his time the Hospital of St. Giles of Beverly was annexed to this House, A.
1278. 13. John de Thorpe. 14. Richard de Welwyk. 15. Robert Balne. 16. William
Feryby. 17. Henry Holme. 18. John Hemyngburgh. 19. William Tynyngton, deposed
by the Archbishop of York. 20. Robert Takel. 21. Thomas Ruland. 22. William
Wartre. 23. Robert Hedon. 24. William York. 25. William Spenser.
Several of the Trussebuts descendants of the Founder confirmed the Possessions
of these Canons; and so did Robert de Ros Lord of Beuver, An. 1279. being then
Patron (Advocatus) of this Priory. Pope Innocent James of Wartre diverse
Privileges, in the Case of non-payment of Tithes for their own Goods and
Stock, in the Case of a general Interdict, etc.

Valued at 221 l. 3 s. 10 d. per Annum.

TWYNEHAM, in Hantshire.
IN the Reign of King Edward the Confessor, there were Secular Canons in Christ
Church at Twyneham. Ranulph Flammard, a great Favorite under King William
Rufus, and afterward Bishop of Durham, was Dean of this Church. In the Reign
of King Steven Canons Regular were first introduced here. The aforesaid
Ranulphus, or Randulphus, new built the Twynham, which at that time bore the
name of the Holy Trinity. Richard de Redvers endowed it with Lands in the Isle
of Wight and elsewhere. Which Richard de Redvers was by King Henry the I. made
Earl of Devon, and had the Isle of Wight, and the Inheritance of this Twineham,
given to him. From whom descend the Courtney's Earls of Devon. Baldwin de
Redveriis confirmed the Estate given by his Richard to this Church, with the
Grant of large Liberties; which Baldwin was the first who introduced Canons
Regular into this Church, to whom his Son Richard de Redveriis junior, granted
the free Election of their Prior, and confirmed all their Possessions, An.
1161. Vid. Vol. 3. P. 45.

[ Valued at 312 l. 7 s. per Annum.]

HERYNGHAM, in Sussex.
KING Edward the I. granted his License to William Paynel to grant certain
Lands to the Prior and Canons of this House, for the finding of four Secular
Chaplains to celebrate for his Soul, in their Church, Statuto de terris ad
manum mortuam non ponend. edito, non obstante. Afterward, upon the Petition of
Matilda Neice, and heir of the said William, Edward the II. in Parliament, that
King granted that instead of the four Secular Chaplains, the said Prior might
for the future appoint four Regular Canons of his own House for that Office.
King Edward the III. granted his License to appropriate the Hospital of St.
Anthony at Coukham to this House.

St. OSITH at Chich, in Essex.
THE Priory of St. Osith the Virgin and Martyr at Chich, was founded by Richard
de Belmeis Bishop of London, who designed to resign his Bishopric and become a
Canon Regular here himself, but was prevented by death. The second Prior of
this House was Ralph afterward Canterbury. King Henry the II. confirmed all
the Possessions given to this Priory by several Benefactors, with the grant of
Chiche. King John granted the Patronage or Advowson of this Abbey to William
then Bishop of London and his Successors.

[ Valued at 677 l. 1 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

IXWORTH, in Suffolk.
GIlbert Blundus who came into England with the Conqueror, founded this Priory
of the blessed Mary of Ixworth near the Parish Church of that Town.

[ Valued at 280 l. 9 s. 5 d. per Annum.]


THIS Priory of the blessed Mary of Norton was founded and endowed by William
the Son of Nigellus Constable of Chester. Roger Constable of Chester confirmed
the Lands and Possessions given to these Canons in Nottinghamshire,
Leicestershire, and Oxfordshire, who also granted them diverse Privileges,
inter alia, to have two Deer, yearly, on the Feast of the Assumption, out of
his Park of Halton. When William Bastard, to whom King Edward the Confessor had
assigned the Inheritance of his Kingdom England, with him came Hugh to whom he
gave the Earldom of Chester. With this Hugh came a Nobleman called Nigellus, to
whom the said Earl gave the Barony of Halton and made him his Marshal, and
Constable of Chester, and further conferred on him many and great Privileges.
such as showed a particular favor to him more than any other Baron of
Cheshire^ William Son of this Nigellus founded this Priory first at Runcorn.
An^ 1133. which was afterward removed to Norton. From him (...) Roger
Constable Chester abovementioned, to whom Ranulf Earl o^ Chester, for a
particular Service done him in Wales, gave the Dominion of Shoo-makers and
Stage Players to hold to him and his Heirs for ever. This Roger died A. 1211.
and lies buried in the Monastery of Stanlowe. Of this Line descended the Lacies
Earls of Lincoln, and the Earls of Lancaster, Leicester, and Derby.

[ Valued at 180 l. 7 s. 6 d. ob. per Annum.]

NEWBURGH, in Yorkshire.
FOunded by Roger de Molbray, and endowed with diverse Lands and Churches; who
also confirmed what the Freemen of his Fee had given, or should give to the
Canons here. In the time of King William the Conqueror Robert de Mowbray was
Earl of Northumberland, who taking William Rufus for having banished Anselm
Archbishop of Canterbury, and destroyed eighty Religious Houses to enlarge his
Forest, was taken by the King, beheaded, and his Estate seized; and afterward
given by King Henry the I. to Negellus de Albeney, whose Mother was a Mowbray;
after which time the Albanies Molbray. Son of that Nigellus was the first
abovementioned Roger de Molbray, who founded this Priory, An. 1145. he founded
also the Abbey of Bellaland, and many other Religious Houses to the number of
thirty five. From whom descended Themas Mowbray who in the Reign of King Rich.
II. was made Duke of Norfolk, Earl of Nottingham, Lord Marshal of England, etc.
From whom descended two Coheirs, the Ann, was married to the Lord Thomas
Howard, who in the second year of King Edward the IV. was created Duke of
Norfolk.

[ Valued at 367 l. 8 s. 3 d. per Annum.]

HODE, in Yorkshire, a Cell to Newburgh.
HOde was at first demised to the Canons of Billalanda, by Robert de on
condition that they should here found an Abbey of their Canons. This was
confirmed by Roger de Mowbray. Adam Fossard gave Hode to the Canons of Newburgh
with Lands lying about the same, which Canons did acknowledge the said Adam to
be the Patron (Advocatus) of the said place, and of all belonging thereunto.

EGLESTON, in the Bishopric of Durham.
PHilip Bishop of Durham confirmed to God, St. Mary, and St. John Baptist, and
to the Canons of Egleston, diverse Lands which Gilbert de Ley held of him by the
service of one Knights Fee, and had given them. An. 1273. the Abbot and Canons
of this House covenanted with John Duke of Britany, and Earl of Richmond, to
find six Chaplains Canons of this House, to say six Masses daily in the Castle
of Richmond, for ever, the said Canons to be constantly resident in the said
Castle, in consideration whereof the said Earl of Richmond granted to the Abbot
and Convent of Egleston diverse Lands and Possessions, and a place apart in his
said Castle for the Habitation of the said six Chaplains, etc.

DORCHESTER, in Oxfordshire.
BEfore the Norman Conquest here was a Bishops Seat; Remigius translated it to
Lincoln. Alexander Bishop of Lincoln erected here an Abbey of black Canons; the
Body of which Church served for the Parish Church. After the Suppression the
East-part of the Abby-Church was bought by a rich man of this Town for 140 l.
and given to augment the Parish Church.

[ Valued at 219 l. 12 s. per Annum.]


FOunded by William Gross Earl of Albemarl, Anno Dom. 1139. Canons Regular were
introduced here from Kyrkham, under the Government of one Richard their Prior,
who was afterward made Abbot in the year 1148. by Pope Eugenius the III. Earl
William the Founder died, An. 1180. having endowed this Abbey with many Lands
and Revenues. Richard the I. confirmed all the Possessions given to the Abbey of
St. Mary of Thornton and the Canons there, with the Grant of large Liberties
and Immunities. Pope Celestine the III. granted them the Privilege not to pay
any Tithes of Cattle, etc. for their own use.

Abbots of this House were
1. Richard. 2. Philip, 1152. 3. Thomas, 1175. 4. John Benton, 1184. 5. Jordan
de Villa, 1203. 6. Richard de Villa, 1223. 7. Ieffrey Holme, 1233. 8. Robert,
1245. 9. William Lyncoln, 1257. 10. Walter Hoto^t, 1273. 11. Thomas de Ponte,
1290.
The Advowson of this Abbey, together with all the Lands, and Possessions
Albemarl, did escheat to King Edward the I. Which being thus in the Crown, King
Edward the III. in the sixth year of his Reign granted, by advice of the
Prelates and Barons in Parliament, that the said Advowson should remain ever
annexed to the Crown; and that the said Abbot should not be obliged to attorn to
any, in case any grant of the said Advowson should be made.

[ Valued at 594 l. 17 s. 10 d. per Annum.]

BRUMMORE, in Wiltshire.
BAldwin de Riveris and Hugh his Uncle, were the Founders of this Monastery for
Canons Regular, King Henry the II. confirmed the Lands given them, and granted
them feeding for one hundred Cattle; and one hundred Hogs in Newforest, and
dead Wood for their fuel as much as necessary.


THIS was a Priory of Nuns of St. Augustine, founded by Sampson de Forte,
Malcolm King of Scotland, as Earl of Huntington confirmed certain Lands to this
Church of St. Peter of Harewold, and to the Prior, William of Scotland. King
Henry the IV. of England gave to the Prioress and Nuns of Harewold, one
Message in Chakirstone of the yearly value of 2 s. with the Advowson of that
Church.

BRINKEBURNE, in Northumberland
FOUNDED by William Bertram, Hawys his Wife, and Roger his Son, for Canons.
Their Possessions were confirmed by William Earl or Northumberland, Henry Earl
of Northumberland Son to the King of Scotland, Henry. III.

[ Valued at 68 l. 19 s. 1 d.]

LEYE, in the I Will of Gersey, Diocese of Exon.
THIS was at first a Priory of Canons, but afterward in the Reign of King
Edward. I. it was changed to a Nunnery of Canonesses; it was dedicated to St.
Mary and St. John Evangelist.

BRIWETON, in Somersetshire.
WIlliam de Moyne Earl of Somerset gave diverse Lands, etc. to the Canons
Regular of this House, which was before the Conquest an Abbey of Monks founded
by Algarus Earl of Cornwall, but the said Moyne, Mohun, placed Canons here since
the Conquest. Sauvaricus Bishop of Bath and Glaustonbury confirmed to God and
the Blessed Mary of Briweton, and the Canons Regular there, the Lands, etc.
given by their Benefactors.

[ Valued at 439 l. 6 s. 8 d.]

BRADENSTOKE, in Wiltshire.
FOunded and endowed by Patricius Earl of Salisbury and Walter his Father.
William Bishop of Sarum appropriated diverse Churches to salvis Vicariis
ordinandis and taxandis. King Henry. III. confirmed all their Possessions.

[ Valued at 212 l. 19 s. 3 d. per Annum.]

NOCTON in Lincolnshire.
THE Priory of Nocton Park was founded by Robert de Areci, Lord of Nocton. It
was dedicated to St. Mary Magdelen. The Heir general of Norman de Arcy
descended from the Founder, married to John de Lymbury. The Possessions given
by several Benefactors were recited and confirmed by King Henry. III. in the
55th. year of his Reign.

[ Valued at 44 l. 3 s. 8 d. per Annum.]

WIGMORE in, Herefordshire.
OLiver de Merlymond chief Seneschal of all the Lands of Hugh de Mortimer,
Steven, built the Church of Schobbedon, which Town his said Lord Hugh de
Mortimer had given him in Consideration of Oliver being kindly entertained at
St. Victors Abbey at Paris in his return from a Pilgrimage, he was so highly
pleased with their good life and Regular devotion, that he afterward obtained
from that Abbey two of their Canons to come over and Institute a House of
Religion at his new built Church of Schobbedon, to which he annexed diverse Lands
and profits. But after this a great dissension arising between the said Hugh de
Mortimer and Oliver de Merlymond, in so much that the said Oliver departed from
his Service and went to Miles Earl of Hereford, Mortimer seized upon all his
Estates, and took from the Canons all the Goods which Oliver had given them,
whereby the said Canons were reduced to such extremity that they were about to
leave their House. But this Hereford, Mortimer not only restored them their
Lands, etc. of which he had deprived them, but gave them more, among other
Benefactions, the Church of Wigmore, and advanced their Prior to the title of
an Abbot. But soon after he took from them again the Town of Schobbedon, and it
was once more restored by mediation. After this these Canons removed their
habitation Eye, and from thence to Wigmore. After this they removed once more
into the Field of Beodune, where they built from the ground a Monastery and
Church, which Church was dedicated to St. James by Robert Folyoth then Bishop
of Hereford, the aforesaid Sir Hugh de Mortimer, conferring thereon at the
Dedication great Benefactions both in Lands, and Plate for the Altar. Which Sir
Hugh died a Chanon of this House, being very ancient. Whose Son and heir Sir
Roger de Mortimer behaved himself so unkindly to the Canons of this House, that
the Abbot and most of the Convent were forced, for some time to retire to
Schobbedon, but the differrence was made up by the Interposition of King Henry.
Isabell de Ferrers Widow of the said Sir Roger, built a House of Religion at
Lechelade after her Husbands decease, and endowed it with Lands for the good of
his Soul. The said Sir Roger though unkind at first, yet before his death

William the Conqueror brought into England with him in his Army, was Ralph de
Mortuomari one of the chief; which Ralph obtained to himself the Lordship of
Wigmore, and other Possessions in the Marches of Wales.

This Ralph built the Castle of Wigmore, and left issue Hugh and William, Hugh
became the Founder of the Abbey of Wigmore, as has been said, and endowed it
largely An. 1179. and dyed in this Monastery An. Hugh was Ralph de Mortuomari,
who being sent over into Normandy by King John in order to defend that Country
against the King of France, who had invaded and Seized all Normandy (because
King John refused tho several times summoned, to do homage for the same) was by
the said King of France taken Prisoner. During whose absence from these Parts
the Welsh invaded this Monastery of Wigmore, plundered the Canons of all their
movables, and burnt all the Buildings Ralph was Roger, who married Matilda
daughter of William de Breuse Lord of Bregnoc, and was so faithful an adherent
to King Henry III. against his rebellious Barons, that he was the chief means
of defeating that formidable Commotion, and establishing Roger, was Roger
Mortimer who was created the first Earl of March, An. 1. Edward. III. Which
Earl Roger was great grandfather of Edmund Mortimer who married Philippa Leonel
Duke of Clarence, second Son of King Edward. III. Which Edmund having buried
his said Wife went over into Ireland the Kings Lieutenant, and An. 1381.
departed this life in that Wigmore, with his Countess, and most of his
Ancestors. Which Edmund and Philippa had issue two Sons Roger, and Edmund, and
two Daughters Elizabeth and Philippa. Roger Mortimer was slain in Ireland, An.
1398. But left issue by his Wife Alianora Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, two Sons
Edmund and Roger, and two daughters Anne and Alianore. Anne was married to
Richard de Condsborough Earl of Cambridge. The two Sons, and the other daughter
died all without issue.

[ Valued at 267 l. 2 s. 10 d. ob per Annum.]

THORNHOLME, in Lincolnshire.
IT was found upon Inquisition at the Assizes at Lincoln, 4 John, that King
Steven founded this Priory and placed Canons in it. That Henry. II gave the
Manor of Aplebi, in which the Priory is situated, to William de Lungespe his
Brother, who after gave the Manor to John Maleherbe.

DERLEY, in Darbyshire.
Hvgh the Priest, entitled Dean of Derby, gave to Albinus, and his Canons of
St. Helens near Derby, the Land which he held at Little Derby, for the erecting
of a Church and Habitation for him and the said Canons, with diverse Lands of
his Patrimony. Which Estate the said Albin and his Successors, Abbots of this
House, quietly enjoyed all the time of the life of the said Hugh, and of Henry
his Son, which Son he begat in lawful marriage before he received holy Orders,
and of two daughters and heiresses of the said Henry, who dying in the Reign of
King Henry. III. that King supposing the said two daughters to dye without
heirs, claimed the Advowson of this Abbey as an Escheat Vid. Vol. 3. P. 57.

[ Valued at 258 l. 14 s. 5 d. per Annum.]

St. AUGUSTINS at Bristol, in Gloucestershire.
ROBERT Fitz Harding a Burgess of Bristol, to whom King Henry II. gave the
Barony of Berkly, built this Abbey, and gave to the Canons Regular of this
House, the Church of Berkly, with diverse others. Whose Estate was confirmed to
them by King Henry. II. while he was yet Duke of Normandy and Earl of Anjou:
also by John Earl of Morton, etc.

[ Valued at 670 l. 13 s. 11 d. ob per Annum.]


JOhn de Querceto (or Cheney) gave to God, and St. Mary, and the Canons of
Rudham diverse Lands, Churches, and Mills, and Duos homines scilicet G. and V.
and terram illorum, two of his Tenants with the Land which they Hervey Beleth
gave them the Manor of Rudham for the maintenance of an Hospital, by him
founded at Boycodeswade.

[ Valued at 121 l. 18 s. 10 d. ob. per Annum.]

BRUNNE, in Lincolnshire. (Bourn)
FOunded by Balwin Son of Gislebert, who endowed it with diverse Lands,
Churches, and Tithes of sundry kinds, An. 1138. The Wakes were principal
Benefactors to this House, and became Patrons of the same, being Lords of the
Manor of Bourn, and descended from the etc. which was allowed by King Edward
the II. who for that purpose granted his mandate to Matthew Broun Escheator for
the Counties of Lincoln, Northampton, and Roteland, in the seventeenth year of
his Reign, notwithstanding that some of the Possessions of this Abbey were held
of the King in Capite.

NEWENHAM, in Bedfordshire.
Paul in Bedford was a College of Prebendaries or Secular Canons, till one of
the Canons killing a Butcher, they were forced to remove their Habitation to a
place called Newenham, a Mile distant from Bedford, and there they became
Regular Canons. Roi^ia Wife of Paganus de Bellocampo, to whom King William
Bedford, and Simon her Son, were the founders of their House at Newenham. Which
Simon endowed them with diverse Lands and Possessions, among others the Church
of St. Paul at Bedford with all its Possessions, and the Tithes of the Mill of
the Castle Bedford, etc. These Canons had also large Liberties granted them on
the River, for fishing, and for keeping Swans as many as they pleased; seeding
Kerdington, free etc. All whose Lands and Liberties were confirmed to them in
15 R. 2. by Thomas Earl Marshall, and Earl of Nottingham, Lord Moubray and
Segrave, then Patron of this Priory.

[ Valued at 293 l. 5 s. 11 d. per Annum.]

St. RADEGUNDIS at Bradsole, in Kent.
KING Henry the III. confirmed the several Lands and Revenues given to this
House by sundry Benefactors, among whom Henry de Wengham Dean of St. Martins in
London. Vid. Vol. 3. P. 69.

[ Valued at 98 l. 9 s. 2 d. ob. per Annum.]

KIME, in Lincolnshire.
THE first founder of this Priory was Sir Philip de Kyme Knt. the Canons of
this House held Lands in Thorpe, and Billingey.

[ Valued at 101 l. 0 s. 4 d. per Annum.]

BUTLEY, in Suffolk.
FOunded by Ranulph de Glanvilla, and by him endowed with diverse Churches and
Lands, in the year 1171. This Ranulph de Glanvill was England, and left only
three Daughters, among whom he parted his Land before he made his Voyage to the
Holy Land, to the eldest who married one William de Aubervil, he gave the
entire Manor of Benhall and the Advowson of the Monastery of the blessed Mary
of Buttele, and to the other Sisters other parts of his Estate.

Vid. Vol. 3. P. 110.

[ Valued at 318 l. 17 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

NEW^STED near Guildford, in Surrey.
FOunded by Rualdus de Calua and Beatrix his Wife with the assent of William
Malbanc their Heir, in honor of the blessed Virgin Mary, and St. Thomas the
Martyr, in a place called Aldeburi in the Manor of Sands, for Canons Regular;
whose Estate was confirmed by King Henry the III. and King Edward the II.

BERLIZ, in Somersetshire.
THE several Lands, Churches, and Tithes given to the Prior and Canons of this
House, dedicated to St. Nicholas, by Matilda de Say^^d others, were confirmed
by King Henry the III. An. Regni 40. and by Edw. the III. An. 13.

WOMBRIGGE, in Shropshire.
FOunded by William Fitz-Alan. Dedicated to God, St. Mary, and St. Leonard.
Many were the Benefactors to this House, among whom the Lords of Cherinton gave
diverse Lauds and Revenues in that Town, etc. All the Possessions of these
Canons, with diverse Liberties to them granted by their severeal Benefactors
were recited and confirmed by King Edward the II. An. Reg. 12.

[ Valued at 65 l. 7 s. 4 d. per Annum.]


SImon Basket an Alderman of Bedford was the first founder of this House, but
the Advowson came afterward to the Lords Latymer. Robert Son of William de
Houton gave Lands to the Order of Friars of the Holy Cross at Caldewell,
confirmed by King Hen. the III. An. Reg. 57.

[ Valued at 109 l. 8 s. 5 d. per Annum.]


FOunded by Richard de Clare Earl of Hertford, for Canons Regular, and by him
endowed with certain Rents, the feeding of one hundred and twenty Hogs yearly
in his Forest of Tonebrigge freely, and to have yearly one Buck at the Feast
of St. Mary Magdalen.

ANGLESEYE, in Cambridgeshire.
Elizabeth de Burgo Sister and one of the Heirs of Gilbert de Clare Earl of
Gloucester and Hertford, Patroness of this Priory, granted the Monks here
liberty to choose their Prior, An. 1333. The same Elizabeth l. per Annum to the
Prior and Convent of this House, in consideration of which they obliged
themselves to find two Chantry Priests, Seculars, to celebrate at the Altar of
the holy Cross in their Church for ever, for the said Elizabeth her Ancestors
and Heirs, and to allow to the said two Priests their Lodging and Diet, and to
each 20 s. per Annum, or else twelve Marks yearly, which they shall think most
convenient; which Grant bears date 6. E. 3.

[ Valued at 24 l. 19 s. per Annum.]


RAlph Earl of Chester was the Founder, or rather Restorer, of this House;
granting to the Canons here a yearly Rent of 100 s. per Annum. Confirmed by
King Henry the II. with the grant of large Liberties and Immunities.

[ Valued at 106 l. 3 s. 10 d. per Annum.]

WORMLEY, in Herefordshire.
STeven de Ebroicis gave to this Church, dedicated to God, and St. Leanard, and
to the Canons here, certain Mills, Lands, and Tithes in Lenhale, for the
maintenance of there Chaplains. Confirmed by Gilbert de Lacy in consideration
of (...) by the said. Canons to him paid. And William Son of the said Steven,
An. 1240. Vid. Vol. 3. p. 48.

[ Valued at 83 l. 10 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

ROYSTON, in Cambridgeshire.
FOunded and endowed by Eustach de Mer^. King Richard the I. confirmed to this
Monastery by the Name of the Monastery of St. Thomas the Martyr apud Crucem
Rhosiae, and to the Canons here, all their Possessions given by several
Benefactors, and further granted a yearly Fair during all Whitsun-week, and a
Market every Wednesday, with the same Liberties as were enjoyed by the Canons
at Dunstable, with very large Immunities in his Grant specified, dated in the
first year of his Reign.

ERDBURY, in Warwickshire.
RAlph de Sadle was a principal Benefactor to the Canons of this House. An.
1232. Alexander then Bishop of Coventry and Litchfeild, ordered the following
Settlement between the Prior of Erdbury, and the Vicar of Dercet, and their
Successors, viz. that the Vicar should have all the Altarage of the said
Church, and Tith-Corn of eight yards Land in Radewey, and of two yard Land in
Derced in the Demeans of the said Prior, with a House, etc. That the Vicar of
the said Church Henry the VI. An. 23. granted the Prior and Convent License to
obtain and receive Lands and Tenements to the value of one hundred Marks
without fine to the King.

[ Valued at 94 l. 6 s. 1 d. per Annum.]

POGHELE, in Barkshire.
FOunded by Ralph de Chadelewurth, dedicated to God and St. Margaret, endowed
with diverse Lands and Revenues by the said Ralph and others, all which was
recited and confirmed by King Henry the III.


RIchard Bacun founded and endowed this House for Canons Regular, with large
Possessions and Liberties: All which were confirmed to Ranulph Earl of Chester,
to hold in pure and perpetual Henry the III. in the thirtieth year of his Reign.

[ Valued at 100 l. 2 s. 10 d. ob. per Annum.]

CUMBWELL, in Kent.
FOunded by Robert de Turneham, dedicated to God, and St. Mary Magdalen,
endowed with diverse Lands and Possessions, all which were confirmed by Steven
de Turnham, Son of the said Robert, and by King Henry the III. An. Reg. II.

[ Valued at 80 l. 17 s. 5 d. per Annum.]


THE several Lands, Rents, etc. given to this Church, dedicated to God, St.
Mary, and St. Thomas the Martyr, by William de Courteney and others, were
recited and confirmed to the Prior and Canons here, by King Edw. the II. An.
Reg. 18. Vid. Vol. 3. p. 47.

[ Valued at 87 l. 2 s. 11 d. ob. per Annum.]


KING Richard the II. An. Reg. 22. granted his Pardon to the Prior and Convent
of St. Margaret near Marlbergh (which House was founded by his Progenitors) for
having accepted diverse Lands of John Lovel Chevaler, without License first
obtained; and further ratified and confirmed the Possession of those Lands to
the said Convent.


KING Henry the III. granted to the Prior and Canons of this House certain
Lands and Privilege in his Forest of Clarendon; King Edw. the III. granted
more, also Pasture for forty Oxen and Cows in his Meadow of Clarendon, and 100
s. of Rent out of his Manor of Clarendon. Hen. the II. founded this Monastery
for four Canons.

[ Valued at 122 l. 18 s. 6 d. ob. per Annum.]

BUCKENHAM, in Norfolk.
FOunded by William Earl of Chichester in honor of God, St. Mary, and St.
James, and by him endowed with Churches, Lands, and Tithes. Confirmed by King
Edw. the II. An. Reg. 11.

[ Valued at 108 l. 10 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

COLDE-NORTON, in Oxfordshire.
KING Hen. III. An. Reg. 13. confirmed to the Prior and Canons of this House,
dedicated to St. John the Evangelist, their several Lands and Possessions given
by Reginald Earl of Bolon, and Ida his Wife, and diverse other Benefactors. Vid.
Vol. 3. p 55.

OSULVESTON, (Ouston) in Leicestershire.
FOunded by Robert Grimbold in honor of our Lord Jesus Christ, St. Mary, St.
Andrew the Apostle, and all Saints, for Canons; to whom he gave the Church and
Town of Osolvestone, etc. in pure and perpetual Alms. Robert Bishop of Lincoln
confirmed the several Churches granted to this Monastery, and further, granted
to these Canons to be for ever free and quit from the Payment of Sinodals, and
all other Episcopal Customs except Peter pence, denouncing a Curse to such as
shall infringe or violate his Grant. Robert Grimbold was a Judge under King
Henry the II. whose Seal William de Ros Lord of Beaver, etc.

[ Valued at 161 l. 14 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

THORKESEY, in Lincolnshire.
KING Henry the III. An. Reg 21. granted to the Prior and Canons of this House
the Site of their Monastery in Frankalmoine, and four hundred and ninety eight
Acres of Land, and fifty Tosts in Torkesey to hold at the yearly Rent of 10 l.
for ever. Beside which the Prioress and Convent of Fossa near Torkesey held one
hundred and twenty Acres of Land and Meadow, and seven Tofts in Torkesey at the
yearly Rent of 46 s.

Valued at 13 l. 1 s. 4 d. per Annum.

CHAUCUMBE, in Northamptonshire.
FOunded and endowed by Hugo de Chaucumb. Amabilia de Segrave Lady of
Chaucumbe, and others of the Segraves were Benefactors; all whose Gifts were
recited and confirmed by King Edward the III. An. Reg 2.

[ Valued at 83 l. 18 s. 9 d. ob. per Annum.] Y


FOunded An. 1172. (18 H. 2) by Matilda Widow of Ranulph Earl of Chester, and
dedicated to the holy Trinity. King Hen. the III. An. Reg 57. confirmed to the
Canons of the holy Trinity of Rependene, and of St Giles of Calc. all the Lands
and Possessions given them by the said Matilda and others; the like did King
Edw. the II. An. Reg. 18.

[ Valued at 118 l. 8 s. 6 d. per Annum.]

KAERMERDIN, in Wales.
KING Henry the II. gave and confirmed to the Church of St. John the Evangelist
at Kayrmerdin, and the Canons there, the old City of Kayrmerdyn with its
appurtenances, with the Church of St. Peter there, and the Chapel in the
Castle.

[ Valued at 164 l. 4 d. per Annum.]

WIKES, in Essex.
KING Henry the II. gave to God and the Nuns of St. Mary at Wikes, the Church
of Wikes, with certain Land and seven Villains in that (Bracatos) for taking
Hares in his Forest of Essex; with diverse other Liberties and Immunities.

BISSETER, in Oxfordshire.
GIlbert Basset gave to the Canons of this House large Possessions, so did
William Lungespeye, among other things Pasture for fifty Cattle at Erdintone,
to feed among his own Cattle there; another Benefactor was Phil^p Basset
Brother of Fulc Basset Bishop of London. All whose Gifts were recited and
confirmed by King Edw. the II. An. Reg. 9.

[ Valued at 147 l. 2 s. 10 d. per Annum.]


FOunded by Gaufridus Son of Oliver de Dynam; and the Canons Secular, changed
to Canons Regular of St. Augustine by the Authority of Bartholomew Bishop of
Exeter. All whose Possessions King Richard etc.

[ Valued at 306 l. 3 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

HELAGHE, in Yorkshire.
FOunded by Bertramus Haget, in a place where formerly was a Hermitage in some
sort belonging to the Prior and Convent of Marton, who by their Deed, under
their Convent Seal, did disclaim, resign, and quit all title to the same, An.
1203. The Lord Jordan de Sancta Maria marrying Alice an Heir General of the
foresaid Bertram, became a second Founder of this Priory, who confirmed their
Estate, and so did Alice his Widow after his decease.

Priors of Helaghe-Park.
1218. William de Hamelecis. 1233. Elias. 1257. John Nocus. 1260. Hamo de
Eboraco. 1264. Henry de Quetelay. 1281. Adam de Blide. 1300. William de
Grimstone. 1320. Robert de Sposford. 1333. Steven Levington. 1357. Richard.
1358. Thomas de Yarum. 1378. Steven Clarell, 45 years. 1423. John Birkyn. 1429.
Thomas York. 1435. Richard Areton, translated to Gisburn. 1437. Thomas Botson,
translated to Bolton. 1440. Thomas Collingham. 1460. Christopher Lofthous,
under an ill Character, for the Book says, furatus est bona hujus domus. 1471.
William Berwick. 1475. William Brammam, Vicar of Helagh. 1480. William
Ellington. 1499. Peter Kendayl.
William de Percey Lord of Kildale gave to the Canons of St. John the
Evangelist of Helagh-Park, the Chapel of St. Hilda at Kildale with diverse

[ Valued at 72 l. 10 s. 7 d. per Annum.]

CANONS-ASHBY, in Northamptonshire.
THe Pynkeneyes Lords of Wedone were great Benefactors to the Canons here,
giving them diverse Lands in Wedone and Weston, with Common for 100 Sheep, 8
Oxen, 5 Cows, and 5 Mares in the Pasture of Wapham, and feeding for Sixscore
Hogs in the Woods there.

[ Valued at 119 l. 4 d. per Annum.]

HAVERFORD, in Wales.
RObert de Haverford gave to the Canons here diverse Churches and Tithes in his
Barony of Haverford, all which were confirmed to them by King Edward. III. An.
Reg. 5.

[ Valued at 133 l. 11 s. 1 d. per Annum.]


THis place being formerly a Hermitage of St. John Baptist, Maurice de Tiretia
founded here a Priory of Canons, and gave them diverse Lands, confirmed by King
Henry. II.


KIng John in the fifth year of his Reign confirmed to the Canons of the Church
of the holy Trinity at Gypewic, the several Lands, Churches, and Possession,
given them by many Benefactors, among the rest a Fair to last for three days at
the Feast of the holy Cross in September.


FOunded and endowed with diverse Lands and Possessions by Richard Engaine, Lord
of Blatherwick, in the Reign of King John. After the year 1367 the Male Line of
the said Founder failing, his estate became divided among three Sisters,
married to the Families of Goldinton, Pabenham, and Bernake. John Engayne gave
diverse Lands in Blatherwick Laxton, to the Canons of the blessed Mary of
Finnisheved for the maintenance of two Chaplains in the Chapel at Finnisheved,
and two other Chaplains in the Chapel of Blatherwick.

[ Valued at 56 l. 10 s. 11 d. ob. per Annum.]

KEINSHAM, in Gloucestershire.
FOunded by William Earl of Gloucester, at the desire of Robert his Son, then
dying. Dedicated to God, the blessed Mary, and the Apostles Peter and St. Paul.
Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester and Hertford confirmed the several Lands,
Possessions and Liberties, given to the Canons of this House, and so did also
King Edward II. An. Reg. 11.

KIRTMELE, in Lancashire.
WIlliam Marescallus founded and endowed this Priory for Canons, providing that
it should always remain a Priory independent of Edward II. An. Reg. 17.

LESNES, in Kent.
FOunded by Richard Lucy Prefect of England, An. 1178. In the year Richard
quitting his Office of Chief Justice, became himself a Canon Regular of this
House, and soon after died and was here. buried. The Lands and Possessions
given to these Canons by their founder, and others, were confirmed to them by
King John, and King Edward. II.

BURSCOUGH, in Lancashire.
FOunded and endowed with large Possessions by Robert Lord of Lathom. King
Edward I. granted to these Canons to have a mercate every Thursday, and a Fair
for five days at the Feast of the Decollation of St. John Baptist yearly, at
their Manor of Ormeskirk. Walter Lord of Scaresbrek Edward. II. An. Reg. 17.

[ Valued at 80 l. 7 s. 6 d. per Annum.]

STEVERDALE, in Somersetshire.
RIchard Lovel Chivaler, gave certain Lands of the value of 40 s. to the Prior
and Convent here for the finding of one Chaplain to celebrate daily for the
Souls of the said Richard and his Ancestors, in the Church of this Priory. This
House was founded by the Ancestors of Richard de Sancto maure; and united to
the Monastery of Taunton, 24. Henry. VIII.

DODFORD, in Worcestershire.
FOunded and endowed by King Henry I. But in process of time the Revenues of
this House being so decayed that there remained here but one Canon, it was
united to the Abbey of Hales Owen, An. 4. Edward IV.

The Abbey de PRATIS, near Leicester.
FOunded An. 1143. by Robert Earl of Melent and Leicester, and largely endowed
by him and others with Churches, Lands, Rents, Tithes, and Liberties, in and
about Leicester and elsewhere with the grant Mary, etc. Margaret de Quincy
granted to the Charnwood, as often as occasion requires; also one Buck yearly
out of the said Forest. Roger de Quincy granted them among other things the
right Shoulder of every Deer taken in his Park of Acle, and free pasture for
all their Cattle throughout the Forest of Leicester. Their Possessions were
confirmed by King Steven, Henry. II. Robert Earl of Mellent came into England
with Leicester, which City being destroyed with the Castle there, he re-edified
the Church of St, Mary in the said Castle, and placed in it twelve Secular
Canons and a Dean, appropriating thereunto all the Churches in Leicester
(except St. Margarets which is a Prebend of Lincoln) with diverse Lands. Robert
his Son and Heir having sounded the Abbey de Pratis transferred all the
Possessions and Prebends of the Church of St. Mary to his new built Abbey. This
last mentioned Robert (commonly called Bossu) took the Habit of a Canon Regular
in this Abbey, and died here, An. 1167. He also founded an Abbey of Monks at
Geroudon, and a Nunnery at Eaton, in, which his Countess Amicia became a Nun.
After some time the Male Line of this Robert failing, the Estate became divided
between two Sisters Coheirs, Amicia married to Simon de Montefort, and
Margaret married to Sayer de These Canons had also a Grant of one Load of Wood,
daily, out of the Forest of Leicester, ad focum domus infirmariae Canonicorum,
for Fuel to serve in the Infirmary.

[ Valued at 951 l. 14 s. 5 d. ob. per Annum.]


KING Henry the I. founded and endowed this Priory, granting to the Canons here
among other things, the tenth Penny of all his Farms in Leiseby, and Grymesby,
and the Tith of all Fish in his Port of Honflet, in pure and perpetual Alms,
with large Liberties and Immunities. All which were confirmed by King Henry the
II.

[ Valued at 9 l. 14 s. 7 d. per Annum.]

St. THOMAS the Martyr near Stafford.
FOunded by Richard Peche (Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, 1162.) who in his
later days became a Canon Regular in this House, in which Habit he died and was
buried; his Episcopal Habit being taken away by his Cousin G. Peche a Monk of
Coventry. Robert de Ferrars Earl of Derby

[ Valued at 141 l. 13 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

NEW-STEAD, in the Forest of Sherwood, in Nottinghamshire.
FOunded by King Henry the II. for Canons Regular, to whom he gave the Town and
Church of Paplewic and other Lands, with large Liberties. Kygell, and
Ravenshede. King John while Earl of Morton gave other Lands, all which he
confirmed after he was King, An. 6.

[ Valued at 167 l. 16 s. 11 d. ob. per Annum.]


FOunded and endowed by Theobaldus de Valeines. Confirmed by King John, An.
Reg. 5.

[ Valued at 100 l. 18 s. 7 d. ob. per Annum.]

STONELEY, near Kimbolton, in Huntingtonshire.
THIS was a Prioy of seven Canons, founded by William Mandeville Earl of Essex
To this House the Rectory of Kymolton was appropriated. The Bigrames were
Benefactors and lay here buried.

[ Valued at 46 l. 0 s. 5 d. ob. per Annum]

MODBERLEY, in Cheshire.
FOunded by Patricius de Modberley for Canons Regular, and by him endowed with
several Lands and Commons of Pasture. He also granted the Canons free power,
upon the decease of their Prior, to elect another according to their own
pleasure.

SPINEY, in Cambridgeshire.
FIRST founded by Beatrice Malebisse one of the Coheirs of the Lordship of
Wikes, within the said Lordship, for three Canons Regular. Afterward Maria de
Basingburne, increased the number to four, two of which were to come daily and
officiate in the Church of Wykes. She per Ell, and every two years a Woollen
Garment price two shillings and six pence, etc. Also to make three
distributions of Alms per Annum to three thousand poor People. But these
Charges being found to extend to much more then the Revenue of the Lands by her
given, Richard Aithilwald and Matilda his Wife Cousin and Heir of the
Foundresses, did An. 6. H. 5. release the coming of the two Canons to the
Church of Wykes, and changed the three distributions abovesaid, to the giving
thirteen shillings and four pence yearly in Alms to the Poor of Wykes, etc.
King Henry the VI. An 27. granted his License to the Prior and Convent of this
House to give their Convent and all their Revenues to the Prior and Convent of
Ely.

MOTESFONT, in Hantshire.
FOunded by William Briwer who endowed this Priory with diverse Lands, and gave
his Manor of Merton for the maintenance of four poor men in Diet and Aparel,
etc. Diverse others were great Benefactors, among whom Peter de Rivallis Brother
of the Founder then commonly called The Holy Man in the Wall: Alienora Wife of
King Edward the I. gave diverse Possessions for an Anniversary, and for daily
Alms to seven poor Widows, etc. Confirmed by Margery de la Ferte or Feritate
Daughter of William Briwer, and Co heir after the death of William her Brother;
William Reginald de Brus married Grace eldest Daughter and Coheir William
Brewere, from whom descended four Daughters, married to the Earl of Hereford,
Cantelow, Fitzherbert, and Mortemer. The Estate of these Canons was confirmed
by King John, An. 6.

[ Valued at 1 ^ 4 l. 3 s. 5 d. ob. per Annum.]


IT was found by Inquisition 15 John. That Robert Son of Robert de Bello Campo
founded and endowed the Priory of Canons here dedicated to God, the blessed
Mary and St. George; saving to the Patrons the liberty of appointing one to
guard the Gare of the said Priory in time of Vacation, and take care that the
Goods of the same be not wasted, the said Guardian to have nothing but his
sustenence, and upon confirmation of a new Prior to retire.

[ Valued at 127 l. 2 s. 4 d. per Annum.]

WROXTON, in Oxfordshire.
FOunded by Master Michael Belet in the time of Hugh Bishop of Lincoln, and by
him endowed with his Manors of Wroxton, where it was founded, and Thorpe near
Rowell in Northamptonshire. Confirmed by King Hen. the III. with Liberties of
Sac and Soc, etc.

[ Valued at 78 l. 13 s. 4 d. per Annum.]


ANno 1206. Robert de Nerford founded a Church here, which Robert was principal
Warden of Dover Castle under Hubert de Burgo then Chief Justice of England. He
also built a Chapel to the honor of St. Bartholomew with an Hospital for
thirteen poor men, and four Chaplains and a Master. After the death of the said
Founder, the said Master and his Brethren took the Habit of Canons Regular, and
from that time were called Prior and Canons. The Chapel and new erected Priory
was dedicated, An. 1221. Alice Widow of the said Robert made several Orders for
the Government of the said Hospital, among others that the Brethren Alice
confirmed with Warranty all the Lands and Possessions given to this House, to
the Canons for the same. She at last conveyed the Advowson and Patronage of
this Priory of King Hen. the III. who made it an Abbey, and confirmed all their
Possessions, An. Reg. 15.

ACORNBURY, in Herefordshire.
THE Lady Margery de Lacy founded this Priory for Nuns, and endowed it with the
Forest of Acornbury, as was found by Inquisition, An. 49. H. 3. which King in
the fiftieth year of his Reign confirmed their Estate. Catherine de Lacy
Daughter of the Foundress gave certain Lands to Hereford to compel the Prioress
and Nuns to the performance. Margaret Widow of Walter de Clifford gave her
Heart to these Nuns, to be buried in their Church, and with her Heart, fifteen
Marks sterling, in Alms; this was by Deed dated, 1260. John de Breuse gave to
the Nuns of Cornebery the Rents of ten (Burgagia) Borough houses in Tettebiri,
which Gift was confirmed by William his Son, 18 E. 1.

[ Valued at 67 l. 13 s. 2 d. ob. per Annum.]

BILSINGTON, in Kent.
FOunded An. 1258. by John Mansel Provost of Beverley, who endowed it with
certain Lands'n Bilsington, and granted that upon the death or the Prior, the
Superior and Convent should have the Custody of their own House and all their
Possessions, and might proceed to the Election of a new Prior without License
first obtained from any one. Some of the Lands of this Priory being overflowed
by the Sea, King Edw. the III. granted ad quod dampnum first sued out and
returned.

[ Valued at 81 l. 1 s. 6 d. per Annum.]

BRADLEY, in Leicesterstire.
FOunded by Robert Bundy, it had but two Canons. Of later time, the Lord Scrope
had the Patronage.

[ Valued at 20 l. 3 s. 4 d. per Annum.]

MICHELHAM, in Sussex.
FOunded by Gilbert de Aquila in honor of the Holy Trinity, for Canons, and
endowed with diverse Lands, free Pastures, and Privileges in his Wood Grounds
in Suffex. All which with other Lands given by many other Benefactors were
recited and confirmed by King Edward the II. An. Reg. 14.

[ Valued at 160 l. 12 s. 6 d. per Annum.]


LEwelin Prince of North Wales granted his Letters of Protection to the Canons
of this House, to exempt them and theirs, from all Rapine and Depredation or
any other molestation by the bordering Welsh, and this was on the account of
one Walter Corbet a Canon of this House, his Kinsman.


PEter Chaceport Keeper of the Kings Wardrobe, having bought certain Lands here
with the Advowson of the Church, Hugh his Son and Heir surrendered them into
the hands of King Henry the III. who with them founded and endowed a Priory of
Canons, granting them to have the custody of their own House in time of
vacation, and not to be charged with etc. or keeping any of the Kings Horses.

GLANNAUCH, in Wales.
FOunded and endowed by Lewellin Prince of North Wales, An. 1221. After him
several other Welsh Princes confirmed the Estate and Possessions of the Canons
of the Isle of Glannauch. So also did King Edw. the I. An. Reg. 23.


FOunded by Robert Grosteste Bishop of Lincoln. Here was formerly a Hermitage
and Chapel of the holy Martyrs St. Steven and St. Laurence, founded by Sir
Robert de Chetwode Knt. It was vulgarly called a Hermitage, not that it was the
Habitation of a Hermit, but because it was Notteley, 1 E. 4.


FOunded by Ela Widow of William Longaspata, for Nuns, among whom she her self
took the Habit, An. 1236. and after became Abbess of this House. This William
Longespee was Son of King Henry the II. and Earl of Rosmar and Salisbury in
Right of Ela his Wife, descended from Walter de Ewrons, to whom King William
gave the said Earldom of Salisbury. Ela founded two Monasteries in one day,
viz. 16 Call. Maii, Anno. Dom. 1232 Namely Henton for Carthusians, and this of
Lacock for Canonesses. The said Ela became Abbess here, An. 1240. resigned An.
1257. died 1261. aged 74.

[ Valued at 168 l. 9 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

SELEBURNE, in Hantshire.
FOunded by Peter de Rupibus Bishop of Winchester, and by him endowed with
diverse Lands and Churches, saving to the Vicars of the said Churches a
Sufficient sustentation, the Presentation to the said Vicarages to belong to
the Prior and Canons,

KIRKBY Beler, in Leicestershire.
ANno 13 Edward I. Roger Beler of Kirkeby founded a House of one Custos and 12
Chaplains to Celebrate in the Chapel of St. Peter at Kirkby, and gave them the
Advowson of the said Church, and the Manor of Buckminster. Vid inf. 246.

[ Valued at 142 l. 10 s. 3 d. per Annum.]

ASHERUGGE, in Buckinghamshire.
EDmund Son of Richard King of the Romans and Earl of Cornwall, founded here a
House for a Rector of Good men Brothers of the Church, in honor of the
precious blood of Jesus Christ; here were to be 20 Brethren, of which 13 at
least to be Priests. For the maintenance of etc. and to be quit of Scutage as
often as it should happen; also to have the Custody of their own Vid. infra.

[ Valued at 416 l. 16 s. 4 d. per Annum.]

KIRKBY Belar.
AN. 1326. Roger Beler was slain in Leicester. After whose death, his Widow
with the assent of his Son and heir translated the Chantry of secular Priests
by him founded at Kirkly to the use of Canons Regular, of whom the first Prior
came from the Abbey of Olustone (Ouston).

The issue of Roger Belar the first Founder failing, the Bishop of Lincoln,
became Patron.

More of ASHRU'G.
THe Lord Edmund Earl of Cornwall, who founded this House of Religious Men
called Bonos homines, or Bonhomes, was buried in the Church here, wherein was
carefully preserved a small parcel of our Lords Blood, with the heart of Thomas
de Cantilupo Bishop of Hereford the holy Confessor, and other Relics.

RIGATE, in Surrey
SEems to be founded by some of the Warens Earls of Surrey, John de Waren Earl
of Surrey released to the Canons of this House a Rent of 19 s. 4 d. one
plow-share, four horse-shooes and nails, which the said Canons used to pay
yearly to his Ancestors for certain Tenements in Reygate, s. 11 d. per Annum.
for the Celebrateing one Mas^e daily in his Castle of Reygate, for ever.

[ Valued at 68 l. 16 s. 8 d. per Annum.]

HALTEMPRISE, in Yorkshire.
THis Monastery was first founded and endowed at Cottingham by Thomas Wake,
Lord of Lydel, with License of King Edw. II. Pope John XXII. granted to the
said Thomas Wake Liberty to translate the said Altemprise. The said Thomas Wake
granted to the Canons, Regular of this House several Mannours and Lands with
etc. and Commons of Pasture, etc. in pure and perpetual Alms, with general
Warranty. John de Meaux of Bewyke by his Deed dated An. 1361 (31 Edward III.)
gave to the Prior and Convent of this House his Manor of Willardby, etc.
conditionally for fix Canons to celebrate for the Souls of him and his
Ancestors, etc. Matins Mass, Vespers and Complin, etc. and in the case of non
performance of the Conditions his heirs to re-enter.

[ Valued at 100 l. 0 s. 3 d. ob. per Annum.]


KIng Edward II. An. 13. granted his License to Bartholmew de Badlesmere to
found and endow a House of Canons Regular in his Manor of Badlesmere, with a
Non obstante to the Statute of Mortmain.

MAXSTOKE, in Warwickshire.
FOunded by William Clinton Earl of Huntington, in honor of the holy Trinity,
the Blessed Virgin, St. Michael, and all the Saints, for Canons viz. One Prior
elective, and a Convent of twelve Canons. In whose deed of Foundation, dated
An. 1336, he appointed several Ordinances relating to their habit, the Election
of the Prior, none to meddle with the Custody of the^ House in time of the
Vacation but who the Superior and Convent shall appoint, Of the quality of such
as are to be received for Canons, Of the Number of Canons to be increased, as
the Revenue Ave Maria gracia plena Dominus'tecum, Benedicta tu in Mulieribus
and benedictus fructus ventris tui Ihesus, Amen. Et benedicta sit venerabilis
matter tua Anna, exqua tua Caro virginea and immaculata processit. Amen. With
some other Orders; all which were Roger Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, An.
1337. King Edw. the III. granted his License to these Canons to exchange their
Manor of Shustoke, for certain Lands in Maxstoke.

[ Valued at 87 l. 12 s. 3 d. ob. per Annum.]

BISHAM, in Barkshire.
FOunded by William de Monteacuto Earl of Sarum and Lord of Man, and Dynbeghe,
who by his Deed dated An. 1338. endowed the Canons here with diverse Lands,
Churches, and Rents, and granted that upon the death of the Prior, neither he
nor his Heirs should intermeddle with Custody of the House, or any of their
Possessions. King Henry the V. An. 8. gave License to Matilda Widow of John de
Monteacuto Earl of Sarum, to remove the Bones of her said Husband buried in the
Abbey of Cirencester, to this Priory of Bustlesham and bury them here.

[ Valued at 285 l. 11 s. ob. per Annum.]

FLANESFORD, in Herefordshire.
FOunded by Richard Talebot, in honor of God, St. Mary the Virgin, and St.
John Baptist, for Canons Regular, and by him endowed with diverse Lands and
Possessions, which Lands being held of the King in Capite, King Edw. the III.
An. 20. granted his License for so doing.

[ Valued at 14 l. 8 s. 9 d. per Annum.]

EDINDON, in Wiltshire.
WIlliam de Edindon Bishop of Winchester being born in this Town, founded in
the Parish Church of Edindon a perpetual Chantry for Secular Chaplains, and
endowed the same with sufficient Revenues, but being afterward minded to turn
the same to a Priory of Brethren of St. Augustines Order called Boni homines
(or Bonhomes) he laid the Foundation of a Monastery, An. 1352. which was
dedicated in honor of St. James the Apostle, St. Catherine, and all Saints, by
Robert Bishop of Sarum, An. 1361. William de Edyndon the Founder died, An. 1366.

[ Valued at 442 l. 9 s. 7 d. ob. per Annum.]

DERTFORD, in Kent.
FOunded by King Edward the III. for Nuns of St. Augustines Order, living under
the Care of the Friars of the Order of Preachers, and and by him endowed with
Lands and Reven^es in Kent, and elsewhere, London, all which was confirmed to
them to hold in Frankalmoine, by the Grant of the said King, Richard II. An. 8.
granted to the Prioress land Convent of this House ( Monasterium Sororum
Praedicatissarum de Derford) the Manor of Massingham in Norfolk with its
Fairs, Markets, and Liberties, etc. for the finding of one Chaplain to
celebrate in the Chapel of the Infirmary of this House, and for the Relief and
Sustentation of the Sisters and Brethren in the said Infirmary.

[ Valued at 380 l. 9 s. ob. per Annum.]


FOunded by King Henry the V. An. Reg. 2. To the honor of the holy Trinity,
the glorious Virgin Mary, the Apostles and Disciples of God, and all Saints,
especially St. Briget, for sixty Nuns of which number one to be Abbess, of the
Order of St. Augustine, and for five and twenty Religious Men, of which number
thirteen to be Priests, four Deacons, and eight Laymen, all to be under the
Government of the Consessor. To live separately, viz. The Nuns in a part of the
House by themselves, and the Consessor and Brothers in a part distinct,
chastely both in mind and body, according to the Regular Institute of St.
Bridget. This Religious Istelworth in the Parish of Twykenham, near the Thames,
and called by the name of the Monastery of St. Savior, and St. Briget of Syon,
of the Order of St. Augustine: by which name or Title the said Abbess and Nuns
were enabled to purchase Lands, to sue, and be sued. Matilda Newton was
appointed the first Abbess, and William Alnewyk the first Confessor. The said
King Henry the V. endowed this House with the Rent of one thousand Marks to be
paid yearly out of the Exchequer, till he or his Heirs should settle Lands of
that value.

[ Valued at 1731 l. 8 s. 4 d. ob. per Annum.]

SOme other Houses are reckoned of this Order, of which there remains little or
nothing of note but only their Names, which are Flixton, in Suffolk; Hempton,
in suffolk; Leyes, in Norfolk; Wodebrigge, in Essex; Vlvescrofte, in Leicester
shire; St. John Baptist at Exeter; Canonleghe, in Devonshire; Shelbrede, in
Sussex; Torpington, in Sussex; Merkeby, in Lincoln; Wes^wde, Kent; St. John,
Northampton.

Hospitals for the Infirm, Of St. AUGUSTINS Order.
It was Decreed in the Council of Lateran, An. Dom. 1179. That where a Number
of Leperous People are gathered together

St. LEONARD's Hospital, in York.
ANno Dom. 800. King Egbert in a Parliament at Winchester, changed the name of
his Kingdom of Britain, into that of England. A. 924. Athestan succeeding his
Father King Edward the elder in this Kingdom, he substituted Ho^el, King of
Wales, and Constantin, King of Scotland, saying, it was more glorious to make a
King than to be one. Which Constantin (more Scottorum perjurium non timens
(they are the Authors words) soon after rebelled against him, and wasted the
Northern parts about Northumberland. Hereupon King Athelstan raised an Army and
in his Journey toward Scotland made his Supplications to God for Victory, at
Beverlay, York, and Durham; after which he overcame Constantin; and imploring
Almighty God to show some token whereby the present and future Ages might know
that the Scots ought to be subject to the Kings of England, he struck his Sword
into a Rock of Stone near Dunbar Castle, and made therein a gash of an Ell
deep, which remains (says my Author) to this day. This King returning out of
Scotland Victorious, did diverse works of Charity, in particular, he gave to the
Clergy or Ministers of the Church of St. Peter at York, called Colidei, for the
better Relief of the Poor, and Maintenance Peter, until the Reign of King
Steven, who built there a Church in honor of St. Leonard, after which it was
called the Hospital of St. Leonard. King William Rusus, King Henry the I. King
Hen. the II. Walter de Langton Master E. 1. made certain Orders for Government
of the Brothers and Sisters in the same, containing an exact direction how the
Chaplains were to spend the day both in the Church and out of it, in their
Religious Offices, etc. That the Lay Brothers should not go beyond the Door of
the Nave of the Church unless in processions, that the Sisters neither any of
them, nor the Lay-Brothers, go out of the Bounds of the Hospital without leave,
etc.

[ Valued at 362 l. 11 s. 1 d. ob. per Annum.]

CARMANS Spittle, in Yorkshire.
Acehorne in the time of King Athelstan, for one Alderman and fourteen Brothers
and Sisters, in the Town of Flixton. Designed for the Relief of Travelers that
they might not be exposed to Wolves and other wild Beasts of the Woods; the
said Founder endowing it with diverse Possessions in Flixton, with common of
Pasture for twenty four Cows and one Bull, etc. The Vicar of the Church of
Folketon, in which Parish this Hospital was situate, was used yearly on the
Feast of St. Andrew the Apostle, to cellebrate a Solemn Mass in the Chapel of
this Hospital; the Assistants at which Mass enjoyed several Indulgences. Henry
the VI. An. 25. confirmed the Possessions and Liberties of this Hospital naming
it for the future Carmans Spitell.

St. GREGORY's Hospital, in Canterbury.
FOunded by Lansranc Archbishop of Canterbury without the NorthGate of the
City. For infirm Men, and Women to live a part in separate Divisions of the
House. The said Lanfranc built near this Hospital a Church in honor of St.
Gregory the Pope, placing Canons therein Lanfranc, but afterward they were
changed into Regulars by William Archbishop of Canterbury.

[ Valued at 121 l. 15 s. 1 d. per Annum.]

BRACKLEY, in Northamptonshire.
RObert Earl of Mellent, who came into England with the Conqueror, founded this
Hospital, where his Heart was kept entire, preserved with Salt. An. 6 Hen. 5.
Matilda Widow of John Lord Lovel granted her Manor of Bagworth and Thornton in
Leicestershire to certain Trustees and their Heirs, for them to grant to Thomas
Coltone, and several others then Members of this Hospital, Pensions for Life;
and by another Deed dated 8 H. 5. declared her Intention and Will to be to
change this Hospital into a Priory of Friars, Preachers, consisting of twelve
and a Prior, the Kings License being first obtained; after which the said
Trustees to reenseoff her or her Heirs with the said Manor, or convey it to
them back again. Vid. Vol. 3. p. 83.

St. JULIANS near St. Albans, in Hertfordshire.
THe Church and House of St. Julian near Eyewode was founded for Lazares; by
Gaufridus Abbot of St. Albans with the advice and consent of his Convent, and
endowed with diverse Tithes and parcells of Tithes in St. Albans, Bradewey, and
elsewhere. Confirmed by King Henry the II. For the Government of these Brethren
several Orders were made, as that their Habit should be a Tunick, and
Supertunick of plain Russit, Custos, that every Brother at his admitance should
make Oath to obey the Abbot of St. Albans and his Archdeacon, etc.

RIPPON, in Yorkshire.
FOund by Inquisition, that it was founded by Thurstan Archbishop of York, for
the Relief of Poor and Leprous People. Endowed with Revenues given at first to
certain Sisters who lived here, wherewith to find a Chaplain to celebrate in
the said Hospital, and to relieve all such Leperous People, who, being born in
Ripschire, should repair to this House, where they were to receive one Garment
called Bak, and two pair of Shoes per Annum, and every day to each man one
Loaf, half a Flagon of Ale, etc. Which said Sisters being dead, the Archbishop
that then was gave the Hospital to the Possession and Government of a Master
and certain Chaplains, but in time Leperous People decaying, in the 15 E. 3.
there were neither Brothers nor Sisters in this Hospital, otherwise it remained
as it ought. Vid. Vol. 3. p. 89.

St. GILES, in the S^burbs of London.
QUeen Maud Wife of King Henry the I. built on the West side of London a House
for the Relief of Leperous People, with an Oratory, and called it the Hospital
of St. Giles. It was endowed with several Revenues by the said Queen and
others, all which were confirmed by her Grandson King Henry the II. Vid. ins.
p. 400.

St. MARY of Bethelem without Bishopsgate, in the Suburbs of London.
SImon Fitz Mary Citizen of London, having an extraordinary affection to the
memory of the Incarnation and Nativity of our Savior which was wrought in
Betholem, gave all his Lands in the Parish of St. Butolph Bishopsgate, to a
Church of St. Mary of Bethelem by him there erected, and for the instituting of
a Priory of a Prior, Canons, Brethren and Sisters, to live according to the
Rule and Order of the Church of St. Mary at Bethelem, all which were to wear
the Sign of a Star on their outward Garment; this Priory was also for the
reception of the Bishop of Bethelem, or any of the Canons or others belonging
to that Church when they should come into England, to which Bishop as a sign of
Subjection, this Priory was to pay a Mark yearly at the Feast of Easter in
nature of a Rent. The Deed of Foundation and Endowment of this House by the
said Simon Fitz Mary bears date, An. 1247.


FOunded by Walter Brun Citizen of London, and Roisia his Wife, on a a parcel
of Land given for that purpose by Walter Fitz Aldred Alderman, and endowed with
diverse parcells of Land and Rents of Tenements in several Parishes in and about
London.

A Composition was made between John Witing Rector of the Church of St. Butolph
without Bishopsgate, and Godefrey then Prior, London, and so were all his
Successors to do. The first Stone of this Hospital was laid by Walter
Archdeacon of London, An. 1197.

[ Valued at 478 l. 6 s. 6 d. per Annum.]


KING Henry the I. granted and confirmed to the Prior and Canons of St.
Bartholomews and to the Poor of the Hospital belonging to that Church, very
great Liberties, ( Et liberam esse sicut coronam meam) whose An. 1133. (33 H.
I.) This Hospital was founded for the receipt of all poor infirm People, till
such time as they should be cured of their Infirmities, and for the lying in of
poor Women, and maintenance of their Children (in case the Mothers should die
in Childbed in the Hospital) till the said Children be seven years old. On this
Account King Edward the III. freed the Master, Brethren, and Sisters, of this
House, from being taxt to the Public Taxes of that time.

[ Valued at 305 l. 6 s. 7 d. per Annum.]


FOunded by King Henry the I. for ten Lepers and a Warden, with two Chaplains
and a Clerk, and endowed with several Rents, etc. as appeared by Inquisition in
the Reign of King Edward the III. at which time there was here, nine Brethren
and Sisters, and but one of those a Leper, and he taken in not of Charity, but
for 100 s. paid for his entrance; here were also seven Women taken in for
money, contrary to the first Henry the VI. An. 35. granted this Hospital and
all the Revenues thereunto belonging, after the death of the then Warden, to
William Sutton Master of the Order of Burton, St. Lazarus, Warden of the
Hospital of St. Giles of Lepers without London, and to the Brethren of the said
Order and their Successors, for the finding and maintenance of three Lepers of
the Kings Household Servants, if any such shall be, etc.

ILLEFORD, in Essex.
THis Hospital was Founded by the Abbess and Convent of Barking for thirteen
Leperous Brethren, two Chaplains, and a Clerk. For whose Regular Government
Ralph de Baldock Bishop of London made Certain Orders, viz. That the Lepers
were to be chosen out of the Dem^asns of the Abbey of Barking if any such there,
That the Abbess present to one place, and the Master and Brothers to the next
alternately, That no married Leper shall be admitted unless the Wife is minded
to vow Chastity, That every Brother shall constantly frequent the Divine
Offices at the Church unless hindered by Sickness, etc. That no Woman be
admitted Hospital, unless the Abbess, near Relations to visit when Sick, or the
Common Laundress, and that at open day, That no Leper shall go abroad without
special License, That the Abbess shall appoint the Master of the said Hospital,
That every Leper shall at his reception Barking, to have nothing in propricty,
etc. Which Orders bear date An. Dom. 1346.

[ Valued at 16 l. 13 s. 3 d. per Annum.]

St. PETER'S in the City of York.
KIng Henry. I. gave and confirmed to the Hospital of St. Peter at York diverse
Lands by him, and Eustachius Fitz-Iohn, and others, granted together with
diverse Liberties, as Sac and Soc, Tol and Them, etc. and as a more especial
Mark of his favor to this House took to himself the name of a Brother and
Warden of the same (Frater enim and Custos ejusdem Domus Deisum) The Like did
King Henry III. and King John. Their Possessions were Henry II. and King Edward
I. Other Benefactors William de Fortibus, Earl of Albemarl, Several of the
Percys, and Moubrays, etc.

St. MARY MAGDALEN at Colchester, in Essex.
FOunded by Eudo Seneschal of King Henry I. by that Kings Command. King Richard
I. granted to the Lepers of this Hospital a fair two days yearly, viz. on the
Vigil and day of St. Mary Magdalen.

St. JOHN, and St. Leonard, at Alesbury, in Buckinghamshire.
FOunded and endowed by Robert Ilhale, Robert at Hide, etc. for the
maintenance of Leperous and other poor People of Aylesbury; Confirmed by King
Henry I. and King Henry II. These were two Hospitals. That of St. John valued
at 33 s. 4 d. per Annum, and that of St. Leonard at 20 s. per Annum. But it was
found by Inquisition, 34 Edward III. that for eleven years before, they were
both decayed, and their Possessions come to the hands of Laymen.


FOunded for Leperous people by Roger de Moubray, and dedicated to God, St.
Mary, and St. Lazerus of Jerusalem, and by him endowed with diverse Lands in
Burton. Nigellus de Moubray granted to this House the Tith of all the Meat and
Drink of his Family wherever he should inhabit, and charged his Heirs
diligently to perform the same. William de gave to Burton St. Lazarus, and the
infirm Brethren of Jerusalem, the Hospital of Tilton, and the Church of
Louseby, etc. Sir John Digby Thurbert de Rochebi, etc. were also Benefactors.
Confirmed by King Henry II. and King John. King Edward III. granted to the
Master and Brethren of St. Lazarus of Jerusalem in England, Founded for Lepers,
and Soldiers that fight against the Enemies of the Cross, to be free and quit
of all Tenths, Tallages, and other Aids and Contributions granted or to be
granted to the King and his Heirs.

[ Valued at 265 l. 10 s. 2 d. ob. per Annum.]


KING Edward the III. An. 27. at the Request of the Master of the Order of
Burton St. Lazarus in England, and in consideration of the Release of a yearly
Rent of forty Marks formerly granted out of the Exchequer, to the said Master
and Brethren of that Order, granted to the said Brethren and their Successors
the Custody of the Hospital of St. Giles without London.

YARUM, in Yorkshire.
FOunded by Alan de Wilton, who gave to this Hospital diverse Lands Hooton to
hold at the yearly Rent of two Marks, also other Lands in Mydilton, for the
maintenance of three Chaplains in the said Hospital, and thirteen poor people.
The same Alan did after wards grant this Hospital and all its Appurtenances in
pure and perpetual Alms, to the Canons of Helagh-Park. The like grant was made
to the said Canons by Peter de which Peter de Brus gave'divers Lands to the
Brethren of this Hospital, with free grinding in all his Mills, and free
Pasture for all their proper Cattle, in his Land.

St. JAMES near Westminster.
THE Master of the Hospital of St. James near Westminster being summoned in a
Quo Waranto, 22 E. 1. appeared and pleaded, that King Henry the III. granted to
the Leperous Women of St. James without London, near Westminster, their Lands
then given, or to be given, to be held with Soc, and Sak, Thol and Them; and
that King Edward the I. granted them a Fair yearly on the Vigil, day, and
Morrow of St. James, and for four days following, and profert, etc. Ideo
predictus Magister, quoad hoc sine die, etc.

TANREGGE, in Surrey.
O Do Dammartin gave to God and the Hospital of St. James in his Village of
Tanregge, and to three Priests there serving God, certain Lands, etc. for the
maintenance of Infirm and poor People, and Travelers, he also gave them his
Relics, two Silver Cups for the making a Chalice, with all the Vestments,
Books and other Furniture of his own Chapel.

[ Valued at 78 l. 8 s. 10 d. ob. per Annum.]

St. JOHN BAPTIST at Stamford, in Lincolnshire.
THIS Hospital dedicated to St. John Baptist and St. Thomas the Martyr,
consisting of a Master and Brethren, was founded by one Syward; among other
Benefactors were Richard de Humez and Bertran de Verdun who gave part of a
Meadow lying near the Bridge toward the North, wherein to build a Church and
make a Coemitery. Confirmed by King Richard I. and by Pope Alexander. It was
situated at the end of Stamford-Bridge, on the South Side; for the Reception of
Travelers and poor people.

SAUTINGEFELD, near Wytsande.
KING Henry the II. confirmed diverse Lands to this Hospital and to the Brethren
here serving God.

SCARDEBURGH, in Yorkshire.
THE Hospitals of St. Nicholas, and St. Thomas the Martyr, were erected by
certain Burgesses of Scardeburgh, and were both under the Inspection of the
Bailiffs and Burgesses of that Town, etc. as was found by Inquisition, An. 26
Edw. the I.


KING Henry the II. granted to the Poor of this House a Rent of 30 s. out of
his Farm of Shropshire. King Henry the III. granted them out of every Sack of
Corn coming to Shrewsbury Market, a handful of both hands, and out of every
Sack of Wheat a handful of one hand, also a Horse-load of dead Wood daily in
his Wood called Linewood, for their firing.

ROMENALE, in Kent.
FIRST founded by Adam de Cherrings in honor of the blessed Martyrs St.
Steven, and St. Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, and by him endowed with Lands,
Rents, and Possessions for the maintenance of certain Lepers, and one Chaplain.
But in process of time this Hospital becoming decayed and neglected, by reason,
chiefly, that no Lepers could be found to inhabit here for many years, John
Franceys Patron of this Hospital, An. 37. Edward the III. in order to revive
and restore the same, made diverse Orders, viz. That in lieu of the Lepers that
used to be here, there should for the future be two Priests to celebrate for
the Founders and Canterbury, and to be Resident, which two Priests shall
celebrate daily in the Chapel of this Hospital, Matins, and the Canonical
hours; that upon the death of the Custos, the Patron to present another to the
Archbishop of Canterbury to be admitted Custos, within the space of two Months,
or in default of the Patron, the Jurates of the Town of Romenale, or the major
part of them, etc.


THE following Orders were made in the Parliament at Lincoln, An. 9. Edward the
II. That there should be fix infirm Brothers of this Hospital, and two found
Brothers to labor about the Affairs of the House, each of which eight, to
receive 9 d. a Week, that there should be a Priest to be the Master of the said
Hospital to say Mass daily, and to administer the Sacraments to the Infirm, his
Salary fix Marks per Annum. Queen Margaret Widow of Edward the I. was during
her Life Patroness and Visitor, and after her death the King or his Chancellor.
The said King Edward the II. An. 14. granted his License, the former Ordination
non obstante, for the Master and Brothers of this Hospital to admit John Serthe
into the next void Place, the said John having given eighteen Marks, to the
Repairs of the Chapel, then ruinous.

MAIDEN-BRADLEY, in Wiltshire.
MAnserus Byset, a Baron, did first institute this House for Leperous Women,
and appointed there certain Secular Priests, who he named Curators of the
Women. Hubert Bishop of Salisbury translated those Priests into Canons Regular.
The Church of Kiderminster was appropriated Roger Bishop of Worcester, after
the death of Robert then Parson. This Manserus, or Manasserus Byset was
Dapiser, or Sewer, to King Henry II. King Henry III. confirmed the several
Lands and Possessions given to the Leperous Sisters of Maiden-Brad^egh, and to
the Prior and Brethren there.

[ Valued at 180 l. 10 s. 4 d. per Annum.]

St. THOMAS of Acon, in London.
KIng Edw. III. A. 14. confirmed to the Master and Brethren of this Hospital
diverse Lands, Tenements, and Rents in London, and elsewhere. as Westhame,
Stratford, Bromley, and Stepney, etc. Ieffrey Fitz Peter Earl of Essex granted
to the Brethren of this Hospital of St. Thomas the Martyr of Acon, the Custody
of the Hospital of St. John Evangelist at Berchamstede.

Anno 23. Heney the VI. John Neel then Master, and his Brethren of this House,
exhibited their Petition in Parliament, setting forth, that Thomas Son of
Theobald de Helles, and Agnes his Wife, Sister of St. Thomas the Martyr
Archbishop of Canterbury, gave to the Master and Brethren of this House then
being, all the Land with the Appurtenances sometimes belonging to Gilbert
Beckit Father of the said St. Thomas, in which Land the said Martyr was born,
to make there a Church in Worship of God, the blessed Virgin, and the said
Martyr, which Lands lie in the Parish of St. Mary of Colchirche in London, that
the Endowment of the said Hospital was enlarged by King Henry the III. An. 52.
in which house have always been, ever since, a Master and Brethren prosessing
the Rule of St. Austin, and Priests and Clerks to the number of twelve or more,
that of old time this House has been dispoiled, and great part of their
Evidences lost and destroyed, they pray therefore that his Majesty by the
assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and by the Authority of this
present Parliament would ordain, stablish and approve, that the Master and
Brethren of the House or Hospital of St. Thomas the Martyr of Acres in the City
of London, may by that name plead and be impleaded, purchase Lands, have

[ Valued at 277 l. 3 s. 4 d. per Annum.]

St. JOHN BAPTIST at Lynn, in Norfolk.
FOunded by Vlfketel Son of the Nun of Sceringes, and by him endowed with a
parcel of Land in Linn, to hold in pure and perpetual Alms. The Mayor and
Burgesses of Linn did use to present and establish the Master and Warden of
this Hospital, till the time of John of Ely Bishop of Norwich.

[ Valued at 7 l. 6 s. 11 d. per Annum.]


THomas de Cant. and Robert Winchelsey Archbishops of Canterbury, in their
Visitations, and Peter the Chaplain, the Founder, made several Orders for the
Government of this Hospital; as, that any Brother being a detractor or
vexatious to the rest to be punished by the Prior and Brethren, and if
incorrigible to be expelled; founded with a Church and Coemitary for twelve
Brothers and Sisters, some sound, and some infirm, with a Chaplain; to dwell in
the House, the infirm not to come into the Chancel, Cellar, Kitchen, or
Curtelage, nor to intermeddle with the Offices of the House, to have a Common
Seal, etc. All the Brothers and Sisters to have equal Portions in the Revenues
with the Prior, if any of the Infirm withdraws himself for one month, his
Salary for a year to be forfeited, if for a year, he to be expelled; a general
Chapter to be held yearly the Mary Magdalen, etc. Which Orders were ratified
and confirmed by William de Turbus Bishop of Norwich, Anno Dom. 1174.

KYNEWALDGRAVES, in Yorkshire.
ROger Archbishop of Tork, and other Archbishops of that See were Benefactors
to the poor Sisters of this Hospital dedicated to St. Mary Magdalen, all
confirmed by Thomas Archbishop of York, An. 1301. Which with many other
Possessions by others given were all recited and confirmed by King Edward the
III. An. 1.


SEems to be founded by Malcolm King of Scotland, who gave to the Infirm of
this Hospital, Lands, and Rents, so did Isabel de Brus, Daughter of Earl David;
Robert de Brus, Son of the said Isabel, Lord of Anandale gave them diverse
Tenements in Cunyngtone, with view of Frankpledge to be held there twice per
Annum, viz. after Easter, and after Michaelmass, with small Courts to be held
there at their Will as ost as expedient. The like Grant by Bernard de Bruys,
all which was confirmed to the Master and Brethren of this House by King Edw.
III. An. 12.

HORNECHIRCHE, in Essex.
THE Master and Confraters of the Hospital of Hornchurch were removable at the
Will of the Master of the Hospital of St. Bernard de Monte in Savoy, to which
Hospital this was only a Cell, having no Common Seal of their own, nor power to
sue or be sued.

HERBALDOUNE, in Kent.
FOunded by King Henry II. who assigned to the Lepers of this Hospital a Rent
of twenty marks per Annum out of his Revenue of Canterbury, till such time as
he assigns them other Provisions in Churches or Rents elsewhere.

[ Valued at 109 l. 7 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

St. SEPULCHERS at Hedon in Yorkshire.
ALan Son of Oubernus gave a parcel of Land to God and the Lepers of St.
Sepulchers at Hedon; Alexander de Thunestal and many others Hospital, all whose
Gifts were recited and confirmed by King Edw. the II. An. Reg. 19.

HAVERING, in Essex.
KING Henry the II. gave the Church of Havering to the poor Brethren of the
Church of St. Bernard de Monte Iovis. Confirmed to them with other Lands by
King Richard the I. and King Henry the III. An. 37.

ELLESHAM, in Lincolnshire.
THIS Hospital, begun by Beatrix, and finished and confirmed by Walter de
Amundevil, was by him conferred upon Canons Regular, John Son of William de
Dyve, An. Dom. 1277. The abovesaid Walter became a Canon here, and was here
buried. The Hospitallers of Jerusalem having by fraud obtained this House from
the then Patron, were by Letter from Pope Alexander, made to relinquish their
Pretensions.

[ Valued at 70 l. 0 s: 8 d. per Annum.]

St. MARY's at Dover, in Kent.
FOunded by Hubert de Burgo Earl of Kent. King Henry III. An. II. granted to
the Brothers and Sisters of this Hospital the Tith of all profitsarising from
the Passage of the Port of Dover, to hold to them and their Successors in
Frankalmoign. The same King, An. 13. granted them a yearly Rent of 10 l. at the
feast of St. Michael to be paid out of the profits of his Port of Dover, beside
the tith above mentioned. Vid. Vol. 3. p. 86.


WIlliam de Lancaster gave to God and St. Mary and to the Brethren of this
Hospital, all Conyngsheved, and diverse other Lands, etc. He also gave the
Canons of this House the Advowson of the House of Lepers of St. Leonard at
Kirkeby in Kendale, etc. Diverse other Benefactors gave Many Lands and parcels,
all Edward II. An. 12. Magnus King of Man and the Isles, by his deed dated An.
Dom. 1256. granted to the Prior and Convent of this House that their Ships and
Goods should be free from toll, and all other demands and Customs, throughout
all his Dominions.

St. JOHN Baptist, at Coventry.
LAurence Prior of Coventry, and the Convent there granted the Site Edmund
Archdeacon of Coventry. Confirmed by Richard Archbishop of Canterbury, and by
Bull of Pope Honorius III. dated, An. 1221. King Henry III. An. 45. granted to
the Brethren and Sisters of this Hospital liberty and protection by themselves
or Messengers to ask, gather, and receive Alms abroad, for Releif of their
House, for the space of seven years. An. Dom. 1425, Richard Crosby being then
Prior of the Cathedral and Regular Church of the Blessed Mary of Coventry, and
Thomas Everdon Master or Custos of this Hospital, Several Orders were made for
the Government of this House, containing, That the Prior and Convent aforesaid
shall be accounted Edmund formerly Archdeacon of Coventry Principal Benefactor,
that the Master of the Hospital be Subject to the Prior, who is to have the
placing, Creation, and reception of the said Master and all the Brethren and
Sisters, that the said Prior and his Successors may Visit in the said Hospital
once a year, attended with eight persons only, Friday, or however once a week,
The Divine Offices to be devoutly celebrated in the said Hospital at the usual
hours Secundum usum sarum, The Lay Brothers and Sisters that are illerate to
say A CANNON HOSPITALLER OF St JOHN BAPTIST AT COVENTRY
Vol.2 P. 428.

instead of Matins thirty Paters, and as many Aves, with the Creed, and for
every of the other hours seven, But those Brothers that have learning,
sufficient, to say the Office of the Blessed Virgin; The Sisters to be always
intent and Solicitous about the Care and Service of the Infirm in the said
Hospital, The Common Seal to be kept under three Keys, one to remain Hospital
shall have a free Sepulture for those who choose to be buried with them, etc.

[ Valued at 83 l. 3 s. 3 d. per Annum.]

BRUGWALTER in Somersetshire.
FOunded by William Briewerr, for thirteen poor People, beside Religious men,
and Travailers. Several Churches being of the Advowson of the Master and
Brethren of this Hospital of St. John Baptist at Brudgwalter, were appropriated
hereunto by the Bishop of Bath and Wells Exeter, An. 1284. The Patronage of
this Hospital coming to the hands of the Lord de la Zouche in Custody of King
Henry VI. by reason of his Nonage, that King granted his License to the
President and Brethren of this House to elect a New Master, on the death of the
former.

[ Valued at 120 l. 19 s. 1 d. ob. per Annum.]

BRUGENORTH, in Shropshire.
IT was found by Inquisition, 14 Edward IV. that Radulf le Strange Founded and
endowed this Hospital in honor of the blessed Trinity, the Virgin, and St.
John Baptist; From which Ralfle Strange did lineally descend John Talbot,
created first Earl Salisbury of that name. And it was then Hospital was in
Process of time changed to that of Prior.

[ Valued at 4 l. per Annum.]

St. JOHN'S in the City of Wells.
FIrst Founded by Hugh Bishop of Lincoln. Ioselin Bishop of Bath, and Sir
Edmund Lions were Benefactors. These were so bountiful to this Hospital, that
at first this House had two hundred marks of annual Rents.

[ Valued at 40 l. o s: 2 d. ob per Annum.]

STRODE, in Kent.
FOunded by Gilbert Bishop of Rochester, for the Receipt of Poor, weak and
infirm People, as well known, as Strangers, and Travelers, and for their
releif with Bed, Meat, and Drink, till they either die or depart in health; The
Master or Governor of which House by the name and title of Iconomus, he
appointed to be a Regular, and to have with him at least two Priests to
celebrate daily two Masses. The said Bishop endowed this Hospital with diverse
Churches and Tithes, etc. All which Revenues were Rochester, Hubert Archbishop
of Canterbury, and King Richard the first. Whose Several Deeds were all Recited
and confirmed by King Edward III. An. 6. by Inspeximus. The same Edward III.
An. 16. granted his License to Mary of St. Paul Countess of Pembroke to grant
her Manor of Strode to any House of Religious Men or Women, already built, or
to be built by her, with a Non obstante to the Statute of Mortmain.

[ Valued at 52 l. 9 s. 10 d. ob. per Annum.]

SHIREBURNE, in the Bishopric of Durham.
FOunded and endowed with Lands and Churches by Hugh de Puteaco (or Pudsey) who
placed there Leperous People collected all over his Diocese, endowing it with
Lands and Churches.

SUTTON, in Yorkshire.
JEffrey Fitz-Peter Earl of Essex gave certain Lands here to William de Wrotham
Archdeacon of Tanton, for the erection of an Hospital in honor of the holy and
individual Trinity, and the blessed Virgin, and of all Celestial Virtues, and
all Saints, and for the maintenance of thirteen poor People and three Chaplains.

MERLEBERGE, in Wiltshire.
TO this Hospital dedicated to St. John Baptist, and to the Brothers and
Sisters here, King John, An. 16. confirmed diverse Lands given by Henry de
Kenet, Levenot Son of Levenot, and others.

[ Valued at 6 l. 18 s. 4 d. per Annum.]


KING John, An. Reg. 9. and King Henry the III. An. 32. confirmed diverse Lands
to the Masters and Brethren of this Hospital of Lepers of St. Laurence in the
Suburbs of Bristol.

BOCKLAND, in Somersetshire.
LOretta Countess of Leicester, Widow of Earl Robert, gave diverse Lands to God
and the blessed Mary, and St. John Baptist, and to the blessed Poor of the
Hospital-house of Jerusalem, for the Sustentation of the Sisters of Bocklaund,
and for the finding of a Chaplain to celebrate daily in the Church at Bokland.

St. THOMAS, in Southwark.
FOunded by Peter de Rupibus, and endowed with a Rent of 343 l. Gilbert de
Clare Earl of Gloucester and Hertford, An. 7. E. 1. exchanged with the Master
and Brethren of the Hospital of St. Thomas the Martyr in Southwark, the Church
of Blechyngelegh for certain Lands in Surrey; which Church King Edward the II.
gave them License to impropriate to their Hospital, and to hold it to them and
their Successors, so impropriated.

[ Valued at 266 l. 17 s. 11 d. per Annum.]

DOMUS DEI, in Southampton.
GErvase de Hamton, Margaret de Redvariis, and many others gave diverse Lands,
etc. to this Hospital, all whose Gifts were recited and confirmed by King
Edward the III. An. Reg. 6. The same King, An. 17. Prepositus and Scholars of
Que^ns-hall in Oxford, and to their Successors for ever, which Hall was then
newly founded and endowed with Possessions by Queen Philippa Wife of that King,
He also granted to the etc. for ever. King Edward the IV. An. 1. granted to the
Custos, Chaplain, and Brethren of this Hospital, and their Successors, the
Alien Priory of Shirburne in the County of Southampton, with all its Lands,
etc. Richard Duke of York the Father, and Richard Earl of Cambridge the
Grandfather of that King, are in the said Grant alleged to be buried in this
Hospital.

SANDONE, in Surrey.
TO the Master and Brethren of this Hospital dedicated to the Holy Ghost,
William de Perci Son and Heir of Henry de Perci gave and William being buried
here, the Prior and Brethren of this House obliged themselves to find a Lamp
and Wax-Candle to burn for him in the Church of Standone at the time of Mass,
for ever, An. 14. Henry 6. That King granted his License to the Cardinal Bishop
of Winchester to annex and unite for ever this Hospital, being founded by his
Predecessors, to that of St. Thomas in Southwark.

ROUNCEVAL, by Charing Cross in the Suburbs of London.
IT was found by Inquisition 7 R. 2. that William Marechall Earl of Pembroke
gave to the Prior and Convent of the Hospital of the blessed Mary of Rouncyvall
and his Successors for ever, one Message and certain Lands and Tenements in
Charing, where the Chapel and Hospital are situated. Confirmed by King Henry.

St. JOHN's Hospital at Oxford.
KING Henry the III. in the seventeenth year of his Reign, erected a noble Inn,
or Hospital, not far from the East gate, in Oxford, for the Reception and
Relief of the Necessities of the Infirm and Travelers, Edendon, and the Jews
Garden in the Suburbs of Oxford without the said Eastgate, and granted that as
often as he came to Oxford they should receive of him Alms for one hundred poor
People on the first day of his coming to Town. He also granted to this Hospital
of St. John Baptist at Oxford a parcel of his Wood of Shottoure, with the
Pasture adjoining, etc.

NEWSTEDE near Stamford, in Lincolnshire.
WIlliam de Albiniaco the III. gave to this Hospital, fonnded in honor of the
blessed Mary ever Virgin, at the Bridge of Wass between Stamford and Offington,
and to the Brethren there, diverse Lands, etc. With the Tith of all the Bread,
Flesh, and Fish, spent in his Family, and free Pasture for one hundred sheep,
etc. The Master of the said Hospital to be a Priest and a Canon Regular of some
House, and to have with him some other Canons living according to the Rule of
St. Augustine, and seven poor and infirm men to be maintained in the Hospital.
The same William, William Albiniaco the IV. confirmed what his Father had
given, and granted that upon death of the Prior, the Canons here might freely
choose another and present him to the Patron, and in the mean time, the Canons
to have the Custody of the House, and Liberties of the same. All which things
were confirmed by King Edward the III. An Reg. II.

[ Valued at 37 l. 6 s. per Annum.]

St. JOHN BAPTIST, at Nottingham.
ANno Dom. 1241. Walter de Gray Archbishop of Tork made the following Order and
Rule for the Brothers and Sisters of this Hospital. That the Master or Custos
provide two Chaplains or more to celebrate there for ever, that all the
Brethren rise together to Matines, which are to be so early that they may be
finished by or before daybreak, from the Feast of St. Michael to Easter; which
done then shall follow Prime and Terce, then Mass, and after Mass, Sext and
None; the Brothers shall mind their business in the House, and if not hindered
with necessary Occasions, they shall hear Vespers and Complin; that they shall
be all obedient to the Custos, and none shall have any thing in property for
seven days under pain of Excommunication; they shall be all clothed and fed in
common, eat no flesh but three days in the Week, Sunday, Tuesday, and Thursday;
lie in one Dormitory; they shall be chaste and sober; their Habit of Russet and
Black, etc.

Here was in this Town of Nottingham, another Hospital, founded by John
Plumtre, by License of King Richard the II. An. Reg. 16. for two Chaplains, one
of which to be Master or Custos, and for thirteen old and poor Widows (senio
confractis and paupertate depressis) which said John endowed the same with ten
Messuages and two Tofts in Nottingham; and ordained that the Community of the
Town of Nottingham, and the Prior of Lenton should present to the Chantry in
the Chapel of this Hospital, and that the two Chantry Priests should receive
for their stipends 100 ^. to each yearly. Whose Orders bear date An. Dom. 1400.

St. JOHN BAPTIST at Ludlow, in Shropshire.
FOunded by Peter Vndergod, near the Bridge at Ludlow, and by him endowed with
diverse Lands, etc. for the maintenance of certain Religious Brethren, and for
the Sustenance of poor and infirm People. He also granted to the Brothers, that
after his decease, they might freely choose one of themselves to be their
Master or Custos: and so as often as occasion should be, and the Master and
Brothers to admit the Poor, etc. which Lands, etc. so given as abovesaid were
confirmed by Walter de Lacy the Chief Lord of the Fee, and by King Henry the
III. An. 5.

[ Valued at 17 l. 3 s. 3 d. per Annum.]

The House of Converts, in the Suburbs of London.
FOunded by King Henry the III. in a place then called Newstrete, and by him
endowed with seven hundred Marks for the Maintenance of Converts, and for the
building their Church, etc. to be paid yearly out of the Exchequer, one Moiety
at Easter and the other at Michaelmas, till other Provision shall be made, in
Lands or Rents. And by another Charter dated 33 H. 3. that King gave to this
House by him founded for Convert Jews, between the old and new Temple at
London, certain Escheated Lands to hold to the Master and Brethren of the said
House converted and to be converted from Judaism to the Catholic Faith.

LECHELADE, in Gloucestershire.
FOunded by Richard Earl of Cornwa! Brother of King Henry III. and Senchia his
Wife. Confirmed by King Henry III. Which King An. 54. granted to the Brethren
of this Hospital, dedicated to St. John Baptist, the Hermitage of Lovebury in
the Forest of Whichewode, they providing one Chaplain to celebrate daily in
the said Hermitage. King Edward the IV. An. 12. granted the Patronage or
Advowson of this Hospital to his Mother Cecily Duchess of York, with License
to change it into a Chantry of three perpetual Chaplains to celebrate the
Divine Offices daily at the Altar of our Lady in the Church of Lechlade, which
three Chaplains to be a Body incorporate, able to purchase Lands etc. and to
have a Common Seal. By the same Deed he granted License John Twyn^ho to found
another Chantry at the Altar of St. Blase in the same Church for one perpetual
Chaplain, and that the other three Chaplains may grant to this Chantry Priest
of St. Blase, a yearly Rent of ten Marks.

LEDBURY, in Herefordshire.
Hugh Foliot Bishop of Hereford for the Reception of poor People and
Travelers, and dedicated in honor of God and St. Katherine the Virgin; he
endowed it with several Churches, and Tenements, etc. all which with other
Lands given by others, King Edw. the III. An. 2. confirmed.

[ Valued at 22. l. 5 s. per Annum.]


RObert the III. called for distinction Blancmains, Earl of Leicester, had
issue, among others, William a Leper, who founded this Hospital.

LANGRIGH, in...
RIchard de Singelton, and Walter Nutun of Ribelcester gave to the Master and
Brethren of this Hospital, dedicated to God and St. Savior, Diverse Lands in
Ribelcester and elsewhere.


FOunded by Robert de Gurnay, and by him endowed with the Manor of Poulet,
etc. for the Maintenance of a Master and three Chaplains, and for the refection
of one hundred poor People daily, for ever, each of the said Poor to have a
quantity of Bread of the weight of 45 s. with a sufficient quantity of Potage
made of Oat-meal: the Bread to be made of an equal mixture of Bean-flower and
Barley (de frumento fabarum, and ordeo.)

[ Valued at 112 l. 9 s. 9 d. per Annum.]

GLANFORDBRIGGE, in Yorkshire.
Ralph Paynel Knt. but the Abbot and Convent of Seleby had the power of placing
one of their Brotherhood, in this Hospital, to have the Custody of the same,
yet so that he should not convert the Goods of the Hospital to any other use
but only to the Sustentation of the Poor and Needy.

St. BARTLEMEW's, in Gloucester.
IT was found by Inquisition 30 E. 3. That in the time of Hen. the II. one
Nicholas Walred, a Chaplain, undertook the building of the West-Bridge here, to
whom many Workmen resorting, one William Myparty a Burgess of Gloucester,
erected a certain Habitation for the said Nicholas and the other Workmen, in
which House for a long time after the said Nicholas and William did dwell
together, with the Workmen and diverse infirm People of both Sexes, having
always a Priest for their Governor all living on Alms, till King Henry the III.
An. 13. gave them the Church of St. Nicholas in this City, with other Lands,
from which time the said House became an Hospital bearing the name of St.
Bartlemew, the same King granted them Liberty also to choose a Prior, which
accordingly they did. This Hospital consisted of a Master, and three Brothers,
beside the Poor.

[ Valued at 44 l. 7 s. 2 d. ob. per Annum.]

GRETHAM, in the Bishopric of Durham.
FOunded by Robert Bishop of Durham in honor of God, St. Mary, and St.
Cuthbert, for a Master and Brethren, and for the Sustentation of the poor and
needy People that should resort thither; who also endowed it with the Manor of
Gretham, etc. He granted also that the Master and Brethren of this House should
be free from all Tolls, Aids, and Tallages; and to all their Benefactors, being
contrite and confessed, he released forty days Penance. Whose Deed, confirmed
by Hugh Prior of Durham and the Convent there, bears date An. Dom. 1262.

[ Valued at 97 l. 6 s. 3 d. ob. per Annum.]

ESTBRIGGE, in Canterbury.
THIS Hospital founded in honor of St. Nicholas, St. Catherine, and St. Thomas
the Martyr, was compounded of several, united into one; the poor and infirm
Brethren of which, William Cokyn Citizen of Canterbury made his Heirs of all
his Lands, Possessions, and Chattles, which with diverse other Gifts from other
Men, King Edward the II. An. 7. recited and confirmed to the Master and
Brethren here, and their Successors.

[ Valued at 23 l. 18 s. 9 d. ob. per Annum.]

BOLTON, in Northumberland.
FOunded and endowed by Robert de Roos for three Brothers and Chaplains, and
thirteen Leperous Men, and certain Lay Brothers. Constituting Rival, and the
Prior of Kyrkham jointly to be the principal Wardens or Governors of this
Hospital to whose Power, he committed the placing the Master, or displacing him
if occasion be.

BASINGSTOKE, in Southamptonshire.
FOunded by King Henry the III. ad sustentation ministorum Altaris Christi, For
the support of those who serve at God's Altar.


FOunded by Queen Alianore Widow of King Henry II. For a Master and Brethren,
and by her largely endowed with Lands, Rents, and Tenements in East-Smithfield,
Kent, and Hertfordshire. Reserving to her self and the succeeding Queens of
England full Power to place the Master or Custos of the Hospital, for ever.
Ordaining that out of the Revenues of this House should be maintained three
Priests together with the said Master, to celebrate daily in the said Hospital;
that on the 16th of November on which day King Henry the II. died, a halfpenny
a piece should be distributed in Alms to one thousand poor People, and on every
day in the year 12 d. to twenty four poor People, that upon the death of any
Brother or Sister, another to be substituted by her, or the succeeding Queens
of England, who are after her death, to be the Patronesses and Conservators of
this House. Whose Deed of Foundation and Settlement, bears date An. Dom. 1273.

[ Valued at 315 l. 14 s. 2 d. per Annum.]


FOunded by Gilbert and John, Merchants of Exeter, here were five Priests, nine
Boys, and twelve poor People.

St. PAUL at Norwich.
FOunded by Edward (or Eborard) the II. Bishop of Norwich. Vid. Vol. 3. p. 43.

St. GILES at Norwich.
FOunded by Walter Suffeld, alias Calthorpe, Bishop of Norwich, for a Master,
three Priests, and twelve poor Women.

[ Valued at 90 l. 12 s. per Annum.]

WELL, in...
FOunded by Ralph Neville for three Chaplains, and certain poor and infirm
People, and by him endowed with diverse Lands which he held of the honor of
Richmond, for which he had the License of King Edward the III. An. 16. Vid.
Vol. 3. p. 89.

PONTFRACT, in Yorkshire.
FOunded by William le Tabourerc, for one Chaplain and eight poor People, and
endowed by him and others, with the License of King Edward the III. granted An.
8.

ELSING-SPITTEL, in London.
WIlliam Elsyng Citizen of London founded here a College consisting of one
Warden and four Secular Priests, and an Hospital of poor People in the Parishes
of St. Alphege, and St. Mary Aldermanbury, on which College and Hospital he
bestowed certain Tenements and Rents in the said Parishes and elsewhere in
London; and gave the Patronage of the same to the Dean and Chapter of St.
Paul's, who united to this House, and appropriated the Church of Aldermanbury,
etc. The said Dean and Chapter to pla^^ the Warden and two of the Priests, and
the said William Elsyng, the other two; the Custos to be in Priestly orders,
and unbenificed elsewhere; s. for each, and the Warden in a Garment of the same
color not exceeding 40 s. and that the Priests be allowed more for Linen and
Shoes, etc. 20 s. per Annum to each, and the Warden 40 s. to be paid yearly,
eight days after Easter; that ninety eight blind and poor etc. Which orders
were sealed by the said William Elsyng, 1331. (5 E 3.) in the presence of John
de (...) Mayor of London, the two Sheriffs, and several Aldermen, etc. Not long
after this, viz. An. 1340. Ralph Bishop of London changed the Warden and
Secular Priests of this Hospital of St. Mary within Cripplegate, into a Prior
and Canons Regular of St. Augustine, under the Patronage of the Dean and Chapter
of Paul's, still; all other things concerning the said Hospital relating to the
poor, etc. to remain as before; and this Commutation was upon the Petition of
the Founder William Elsyng.

[ Valued at 193 l. 15 s. 5 d. per Annum.]

BERKING-CHIRCHE, near the Tower at London.
KING Edward the III. An. 44. granted his License to Robert Denton Chaplain, to
found an Hospital in his House or Message within the Parish of Berking-Church,
London, for the Habitation of poor Priests and other poor men and Women, who
fall into Frensies and lose their Memory; he also Licensed him to give and
assign the same House and another Message in the Parish of St. Laurence
Pountency (both which Messuages were held of him in Burgage) to certain
Chaplains, etc. for the celebrating the Divine Offices, etc. But the intended
Foundation here not taking effect, King Rich. the II. An. 2. at the Petition of
the said Robert, granted him License to assign the Premises, etc. to the
Hospital of St. Katherine near the Tower.


FOunded by Henry Duke of Lancaster near the Castle in Leicester, An. Dom.
1330. And by him endowed with diverse Lands, etc. Here was also of his Frection
a Collegiate Church, in which he was buried An. 1361. The whole was to maintain
a Dean and twelve Canons, and as many Vicars, one hundred poor People and ten
able Women to serve them. Vid. Vol 3. part 2. p. 139.

[ Valued at 23 l. 12 s. 11 d. per Annum.]

HEHTE, in Kent.
KING Edward the III. An. 16. granted his License to Hamon Bishop of Rochester
for the founding of this Hospital for thirteen poor People, with a non obstante
to the Statute of Mortmain.


FOunded with License of King Edward the III. by John de Kirktone for a Warden
being a Chaplain, and fifteen poor People. Dedicated in honor of all Saints,
and by the said John endowed with diverse Lands, held of the Abbot and Convent
of Croyland.

St. NICHOLAS near York.
THis Hospital being of the Advowson or Patronage of the Kings of England, was
An. 1303. Visited by William de Grenefeud at that time viz. that all the
Brothers and Sisters of this Hospital should at their Admittance profess due
Obedience to the Master and Warden, and inviolaby observe perpetual Chastity,
That both Brothers and Sisters should be present at Matins, Mass, and the other
hours, unless hindered by Sickness, etc. and that they should say during the
time of Divine Service, the Lord's Prayer and Angelick Salutation, with due
devotion, iterating the same as often as the Lord shall inspire them; That the
Brothers and Sisters should not live under the same Roof, etc. That what ever
they have for their several uses shall after their death come to the House;
That they shall have a Common Seal; that they shall not demise, or bind any of
their Possessions, unknown to the Chancellor of England or his Successors; That
for the future none shall be Master or Custos of this House but such only as
will undertake the Government in his own person; If any transgress against
their due obedience the Master or Custos shall for etc.

[ Valued at 29 l. 1 s. 4 d. per Annum.]

BOWS, in the I Will of Gerneseye.
FOunded with License of King Edward III. An. 35. by Peter of St. Peter's in
Gernsey, in the Parish of Saintpierport in that Island, for a Master or Custos,
Brethren, and Sisters; and by him endowed with twenty yardland, and the
delivery of fourscore quarters of wheat yearly, arising out of certain Land in
the said Parish; which Land was held in Capite of the King, by a Service called
Chaumpert, viz. the payment of the eleventh Sheaf arising on the said Lands
yearly.

WOLVERHAMPTON, in Staffordshire.
FOunded, with License of King Richard II. An. 16. by Clement Lusone, and
William Waterfall, for one Chaplain and six poor people.

The Holy Trinity in New Sarum.
KIng Richard II. An. 17. granted his License to John Chaundeler to make an
Hospital in honor of the holy Trinity of two messuages in a Street called
Newestreet in New Sarum, for the Releif of poor weak and Infirm people, whereof
the Mayor of the Said City for the time being to be Master, and to rule and
govern the same, and to endow the same with a certain Rent of 13 s. 4 d. King
Henry IV. An. 1. granted License to the then Master to purchase Lands of 20 l.
value per Annum.

KNOLS Alms house at Pontfract, in Yorkshire.
FOunded by Sir Robert Knolls Knight Citizen of London, and Constance his Wife,
in honor of the Holy Trinity, and blessed Virgin Mary, for certain Chaplains
whereof one to be Master, two Clerks, and thirteen Poor people, such especially
as by misfortune come to want, and two Servants to help the said Poor. The
Master to have twenty marks for his fastenance, the two Clerks each ten marks,
and the thirteen Poor amongst them 34 l. 4 s. 3 d. ob, per Annum. viz. 1 d. ob,
a day to each. Which Deed of the Said Roberts Foundation bears date An. Dom.
1385,

[ Valued at 182 l. 14 s. 4 d. per Annum.]

OKEHAM, in Rutland.
KIng Richard II. An. 22. granted his License to William Dalby of Extone to
found this Hospital for two Chaplains, of which one to be Custos, and thirteen
poor Men, and to endow the same with one Message and two acres of Land at
Okeham, and to grant the Patronage of the same Anne of the Order of Ca^^husians
at Coventry, with a further License to the said Prior and Convent to give a
yearly Rent of 40 l. to be issuing out of some of their Possessions where ever
they pleased to assign, to the Custos of the said Hospital and the said Poor
men for their maintenance, for ever.

[ Valued at 12 l. 12 s. 11 d. per Annum.]

DONYNGTON, in Barkshire.
KIng Richard II. An. 16. gave License to Richard Alberbury to found an
Hospital in his Manor of Donyngton, which he held of the King, as of his
honor of Walingford, for certain poor people, or which one to be chief, by the
name and Title of The Minister of God of the poor House of Donyngton, and to
endow the same with diverse Lands.

[ Valued at 19 l. 3 s. 10 d. per Annum.]

THORNTONS Hospital in New Castle upon Tine, in Northumberland.
FOunded by Roger Thornton in honor of St. Catherine for one Chaplain, Henry
IV. An. 1^ granted his License, and that they might have a Common Seal. Endowed
by the said Roger with yearly Rents of 10 l.

EWELME, in Oxfordshire.
KIng Henry VI. An. 15. granted his License to his Cous^n William de la Pole
Earl of Suffolk, and Alice his Wife to found an Alms House in this Town, for
two Chaplains and thirteen poor men, and that they should be a Body Corporate,
and that he might endow the same with one per Annum. This Hospital was Founded
An. Dom. 1448. and called Gods House. The two Priests were one to instruct the
Poor in Religious Duties, the other to be a Schoolmaster and teach the poor;
both to have for Salery to l. the Minister 16 d. a week, the other twelve poor
men, 13 d, a week.

[ Valued at 20 l. per Annum.]

SHIREBURNE, in Dorsetshire.
FOunded, with License of King Henry the VI. An. ^5. by Robert Nevyle Bishop of
Sarum, Humfrey Stafford, Knt. Margaret Goghe, John Fauntleroy, and John Baret,
to the honor of God, St. John Baptist, and St. John Evangelist, for twenty
Brethren, twelve poor and impotent men, and four poor and impotent Women, and
for a perpetual Chaplain; and that the Brothers of this House might elect one
among themselves to be their Master from year to year, and upon the death of
any of their number the rest might elect others to succeed in their room, etc.

BOCKING, in Essex.
KING Henry the IV. granted his License to John Doreward to erect a perpetual
Chantry of one Chaplain in the Parish Church of Stanewey in Essex, and to endow
the same with a Mansion lying near the Church yard there, and with 7 l. of
yearly Rent. Which Licensed Foundation not being effected in the Life of the
said John, King Henry the VI. did afterward grant License to John Doreward Esquire
his Son, to found a certain House at Bocking to be called Maison Dieu, for
seven poor People, one of which to be called Praepositus Villae de Bokking, and
to have the Government of the said poor, etc. and to endow the same, and a
Chantry by him founded in the Parish Church of Bokking, with Lands and Rents.

TODINGTON, in Bedfordshire.
KING Henry the VI. An. 21. granted his License that John Broughton or his
Feoffees might erect an Hospital in honor of St. John Baptist in Todyngdone,
for one Chaplain, and three poor Men, to be a perpetual Community and Body
Corporate. Also that he might give to the Prioress and Nuns of St. Margaret at
Dertford an Annual Rent of 8 l. and that the said Nuns might assign the said
Rent, and also another Rent of 5 l. per Annum to be issuing out of their own
Lands to this Hospital, which House Dertford was of the said Kings Patronage
being founded by his Progenitors.

RICHMOND, in Yorkshire.
HERE being of old time a poor Hospital dedicated to St. Nicholas in which was
only one Chaplain, of the Kings Patronage by reason or the honor of Richmond,
and that Hospital being fallen to extreme decay, William Ayscogh one of the
Justices of the Common Pleas, repaired it, and added another Chantry Chaplain,
in consideration whereof, and that he was become as a second Founder, King
Henry the VI. An. 26. granted him the Patronage.

[ Valued at 10 l. per Annum.]

DERTFORD, in Kent.
KING Henry the VI. An. 31. gave License to John Bamburgh, William Rothele,
Roger Ionet, and Thomas Boost, and to the Survivors of them to found an
Almshouse in honor of the holy Trinity (to which the Parish Church there is
dedicated) for the perpetual Vicar of that Church, and the Gardians of the
Goods, and Chattles of the said Church, and for five poor decrepid Men; and
that the said Vicar, and Gardians, and their Successors should be Master of the
said House, and a Body Corporate, and have a l. per Annum.

The Almshouse within the Precinct of St. Crosses at Winchester, in Hampshire.
FOunded by Henry, Cardinal, and Bishop of Winchester, half Brother of King
Henry IV. who by License of King Henry the VI. An. 21. Winchester, diverse
Manors, and Lands, etc. to the yearly value of 500 l. Within which this
Almshouse was erected for two Chaplains, five and thirty poor Men, and three
Women, to be governed by the Master of that Hospital; but the Cardinal dying
before this Foundation was perfectly completed, King Henry the VI. An. 33. did
incorporate The New Almshouse of Noble Poverty, established near Winchester by
Henry Cardinal of England, and Bishop of Winchester, Son of John late Duke of
Lancaster of noble Memory; with grant of a Common Seal, and Power to purchase,
etc.

[ Valued at 84 l. 4 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

STOKFASTON (Stockerson) in Leicestershire.
FOunded with License of King Edward the IV. An. 5. by John de Boyville Esquire
near the Town Church, for one Chaplain, and three poor men, who were a Body
Corporate, and might retain Lands to the value of 10 l. per Annum.


FOunded with License of King Edward the IV. An. 11. by Margaret Widow of
Robert Lord Hungerford, John Cheyne of Pynne Esquire and John Mervyn Esquire for one
Chaplain, twelve poor Men, and one poor Woman, of whom the Chaplain to be
Custos or Warden. Which Hospital was made a Body Corporate, etc. and endowed
with diverse Lands, and Southleghe in Wiltshire.

The Savoy, in the Suburbs of London.
KING Henry the VIII. An. 2. granted the place, or piece of Ground, called the
Savoy, parcel of the Duchy of Lancaster, and lying in the Parishes of St.
Clements Danes without the Bars of the New Temple at London, and St. Mary of
the Stronde in the County of Middlesex, to Richard Bishop of Winchester,
Richard Bishop of London, Thomas Bishop of Durham, Edmund Bishop of Sarum,
William Bishop of Lincoln, John Bishop of Rochester Thomas Earl of Arundel,
Thomas Earl of Surrey, Charles Lord Herbert, Sir John Fyneux Chief Justice of
the King's Bench, Sir Robert Read Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, John Young
Master of the Roles, Sir John Lovell, and John Cut, Excutors of King Henry
the VII. for the founding and establishing of an Hospital. And by another Deed
dated An. 4. he granted License to the said Executors to found such Hospital
for five Secular Chaplains, one of which to be Master, to pray for the good
Estate of him and Catherine his Consort, and for the Souls of King Henry the
VII. and Elizabeth his Consort, and of Arthur Prince of Wales. Which Hospital
was to be called The Hospital of Henry the VII. late England, at the Savoy; to
be a Body Corporate, to have a Common Seal, and yearly Revenues, to the value
of five hundred Marks per Annum, for maintenance of the said Chaplains, and for
performance of such other Works of Mercy and Piety as by the said Executors
shall be appointed and expressed. With a Non obstante to the Statute of Mortmain.

[ Valued at 529 l. 5 s. 7 d. ob. per Annum.]

Of the Knights, Hospitallers of St. John of Jerusalem.
THE Patron of this Order of Knights was St. John Baptist, from John and the
Poor at Jerusalem, is said to be first built in the time of Julius Caesar
Emperor of Rome, and Antiochus Prince of Antioch, with certain Treasure which
one Melchiar, a Priest in the Temple, had taken out of the Sepulcher of David;
here the Poor and Infirm were kindly received Jerusalem, he resorted frequently
to this House, and that it was in this House that he appeared to his Apostles
after his Passion Steven and others of his Disciples served the poor in this
Hospital house according to our Lord's Precept. When the Christians were
expelled from Jerusalem, and the City was possessed by the Saracens, one
Conradus, or Gerardus, a devout Servant of God, lived here and served the Poor
in like manner, who at such time as Jerusalem was besieged by Godfrey of
Bullen, and the Christian Pilgrims, and a great Famine being in the Christian
Camp, was accustomed to go upon the Walls and throw over Loaves, which he
carried secretly about him for that purpose, as if he were eager in throwing
Stones against the Besiegers. This Gerard was the first Master of this
Hospital, which after the City was taken by the Christians was very much
favored, and its Revenues augmented by the Kings of Jerusalem, etc. After the
death of this Gerard, Friar Raymund de Puy became Master, who Innocent the II.
and Pope Boniface. This Rule consists of nine and twenty Articles, among which
it is ordained that every Brother or Friar, at his admission to the Service of
the Poor here, is to profess these three things, Chas^ity, Obedience, etc.

Others give another account of the Original of the Hospitallers^ affirming
that after the Turks of Arabia had overrun Syria and Egypt about the year 612.
certain Italian Merchants of the City of Malfe, trading into these parts, and
being favored by the Turks on the account of their Trade, they obtained from
the Calife of Egypt a piece of Ground lying before Church in honor of St. Mary
Magdalen, for the Reception of Women Pilgrims, and placed therein certain Nuns,
and lastly considering the danger of those who came in Pilgrimage to the holy
places, who were often robbed by the Turks, they built an Hospital or Domus Dei
for the Reception of Men, whether Well or Sick, who arrived here in Pilgrimage,
and another Church for them, dedicated to St John Elemon, Patriarch of
Alexandria. These three Houses subsisted only by Alms, collected for them,
yearly, by the said Merchants of Malfy, till the Christians conquered Jerusalem
and expelled the Saracens: At which time lived in the Abbey of Monks, the
beforementioned Girald to whom the Abbot committed the Reception and Relief of
the Poor and Pilgrims in the foresaid Domus Dei or Hospital; and after such
reduction of the City, the said Hospital flourisht daily more and more,
procuring to it self great Revenues, and to Rome, were the occasion of great
Troubles and Disorders between the Hospitallers and the Patriarch of Jerusalem
These Hospitallers on their admission were to make Oath upon the Missal, as
follows, You promise John Baptist, to live and die under the obedience of such
Supe^^^ior, whoever he be, as God shall give you, you vow further and promise
to live chastely until death, and also without property; we also make another
promise, which no Religious Men besides us, make, for we promise to be Servants
and Slaves of the In^irm our Masters. After the making this Vow, he who admits
him says, And we promise you Bread and Water, and humble Clothing, for nothing
more you can require, and we make you a Partaker of all the good Works done in
our Order, etc.

A List of such who have been Masters.
1. Girardus. 2. Raymundus de Podio. 3. Augier de B^llen. 4. Ar^audns de Comps.
5. Gilbertus Assailli. 6. Castus. 7. Iobertus. 8. Gaufridus de Dinsono. 9.
Hermengandus Daps, in his time the Christians lost Jerusalem. 10. Rogerius de
Molins. 11. Garnerius de Neapoli, he had been Prior of St. Iohn' s at London.
Vid. p. 550. 12. Alfonsus de Portugalia, resigned. 13. Gaufridus Rat 14.
Garinus de Monteacuto. 15. Bertrandus de Gexi. 16. Garinus. 17. Bertrandus de
Cons. 18. Petrus de Villa Brida. 19. Willielmus Castello Novo. 20. Hugo Ryvell.
21. Nicholaus de Lorgne. 22. Odd. 23. Guillelmus de Villareto. 24. Fulco de
Vilareto, in his time the Knights Hospitallers took the Island of Rhodes, and
removed the Convent from Cyprus. He was deposed. 25. Mauricius de Paygnaco. 26.
Elionnus de Villa Nova. 27. Deodatus de Gosono. 28. Petrus Cornelian.

FOunded by Jordan Briset, a Baron, about the year 1100. on ten Acres of Land
which he had in exchange from the Nuns of Clerkenwell, which Nunnery he had
founded not long before. The Church of this Hospital was dedicated in honor of
St. John Baptist by Heraclius Patriarch Jerusalem, An. Dmo. 1185. The foresaid
Jordan endowed this House with fourteen Acres of Land adjoining upon the Clerks
Well. Robert de Fun gave to the Brethren of this House the Hermitage of
Yevelie, with a Condition that the said Brothers should admit him into their
Order, at such time as he pleased, whether in Health or Sickness. Many others
Robert de Vere Earl of Oxford gave to the Prior and Brothers of the Hospital of
St. John of Jerusalem in England William Earl of Ferrars, Hugh de Bellocampo,
Gilbert etc. gave diverse other Lands, and Churches, etc. recited John, An. 1.
These Knights of St. John claimed a Privilege to bury the Bodies of such who
had given Alms to their Fraternity, however they came to their death, whereupon
it happened, An. 4. E. 1. that certain Fellons having been executed, some of
the Servants of these Knights went to the Gallows and took `em down to bury,
one of which Fellons, Adam le Messer by name, being laid in the Grave came to
life again, and fled to the Neighboring Church for Sanctuary, where he
remained till he abjured the Realm. Pope Clemens having in the Council of
Vienna suppressed the Order of Knights Templers, and given all their Lands and
Possessions, moveable and immovable to these Knights John of Jerusalem, King
Edw. the II. An. 7. granted his Letters of Mandamus all over England, for
putting the same in execution, in this Kingdom. The like Grant was made by Act
of Parliament, An. 17. E. 2. However Hugh Spencer the younger by force seized
and held from them New Temple, London, which upon his Attainder came to the
hands of King Edward the III. who in the twelfth year of his Reign, did give,
grant, and sell, in consideration of 100 l. part of the said Manor of the New
Temple then valued at 7 l. 5 s. 2 d together with the Church, Coemitary, and
Cloister, etc. to the Prior of St. John's and his Successors.

Vid. Vol. 3. p. 108.


ANno Dom. 1118. Certain Religious Knights, of whom the principal were Hugh de
Paganis, and Godfrey de S. Audomaro, engaged themselves to the Service of
Christ, before the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and undertook to live after the
Manor of Canons Regular. King Baldwin granted them a Habitation in part of his
Palace adjoining to the Temple, and he and others gave them other Gifts whereon
to subsist. Their chief prosession was to guard the Roads from Theives for the
safety of Pilgrims. Their Habit was white with a red Cross. Their number did in
a little time so increase, that they had in their Convent above three hundred
Knights, besides others, and as their number so their Possessions An. Dom.
1240. the Church belonging A KNIGHT TEMPLAR
Vol. 2 P. 617

to these Knights at the Place called the New Temple in London was dedicated on
Ascension day, the King and a great Concourse of Peers and great Persons being
present, An. Dom. 1147. Conrad Emperor of Germany, and Lewis King of France,
with great forces of French, English, Normans, and Britains, made an expedition
against the Pagans in the Holy Land, but returned with Little or no success at
that time; These Knights Templers Damascus, which City had been taken by King
Lewis but for them. An. Dom. 1307. (1 Edward 2.) These Knights were Imprisoned
throughout all Christendom, for certain Enormities and Superstitions crept
into their Order, and all their Estates real and personal Seized.

Of the New Temple at London.
KIng Henry III. by a solemn and formal Deed of Grant dated the nineteenth year
of his Reign, gave his Body to be buried, when it shall please God to take him
out of this Life, at the New Temple in London The like did Queen A^ianor. The
said King Henry III. granted to the Master and Brothers of this House (Magistro
and Fratribus militiae Temp'i Salomonis Jerusalem) and to their Successors 8 l.
yearly out of the Exchequer for the Maintenance of three Chaplains in the New
Temple at London. King Henry the II. gave the said Knights the whole Water
Course of Fleet with a place near Castle Bainard for the making a Mill, with a
Message Fleet near the Bridge. He also granted the Church of St. Clements
Danes with all it appurtenances. Pope Innocent granted that none who should fly
into the Houses of these Knights Templers for safety or Protection, should be
disturbed, nor their Goods taken, under Pain of Excommunication. One of these
Privileged Places belonging to these Knights was Parish=Gardyn, otherwise
called Wideflete, in Suthwark (vide page 543) Concerning which diverse Statutes
and Orders were made by John Duke of Bedford, Farmer of that place, An. 1320.
Some of which were, That every person flying thither for safety should be
examined for what Cause he flies, whether for another man's Debt, or Felony, or
Trespass; and then his name and the Cause to be registered, That he shall be
sworn to be of good behavior in the said Privileged place, while he remains
there, etc. If his flight be for Felony he shall be kept under a Guard of six
men of the Society, If any person strike another he shall pay s. 8 d. if he
draw blood, 13 s. 4 d. If any one commit felony after his reception he shall
lose his Privileged and be committed to the Prison of the Kings Bench. If any
person take in a Whore or be convict of Fornication or Adultery within the
Privileged places, he shall forfeit to the Lord 6 s. 8 d and lose his
Privilege. Bernard de Ball^lio gave to these Knights 15 l. per Annum. of his
Lands in England, arising at Hichen in Hartfordshire. This gift was made at
Paris, in the Presence of the Apostolic Lord Eugenius, the King of France,
Several Archbishops and one hundred and thirty Knights of this Order.
Confirmed afterward Steven. An. Dom. 1185, an Inquisition was made by Friar
Galfrid Steven, of all the Lands, Churches, Mills, Rents of Assize, etc.
belonging to this Order in England; which Perticulars take up fifteen pages,
and being as I conceive, of no use in this Abridgment, I shall not take any
further notice of them, but refer the Curious to the Book at large. An. Dom.
1434. Friar John Stillingfleet compiled a Book of the names, John of Jerusalem
in England, and of all the Lands, Churches, Preceptories Manors, Houses,
Rents. etc. given as well to the said Hospital, as to the Knights Templers in
England. He begins with the Lord Jordan Briset who in the Reign of King Hen. 1.
Founded the House and Hospital of St. John at Clerkenwell, and since him
reckons up some hundreds of other Benefactors, with the Lands, etc. by them
given, among whom, I shall observe, Will. Maundeville Earl of Essex gave to the
Brothers of this Hospital five Bucks to be received yearly between the Feasts
of St, John Baptist, and St. Michael, and five Does between St. Michael and
Lent, for ever out of his Park of Enfelde. William Longeford Knt. William
Coterell and others gave diverse Tenements in the Parish of St. Dunstans West,
with diverse Rents in Fleet Street, the Fiketzfeld, the Mills of Wideflete, with
the Garden called Parish-Garden, with many other Lands, Tenements, and Pastures
in Southwark, Lambethe, and Newington, etc. The Lady Joan Gray Widow of Sir
Robert Gray Knt. gave them the Manor of Hampton near Kingston with all the
Appurtenances, An. 1212. with other Lands elsewhere. Sir Thomas Knt. gave them
the Manor of Saunford in oxfordshire. Roger de Moubray gave to the Templers
many Lands, among the rest, he gave Bal^alle, in Warwickshire. Maud Countess of
Clare, Widow of William, and Mother of Richard Earls of Clare, gave diverse
Hubert de Ria, gave the Templers diverse Revenues in the same Thomas Archbishop
of Canterbury out of anger and ill will departed from the King at Northampton;
So runs the Date of the Deed. Robert de Everyngham gave the Templers the Manor
of Ronstone, etc. and Gilbert de Gressy gave them, there, two Quarentenes or
Furlongs of Heath (bruerae) and Pasture for five hundred Sheep, this Preceptory
was called Temple Earl of Leicester gave the Templers large Possessions
Leicester. William de Erlegh had given Bucklande to be a Monastery of Canons,
but they having misbehaved themselves and forfeited their Estate there, King
Henry the II. about the year 1180. gave their House and Estate thereto
belonging, to the Prior of St. John of Jerusalem, for the Habitation of certain
Sisters of that Order, conditioning that this England for such Sisters. Robert
de Ros and abundance of the greatest Lords of this Kingdom were Benefactors to
these Knights. But above all they held themselves so far obliged to Roger de
Moubray, that the Templers granted to the said Roger and his Heirs, that if at
any time they should happen to find any Brother of the said Order put to
public Penance for any Fault or Offense against his Rule, yet the said Roger
or his Heirs should have power to release him from his said Penance, without
any contradicton. And the Hospitallers granted An. 1330. to John Lord Moubray
and his Heirs for ever, that in case he or they come at any time in devotion to
any of their Convents beyond the Seas, to be as honorably received and served
as any under the Degree of Steven, King Henry the II. King John, and King Henry
the III. were great Benefactors to the Templers, the last of which granted them
free Warren. Fairs and Markets, in many of their Manors and Richard the I. had
a special love for the Knights Hospitallers by reason he had received from the
Master and Brothers of the Hospital many benefits for himself and followers,
when in the holy Land. King Richard the I. granted to the Templers, and also to
the Hospitallers, Markets and Fairs in diverse of their Towns. King Edward the
II. granted A KNIGHT HOSPITALLER
Vol. 2. P. 55^

all the Estate of the Templers to the Knights Hospitallers of St. John, by Act
of Parliament in the seventeenth year of his Reign. King Edw. the III. King
Richard the II. and King Henry the IV. were also very kind to these Knights of
St. John, the last mentioned granted to these Knight, to receive from his Wood
of Pederton three Load (six Horses to a Load) of underwood weekly, viz. of
Thorn, Allez, Maple, and Hazel, for the use and profit of the Prioress and
Sisters of Buckland, and their Successors for ever.

Ieffrey de Say granted to the Knights Templers (fratribus militiae Templi his
Manor of West-Grenewiche, etc. A sine was past 19 H. 3. between Robert de
Stanford Master of the Warfare of the Temple in England, John de Curtenay and
Emme his Wife Deforciants (inpedientes) of certain Lands in East-Hyrst. King
John confirmed to the Knights Templers the Island of Lundy lying in the Mouth
of the Severn. first granted by his Father King Henry the II. In short, the
foresaid King Henry the III. granted etc. with all the Immunity that the Royal
Power can grant (cum omnibus Libertatibus and liberis consuetudinibus, quas
regia potestas liberiores alicui domui Religionis confer potest.)

In the Pontificate of Pope Clement, the Knights Templers being accused France,
before whom the Master and Preceptors of England to commissionate the
Archbishop of Canterbury and diverse other Bishops to make the like enquiry in
this Kingdom. An. Dom. 1309. The Articles exhibited against these Knights were
principally these; That Good Friday it self; That they do not believe the
Sacrament of the Altar, nor any other Sacraments of the Church; that they
enjoin the Priests of their Order not to say the words of Consecration in the
Canon of the Mass; That they affirm and believe that the Great Master of their
Order can absolve them from their Sins, so their Visitor, and Preceptors, though
Laymen; That they use several obscene and (deosculabantur in ano seu spina
dors^, ali quando in virga virili); That they mutually commit the Sin of Sodomy
with one another, and affirm it to be no Crime but lawful; that they adore
Idols, especially in their great Chapters and Assemblies, as their God and
Savior; that such Admissions are therefore private, none suffered to be
present but those of the same Order; that they are sworn not to reveal the
manner of their Reception under pain of Death or Imprisonment; and that these
things are reported by public same, common opinion, and also confessed for the
most part by many of their own Order in full Consistory before the Pope and
Cardinals. The abovesaid Inquisitors sat upon these Matters in the Bishop of
London's Hall in October. 1309. the said Order, but not any thing appeared to be
criminal, absolutely denying Yo^k, and though both at London and York they were
accused of many things, yet nothing appeared for which the Order deserved in
Justice to be suppressed (nihil inventum est quod de jure videretur statum
illorum anullare.) However they were all in one day seized on throughout
England, and imprisoned. And in the Council of Vienna, An. Dom. 1312. the whole
Order of the Templers was condemned and perpetually annulled; with an
Inhibition that none for the future should take that Order, profession or
Habit, under pain of the greater Excommunication. After which the Knights
Hospitallers of St. John obtained most part of their Possessions. At this time
William Archbishop of York, moved with Charity to consider the helpless
condition of the Templers in his Diocese, placed them in several Monasteries in
that County, and ordered them maintenance during Life. Vid. inf. 943. and Vid.
Vol. 3. p. 62. 108.

[ Valued at 2385 l. 12 s. 8 d. per Annum.]

THomas Wolsey Cardinal Priest of St. Cicily, and Archbishop of York, by Virtue
of a Commission from Pope Leo X. An. Dom 1519. Composed certain Ordinances and
Decrees for the better Government of the Canons Regular of St. Augustine in
England: Consisting of these England, to be once every three years. Of their
admittance into the Order, and form of Profession. Of their Obedience, Poverty,
Clausure, Habit and Tonsure; Of the Canonical Hours and Offices in the Oxford,
and of the number of Canons in their Houses or Monasteries.

These Statutes to be published and observed in every House or Monastery of
Canons Regular in England, by their several Abbots, etc.

A CANNON REGVLAR OF St. SEPVLCHRE
Vol. 2 P. 573



Of the Canons of the Holy Sepulcher.
The Priory of the Holy Sepulcher in the Suburbs of Darwick
ANno Dom. 1109. Black Canons were first brought into England, and settled
first at Colchester, then at London, etc. Henry Earl of Warwick erected the
Priory of the Holy Sepulcher at Warwick. About that time the Christians had
newly taken the Holy Land, and had instituted Canons in the Church of the
Sepulcher at Jerusalem, which Canons wore the same Habit with other Canons
Regular, without any distinction besides a double Cross of red in the Breast of
their upper Garment. This House in Warwick was the first and Superior of this
Order in all England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland, till the loss of Jerusalem,
after which this Order decayed almost to nothing, their Profits and Privileges
being transferred to the Trinitarians. Simon Bishop of Worcester dedicated
their Altar, and Cimitery at Warwick, with express provision that the
Parish-Churches of All Saints, and St. Mary's, should not suffer any diminution
or detriment in their Tithes, Buryings, Oblations, Confessions, visiting the
Sick, or any other accustomed Benefits to the said Churches belonging; and that
these Canons should pay to the Parish or Mother Church of All Saints, an
acknowledgment of 30 d. yearly at the Feast of all Saints.

[ Valued at 41 l. 10 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

THETFORD, in Norfolk.
BUilt and endowed with Lands and Revenues by the old Earls of Warren, for
Canons of the Holy Sepulcher. Who enjoyed here large Liberties. Hamelin Earl of
Warren base Brother of King Henry the I^. granted to these Canons among other
things, three Fairs, viz. One on the Invention of the Holy Cross in May,
another on the Feast of the Holy Sepulcher, and the third on the Feast of the
Exaltation of the etc. All which Grants of his Ancestors were confirmed by John
Earl of Warren, An. Dom. 1315. (8 E. 2.)

[ Valued at 39 l. 6 s. 8 d. per Annum.]

Of the Order of Premonstratenses.
Norbert, born in the Diocese of Colein, of noble Parents. About the Age of
thirty three years he was made Deacon, and Priest; and renouncing all Church
Preferments and a large Partimony, he distributed what he had among the poor.
An. Dom. 1120. he retired to a place called Praemonstratum with thirteen
Companions, in the Diocese of Laudunum, or Laon, a City in Picardy, and there
began this Order, called from the place, Premonstratenses, according Augustine.
Being called from this retirement to oppose the Herefie of Tanchelinus at
Antwerp, An. 1124. he in a little time reduced the Persons infected, to the
Catholic Faith. After this he was (though against his will) made Archbishop of
Magdeburg, and became very Instrumental in planting the Christian Religion in
the Northern parts of Europe, and also in healing the Schism between Innocent
the III. and Peter Leo the Antipope. The Place called Premonstratum and a
Chapel there, of St. John Baptist, was given to St. Norbert by Bartholmew
Bishop of Laudunum, with the approbation of Lewis the VI. called the Gross,
King of France. This place was so called, because (as is said) it was
fore-shewn or Praemonstrated to be the Head Seat and Mother Church of this
Order, by the Blessed Virgin, who also gave and appointed them their white East
and West, North and South, of equal England in the ninth year of King Steven,
and about An. Dom. 1146. settled at Newhouse.


FOunded by Peter de Gosla for an Abbot and Canons of the Order of
Premonstratenses, which Abbey and Church dedicated to St. Martial, was by him
endowed with Lands and Revenues; among other things he granted them free
fishing in Humber, and Tithes of his Wood, etc. All which was confirmed, by
those of whom he held his Estate, Radelf de and William Larl of Lincoln. This
Abbey was founded at Neuhus Peter de Gosla held Lands at Newhouse by the service
of five Knights Fees, of the Barons de Bajocis, who held the same of the King
in Capite.

ALNEWIKE, in Northumberland.
FOunded and endowed for Canons of this Order, An. 1147. by Eustace Fitz John,
who married the Daughter and Heir of Yvo de Vescy, Alnewyk and Maltone, from
whom descended A CANNON REGVLAR OF Ye ORDER OF PRAEMONSTRE
Vol. 2. P. 529

the noble Family of Vescy, whose Heirs General were married to Muscamp, and
Bolbek.

[ Valued at 189 l. 15 s. per Annum.]

BLIBURG, in Suffolk.
KING Richard the I. recited and confirmed to these Canons the several Lands
and Rents given them by many Benefactors. The Founder and Patron of this Priory
was the Abbot of St. Osiths.

[ Valued at 48 l. 8 s. 10 d. per Annum.]

HEPPE, in Westmerland.
THIS Priory was first founded in honor of St. Mary Magdalen at Preston, by
Thomas Son of Gospatric, and by him endowed with diverse Lands; among other
things he gave the Canons here as much Wood Thomas gave them also Pasture in
and about Swindale, for sixty Cows, twenty Mares, five hundred Sheep, etc. With
other Possessions in the Territory of the Town of Heppe where this Convent was
new erected. Confirmed by Robert de Veteriponte.

[ Valued at 154 l. 17 s. 7 d. ob. per Annum.]

TUPHOLME, in Lincolnshire.
KING Henry the III. An. 20. Confirmed to the Abbot and Canons of St. Mary of
Tupholm, the several Lands and Possessions given them by Gilbert de Nevill, and
Alan de Nevill his Brother, and diverse other Benefactors. The first Founder was
Robert de Nova Villa, or Nevill, who in Capite from the time of the Conquest,
wherewith he endowed this House.

[ Valued at 100 l. 14 s. 10 d. per Annum.]

WELLEBEC, in Nottinghamshire.
JOceus le Flemangh came into England in the Conquerours Army and obtained from
that King diverse Lands in Cukeney, etc. In this Town lived on Gamelbere, an old
Tenant in Capite before the Conquest, who (de cluario Domini Regis) as often as
the King should lie at his Manor of Maunsfeld, and if he should lame (si
inclaudet) the Palfrey, then he should give the King another Palfrey of four
marks price, this Gamelbere dying without issue the said Estate came by Escheat
to King Henry I. who gave it to Richard Son of the said Ioceus, and his heirs
to hold by the same Service. This Richard had issue by Hawise a Kinswoman of
the Earl of Ferrars, Thomas; who became the Founder of this Abbey, where a
Church of St. James Simon Fitz-Simon and Isabel his Wife, Walter de Faucumberge
and Agnes his Wife etc. An. Dom. Henry de Faucumberge past the Manor of, and
all his Estate in, Cukeney, with the Advowson of this Abbey, to John de Hothom
Bishop of Ely, who four days after conveyed all the premises, except the
Advowson James at Welbeck; and by another Deed dated 25 days after in the same
year John de Nottingham then Abbot of this Abbey, obliged himself and Successors
to find eight Canons of his Abbey for the daily celebration of the Divine
Offices for the Souls in the said Deed montion'd and to celebrate the
Anniversary of the said Bishop in like manner as of then first and principal
Founder, etc. And to this also he and all the Canons of this House obliged
themselves by Oath etc. Richard Basset Knight gave to this Abbey the Town of
Duckmanton, (...) of the Barony of Henry de Stut^vill, was by him confirm (...)
laving to him the Service of one Knights Fee. The other Lan^^, etc. belonging
to this Abbey in Cukeney and elsewhere, were all confirmed by King Henry II.

[ Valued at 249 l. 6 s. 3 d. per Annum.]


WIlliam Parcarius Son of Ingeram Parcarius gave two parts of the Park of
Croxton to this Priory; Hugh Brother of the said William confirmed the said
Gift, and gave other Lands, etc. toward the Building of the Church. Also he
gave his whole Demeasne of Croxton to these Canons to hold in see farm at the
Rent of four marks per Annum gave them the other third part of Croxton Park.
William Earl of Bolon, and John Earl of Morton, Confirmed their Estate at
Croxton, and gave other Lands. The abovementioned Ingeram Parcarius was also
called Ingeram le Porter, and came into England at the Conquest. Edward 1. An.
I. confirmed to the Abbot and Canons of the Church of St. John the Evangelist
and Apostle, at Croxton, otherwise called the Church of St. John de Valle all
their Lands, and granted them free Chase at Croxton. Vid. Vol. 3. p. 73.

[ Valued at 385 l. 10 d. ob. per Annum.]


FOunded in the time of King Henry II. by Radulphus de Glanville, and by him
endowed with the Manor of Leystone. The Advowson of this Abbey coming to the
Crown by the forfeiture of Michael de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, King Richard II.
An. 12. confirmed to the Abbot and Convent of this House their Estate, and
granted them free Election of their Abbot, that in time of Vacation neither he
nor his heirs nor any of his or their Officers would seize the Temporalities,
nor intermeddle in the same, nor should any Abbot and Convent of this House be
ever compelled to grant any Corody or Pension to any Person. Vid. Vol. 3. p. 74.

[ Valued at 181 l. 17 s. 1 d. per Annum.]

BEAUCHIEF, in Derbyshire.
RObert Fitz-Ranulf Lord of Alferton, Norton, and Marnham, was one of these
four Knights, who martyred the Blessed Thomas Archbishop o^ Camesbury, in
explation of which Act he founded this Monastery of Bello Capite, or Beauchef;
dedicated to St. Thomas the Martyr. Thomas de Cadureis (or Chaworth) descended
by an Heir General from the said Robert, gave diverse Lands to this House, and
confirmed all the Gifts of Edward II. An. 9. recited and confirmed the Lands,
etc. given to the Abbot and Canons of this House, by their several Benefactors.

[ Valued at 126 l. 3 s. 4 d. per Annum.]

BLANCLAND, in Northumberland.
FOunded for twelve Canons of the Order of Premonstratenses by Walter de
Bolebek, and by him endowed with diverse Lands etc.

[ Valued at 40 l. 9 d. per Annum.]

NEWBO, in Lincolnshire.
FOunded and endowed with Lands and Churches by Richard Malebisse. Confirmed by
King Henry III. An. 9. Among other things the foresaid Richard gave the Canons
of this House certain Lands in Estwisell held of John de Lascy Earl of Lincoln
by Ward, Releif, and Scurage, etc. all which Services the said Earl afterward
released and quit claimed to these Canons in pure and perpetual alms.

[ Valued at 71 l. 8 s. 1 d. ob. per Annum.]

LAVINDENE, in Buckinghamshire.
FOunded by John Bidun and by him endowed with diverse Lands and Churches.
Ranulph Earl of Chester, and Ralf de Bray, with diverse others, were
Benefactors, all whose gifts were confirmed to the Canons of the Church of St.
John Baptist at Lavindene by King Henry III. An. II.

[ Valued at 79 l. 13 s. 8 d. per Annum]

WENDLYNG, in Norfolk.
FOunded and endowed with Lands, etc. by William de Wendlying, in free and
perpetual Alms. Confirmed by King Edward III. An. 6. And by Robert de
Stuievill, An. 1273. (1. Edward I.)

[ Valued at 55 l. 18 s. 4 d. per Annum.]


FOunded in honor of St. Thomas the Martyr, Archbishop of Canterbury, by the
Lady Agnes de Orreby, Wife of Herbert de Orreby, An. 22. Henry the II. Richard
Bishop of Lincoln (52 H. 3.) and Philip de Kyme (4 E. 1.) with diverse others
were Benefactors.

[ Valued at 87 l. 11 s. 4 d. per Annum.]

STANLY Park, commonly called Dale, in Darbyshire.
Mary at Derby, a man very Religious and a great Alms-giver, was admonisht in a
Vision to leave all that he had, and betake himself to a solitary Life in a
Place called Depedale, which accordingly he did. This was a Desert and Moorish
place East from Derby, near Stanley. Radulsus Son of Geremundus, Lord of the
place, accidentally discovering this Hermit in his poor Habitation, as he was
hunting, and commiserating his Condition, granted him the Soil where his
Hermitage stood and also the Tith of his Mill of Burg, for his maintenance. The
Daughter of this Radulfus was married to Serlo de Grendon Lord of Badeley, to
whom his Aunt and Godmother, called The Gome of the Dale, ( Gome in old English
signified a Godmother) gave Depedale. These two astembled hither certain Canons
from a Religious House at Kalke, to whom they gave this Place, where they built
asumptious Rome ample Privileges. But these Canons becoming very relax in
their Divine Offices, and more given to hunting, and the Pleasures of the
Forest, than to the Church and Prayer, for which being in danger to be
removed, they by way of Prevention refigned all they had here into the hands of
their Patron, and returned to the place from whence they came, except Humfrey
their Prior who retired to a place called the Magdalen, and became a Hermit.
But this House became not hereby desolate, but afterward rise to a greater
degree of honor, ( Ludit in adversis divina potentia rebus) for after this
there came hither six Canons of the Order of Praemenstratenses from Tupholme,
invited by the Patron. But these also misbehaved themselves, and were recalled
to Tupholme. Hereupon William de Grendhom, then Patron, procured five other
Canons of the fame Order from Welbeck. William Son of the foresaid Radulf, with
his Daughter Maud married to Ieffrey Sawcemere, but childles, and the foresaid
William de Grendon, the Patron, his Sisters Son, joined together in making a
Fair and sufficient Endowment of Lands to this House, procuring nine Canons
from Newhouse, to whom they gave the Town and Park of Stanley, the Depedale,
with other Lands in Okebroke, etc. All which with their other Possessions given
by other Benefactors, were confirmed to the Abbot and Canons of Stanlegh Park
by King Henry the III. An. 19.

Vid. Vol. 3. p. 72.

[ Valued at 144 l. 12 s. per Annum.]

LANGDONE, in Kent, a Cell to Leystone.
FOunded by William de Auberville, and by him endowed with the Town of
Langedone and diverse other Lands; and confirmed by Simon de Albrinciis his
chief Lord, and Nicholas do Cryoll defcended of the foresaid William the
Founder.

WEST-DERHAM, in Norfolk.
FOunded by Hubert Dean of York, for the good of his own Soul, and the Souls of
his Father and Mother, and of Ranulph de Glanville and Bertra his Wife who
brought him up. He became afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, and endowed this
Abbey with many Lands, all which was confirmed by King John, An. 1. who also
granted to the Canons of this etc.

[ Valued at 228 l. ob. per Annum.]

BILEGH, alias Maldone, in Essex.
THE Canons of Perendune removed to Maldon, An. Dom. 1180. Robert Mantell was
their Founder. King Richard the I. An. 1. confirmed all their Lands and
Revenues, with the grant of Liberties.

[ Valued at 157 l. 16 s. 11 d. per Annum.]

SULBY, in Northamptonshire.
THIS Abbey of St. Mary de Welleford afterward called the Abbey of Suleby was
founded by William de Wideville. King Richard the I. granted these Canons
diverse Immunities. Robert de Pavily Knt. granted them his Manor of Suleby to
hold of the Abbot and Convent of Westminister, being Lords of the Fee, at the
yearly Rent of 102 s. and of him the said Robert by the Payment of one pound of
Cummin, (Cimini) or 2 d. at Easter yearly, for all Services and Demands. Diverse
other Benefactors gave other Lands in Northamptonshire and elsewhere, among
whom were John de Lacy Constable of Chester, Ralph Basset, etc. All confirmed
and recited Edward the II. An. 9.

[ Valued at 258 l. 8 s. 5 d. per Annum.]

COKERSAND, in Lancashire.
FOunded by The^bald Walter, Brother of Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, for
Canons of the Premonstratenses, to whom he gave in pure and perpetual Alms the
Hay (or enclosed ground) called Pyling for the ^recting of this Abbey. Confirmed
by King John, An. 2. All which, William de Lancaster, John de Lasey Earl of
Lincoln, and Constable of Chester; and the Ieffrey Son of the Lord John, and
others, were recited and confirmed by King Richard the II. An. 7. A Contest
Lancaster, and the Abbot of Cokersand, about Tithes and other Rights of the
Church, it was agreed and settled by Papal Authority, An. 1216. that the Prior
should have two parts of the Corn Tithes in Lancaster and Pulton, and this
Abbot one third part; also Cokersand shall not admit any of the Parishioners of
the Prior of Lancaster to Sepulture at his Convent, without the Priors License,
etc. The Abbot and Convent of Leicester (de pratis) granted to the Canons of
Cokersand the Site of the Hospital of Cokersand, for the making of an Abbey,
which change from an Hospital to a Monastery, of Premonstratenses, was made An.
1190.

BEGEHAM, in Sussex.
THIS Abbey was first founded at Hotteham, by Ralph de Dena, and by him endowed
with Lands, etc Translated from thence to Begeham, otherwise called Benlin, by
Ela de Saukvile Daughter of the first Founder, whose Son Ieffrey de Saukvile
confirmed the Estate of these Canons. Gilbert de Aquila, Robert de Tu^nham,
Walkelin Maminot, and Richard Earl of Clare and Hereford were also Benefactors,
John. King Henry the III. An. 35. Thursday, at their Manor of Rokeland, and a
Fair there for three days at Midsomer. Which with their other Possessions, was
confirmed by King Edward the II. An. 6.

Vid. Vol. 3. p. 77.


FOunded by Ralph de Hay with the Consent of Richard Hay his Brother, Henry
the II. and King John, An. 16. The Bardolfs, and Longspes were Benefactors.


KING Edward the II. An. 12. recited and confirmed the several Lands and
Possessions given to the Brothers and Sisters of Brodholme, by diverse
Benefactors; among whom, Ralph de Albaniaco, Walter de Clifford Agnes his Wife,
etc.

[ Valued at 16 l. 5 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

COVERHAM, in Yorkshire.
THIS Monastery was first founded at Swayneby, An. Dom. 1190. by Helewisia
Daughter and Heir of Ranulf de Glanvilla a Baron, and Capital Justice of
England, in the time of King Henry the II. and Richard the I. It was afterward
translated from Swayneby to Coverham near Midleham, by Ralph Fitz-Robert
descended from the said Helewisia. The Lands, etc. given to this House by the
Foundress and her Son Walleran Fitz-Robert, and Ralph Fitz-Robert, Edric
Neusum, and others, were all confirmed by King Edward the III. An. 22. Of this
Family did descend Mary Lady of Midleham, married to Ralph de Nevile, and Joan
married to Robert de Fatershall.

[ Valued at 160 l. 18 s. 3 d. per Annum.]

St. AGATHA near Richmund, in Yorkshire.
FOunded by one Roaldus the Constable (possibly of Richmond Castle) Roger de
Moubray, Alan Bygot and others were Benefactors, whose Grants were Edw. III.
An. 3. Richard le Scrope of Bolton, by Rich. II. granted to the Abbot and
Convent of this House a yearly Rent of 150 l. for the Maintenance of ten
Canons, over and above the common number then in the Monastery, and of two
Secular Chaplains to celebrate for the said Richard and his Heirs, etc. and for
the Maintenance of twenty two poor men in the said Abbey. This Richard le Scrope
had been the Kings Chancellor, and gave also to this Abbey the Manor of
Brompton upon Swale, then valued at 10 l. 3 s. 4 d. per Annum.

[ Valued at ^ 11 l. 17 s. 11 d. per Annum.]

TORRE, in Devonshire.
THIS Church and Abbey of St. Saviors of Torre was founded by William Briwer,
and by him endowed with many Lands and with the Church of Torre, etc. to hold
in free, pure, and perpetual Alms. King John confirmed to these Canons all
their Possessions, with the Grant etc. for themselves and their men. From this
William Briwere the Founder descended Reginald de Mohun, who in the thirty six
of King Henry the III. had a grant from this Abbot and Convent of Liberty to
erect a Chapel in his Court at Thorre for himself and proper Family, but not
to baptize there, nor admit any of the Parishioners to any Ecclesiastical
Rights, the said Abbot and Convent to receive one Moiety of all Oblations or
Obventions arising in the said Chapel, etc.

[ Valued at 396 l. 11 d. per Annum.]


THE Manor and Advowson of the Church of Hales was given by King John, An. 16.
to Peter de Rupibus Bishop of Winchester, for the erecting of a Religious
House, which was accordingly founded here by that Bishop, and by him endowed
with this Estate. Confirmed by King Henry the III. Roger Bishop of Coventry and
Litchfield, An. 1248, appropriated the Church of Waleshale to this Abbey, after
the death of Vincent etc. An. Dom. 1270. Godfrey Bishop of Worcester made a
Settlement between the Abbot of Hales, and the Perpetual Vicar of the Parish
Church there, the said Vicar to have and receive from the Abbot ten Marks
yearly, a House with Out Houses, Orchard, Garden, and the Vesture of the
Churchyard: The Canons to find another Priest to be under the Vicar
(Presbiterm secundarium) and to bear all ordinary and extraordinary Charges.
John de Hamptone, Joan Botetourt, and John her Son, gave diverse Manors,
Wolstan Bishop of Worcester appropriated to this Abbey the Church of Clent and
Chapel of Rouley, reserving to the perpetual Vicar who has the Cure of Souls
there, a Revenue of 10 l. viz. a Message and Curtelage on the South side of
the Churchyard, with Tith of Calves, Lambs, etc. and all small Tithes (except
of the Monasteries proper Lands) Mortuaries, the Herbage and Trees of the
Churchyard, and all the Altarage.

[ Valued at 280 l. 13 s. 2 d. ob. per Annum.]


FOunded by Robert Fitz-Roger, and endowed with Lands, etc. All which were
confirmed to these Canons by King John, An. 1. with the grant of large
Liberties, and Immunities from all Tolls and Taxes.

Valued at 104 l. 16 s. 5 d. ob. per Annum.


KING Henry the III. An. 16. granted his Manor of Tichefeud to Peter de
Rupibus Bishop of Winchester, to found an Abbey of Premonstratenses, and further
granted to the said Abbey very great Liberties in the said Manor and their
other Lands, with very great Immunities, and to be free and discharged from
Tolls, etc. and from Eua de Lord of the I^^ Gilbert le Mansel, Peter de
Sukemund, who gave certain Land (...) Ingepenne to hold of the Chief Lord of
the Fee by the Service of half a Knights Fee, and of himself and his Heirs by
one pair of d. at the Feast of St. Michael, etc. All whose Gifts were confirmed
to this House by King Edward the II. An. II. An Inventory of the Goods of this
Monastery was taken, Anno Dom. 1420. John Powle Abbot of Hales-Owen, Visitor of
this Place, and it was then found that they had no Moneys in their Treasury.
but l. 4 s. in Debt; and the House engaged in 62 l. 6. d. In the Sacristy, one
Silver-Cup gilt for keeping the Sacrament, two great Chalices gilt, and twelve
lesser ones, a great Silver Vessel full of Relics, a great Silver Cross gilt
with the Images of Mary and John, two Candlesticks Silver and gilt, etc. In the
Treasury many pieces of Plate, some of great size, etc. In diverse Manors
belonging to this Church four and thirty Horses, ten Mares, four Foals, one
hundred and fifty four Oxen, seven Bulls, nine and fifty Cows, etc. three
hundred eighty and one Muttons, one hundred Lambs, etc. seventeen Boars, twenty
four Sows, thirty three Hogs, one hundred and twenty six lesser Swine, and
eighty nine Pigs.

[Valued at the Suppression at 249 l. 16 s. 1 d. per Annum.]

Of the Order of St. Gilbert of Sempringham.
Gilbert is writ very largely, out of which I shall here observe only the most
Remarkable Passages, as briefly as may be. He was born at Sempringham in
Lincolnshire his Fathers name was Iocelinus. of Norman Extraction, but having
large Possessions in this County. In his youth he was sent into France for the
Improvement of Sempringham and Tirington being void, his Father Presented him
Parson of the Alexander Lincoln, by whom he was made Priest. All this while he
was of such Exemplary Piety that he became of great note for Sanctity of
Lincoln, which was offered him with considerable Henry I. At which time he
begun his Order after this Manner; Seven young Virgins, who voluntarily left
the World, shut themselves up in a solitary Habitation adjoining to the North
wall of the Church of St. Andrew at Sempringham, and submitted to his
Government and direction in Spirituals. Their Apartment had but one Door kept
Locked, Their Diet and Releif they received in at a Window. Eugenius gave him
the headship or Government of this Order. To assist him in his Office of
Superspection he Collected Clerks who might take part of the Care of the
Government of his Nunneries off of him, and this was the Original of the Canons
of this Order. These Canons were to live in a Benedict, the Canons that or St.
Augustine, with some Gilbert though Chief of this Order yet lived with as much
hardship in fasting. Watching, and all other Austerities as the meanest of
Henry II. he fell into great Troubles by reason of his siding with Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury and his releiving him with moneys when he fled into
France, England, and by King Henry II. himself. In his old Age he was deprived
A NVN OF Ye ORDER OF St. GILBERT.
Vol. 2. P. 669

of his sight, but the vigor of his mind remained as perfect as ever, with all
the virtuous faculties of his Soul not in the least decayed. Observing An. Dom.
1189 and was buried at Sempringham, four days after Sempringham, An. 1201.
before certain Commissioners appointed Hulert Archbishop of Canterbury, and
again after that, by Papal Authority. The Consequence of which was the
Canonization of St. Gilbert and the Inserting his name into the Catalogue of
Saints, An. Dom. 1202. in

THe Institutions made by the blessed Gilbert and his Successors for the
Government of this Order of Sempringham, are very large and cousist of Diverse
general Chapters, or Heads, and those divided into many Subdivisions. I shall
take Notice only of the Principal Titles, And refer to the Book at large for
particulars.

The first Treats of the Rise and beginning of the Order, and of the etc.

Of the Principal Examiners or Searchers (Scrutatoribus) their Constitution,
etc.

Of the four Procurators in each House of this Order, etc.

Of the Canons and Novices, and their Age, and of the Lay Canons, etc.

Of the Brothers, their Institution, Apparel, and Duties, etc.

Of the Nuns, and such matters as relate to them and their Houses.

Of the Lay Sisters, their Apparel and manner of Life.

Of the Sick and Infirm Nuns and Sisters, how to be treated.

Of the Office of the Dead, and Funeral Matters, etc.

Of some Rules relating equally to the Nuns and Sisters.

Of the Unity and friendship between all the Houses of this Order.

Of the Grand Chapter of the Order to be held yearly. In the

THis order was first Instituted in England in the Reign of King Steven, 1148.
by Master John Gilbert of Semplingham; William Bishop of Norwich writ a very
high Commendation of this Gilbert, Alexander III.

The Priory of Sempringham, in Lincolnshire.
Gilbert de Gaunt, and by him and others endowed with Lincolnshire. John
Dalderby Bishop of Lincoln by his Deed dated at Buchden, An. Dom. 1303. granted
License to the Scholars of the Convent of Sempringham, Studying Divinity or
Philosophy, in St. Peter's Parish in Stamford, to have a Chaplain to celebrate
in their private Chapel there, saving the Rights of the Parish Church of St.
Peter there. Robert Lutterel, Rector of Irnham, gave for the maintenance of the
said Scholars so studdying at Stamford as aforesaid, the House where they
inhabited, with diverse Lands and Tenements in Keten, Cotismore, and Casterton,
in Rutland.

Vid. Vol. 3. p. 107.

[ Valued at 317 l. 4 s. 1 d. per Annum.]

HAVERHOLME, in Lincolnshire.
FOunded by Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, and by him endowed with the Isle then
called Hasreholm. An. Dom 1139.

[ Valued at 70 l. 15 s. 10 d. ob. per Annum.]


PAganus de Bellocampo and Rohaisa his Wife gave many Lands to this House. King
Edward the II, in the tenth year of his Reign granted his License to John
Blundel to give the Manor of Chikesonde with its appurtenances to the Prior
and Convent of this House.

[ Valued at 212 l. 3 s. 5 d. ob. per Annum.]

BOLINGTON, in Lincolnshire.
FOunded by Simon Fitz William in his Park of Bolyngton, and by him endowed
with part of his said Park, and diverse other Lands in pure William de Kima
confirmed to the Prior and Convent of both Sexes at Bolyngton, all their Lands
and Revenues, A. D. 1256. Robert Putrel of Cotes being received into the
Fraternity of this House, gave them at the sametime the Church of Houtun and
Advowson of the same. The Crevequers, or Creukers, Barons of Redburn, were
Benefactors to this Priory, giving diverse Lands in pure and perpetual Alms.

[ Valued at 158 l. 7 s. 11 d. per Annum.]

A CANNON REGVLAR OF St. GILBERT
Vol. 2. P. 791



WATTON, in Yorkshire.
FOunded by Eustachius Son of John and Agnes his Wife, for Nuns, and thirteen
Canons to serve and provide for them, according to the Institution of the Order
of Sempringham. To whom he gave the Town of Watton, etc. Confirmed by William
Fossard Lord of the Fee, and by Henry Archbishop of York. Confirmed also by
Roger de Lasci Constable of Chester Eustachius. King John also gave them Lands
in Eustachius the Founder married for his first Wife a Daughter and Heir of Ivo
de Vescy, from which match descended several of the Vescys; and for his second
Wife Agnes Daughter of William Constable of Chester.

[ Valued at 360 l. 16 s. 10 d. ob. per Annum.]

ALVINGHAM, in Lincolnshire.
PEter de Melsa and Beatrix his Wife gave to the Church of St. Mary of
Alvingham, and to the Nuns and Brethren there, diverse Lands and Revenues in
Alvingham and elsewhere, confirmed by John their Son, An. Dom. 1232. Henry
Bishop of Lincoln certified to the Treasurer and Exchequer, An. Dom. 1401, the
names of all the Churches that were appropriated to the Order of Gilbertines.
Pope Innocent the III. etc.

[ Valued at 128 l. 14 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

St. ANDREWS, in the Suburbs of York.
FOunded at Fishergate at Tork, by Hugh Murdac, and by him endowed with Lands,
Tenements, and Rents in and about York. A. D.. 1202, and exchange of certain
Revenues was made by mutual consent between Simon then Dean, and the Chapter of
St. Peter's at Tork; and Roger then Prior of this House, and Hugh Murdac.

[ Valued at 47 l. 14 s. 3 d. ob. per Annum.]

STIKESWOULD, in Lincolnshire.
IT was found by Inquisition taken at Stanford 3 E. I. That the Master and Nuns
of Stikeswald held diverse Lands at Huntington, of the Gift of several
Benefactors.

[ Valued at 114 l. 5 s. 2 d. ob. per Annum.]

ORMESBY, in Lincolnshire.
FOunded and endowed with Lands by Gilbert Son of Robert de Ormesby.


FOunded by one -- de Grelle Ancestor of Thomas de la War. Agnes de Percy and
others were Benefactors.

[ Valued at 135 l. 9 d. per Annum.]


FOunded and endowed by Isabell de Chauncy Widow of Sir Philip de Chauncy.

[ Valued at 130 l. 13 s. ob. per Annum.]

Newsted at ANCOLM, in Lincolnshire.
FOunded and endowed, with the grant of very great Liberties and Immunities, by
King Henry the II. Confirmed by king Edward the II. An. suo. 13. Diverse Lands
and Revenues were given to the Nuns of the Order of Semplingham, by Peter Son
of Henry de Bilingey, whose Cousin and Heiress became the Wife of William Mason.

[ Valued at 38 l. 13 s. 5 d. per Annum.]


PEter Son of Peter de Belyngey confirmed to the Nuns of Catlei and their
Brethren Clerks and Laics, diverse Lands in Bilingey and Walcot, given by his
Ancestors.

St. CATHERINES, in the Suburbs of Lincoln
FOunded by Robert the second, Bishop of Lincoln, with the assent of his
Chapter, and endowed with the Prebend of Canewich, and with the Church of
Newerc, and diverse Lands and Revenues at Newerc, etc. Confirmed by King Henry
the II.

[ Valued at 202 l. 5 s. ob. per Annum.]


FOunded by Reynerus de Evermu, and by him, and Odo de Sancta Cruce, endowed
with Lands. Confirmed by King Henry the III. An. suo 52.

[ Valued at 49 l. 5 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

HOLLAND-BRIGG, in Lincolnshire.
FOunded by one Godwin a Rich man of Lincoln; and named the Priory of St.
Savior.

MALTON, in Yorkshire.
FOunded for Canons of this Order of Semplingham, by Eustachius Son of John.
Which said Eustachius, and William de Vesci his Son, conferred Flamvills, etc.
Vescies descended Gilbert de Aton, who became Patron of this An. Dom. 1307. The
Lands of this Priory were confirmed to these Canons by King John. An. Dom.
1200. William Laceles, Malton, in lieu of certain Tithes by them granted to the
Church of Soureby.

[ Valued at 197 l. 19 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

SHOULDHAM, in Norfolk.
FOunded by Galfridus Son of Peter, Earl of Essex, for Nuns and their Brethren,
Clerks and Laics, and by him endowed with the Manor Shouldham, and many other
Lands and Churches. After which Foundation he removed the Body of his Wife
Beatrix de Say, who died in Childbirth and had been buried at Chikesand, to
this Priory.

[ Valued at 138 l. 18 s. 1 d. per Annum.]

ELLERTON, in Yorkshire.
FOunded by William Son of Peter, who gave all his Inheritance in Elterton for
the making a Priory of Canons of the Order of Sempingham, An. Dom. 1387. German
de Hay then Patron of this Priory, obtained a German had then but the
presentation of one poor man of the thirteen that were to be maintained in this
Priory, for the future to said German his Heirs and Assigns Lords of the Manor
of Aghton, shall present l. for every refusal to admit any poor man so
presented. Vid. Vol. 3. p. 108.

[ Valued at 62 l. 8 s. 10 d. per Annum.]


FOunded and endowed with diverse Lands in Oveton and elsewhere by Alan de
Wiltone. For Canons of the Order of Semplingham. Confirmed by King John, An.
suo, 5.

[ Valued at 11 l. 2 s. 8 d. per Annum.]


FOunded by Iessrey de Hauvill, for Canons. To whom he gave all his Lands and
Tenements, etc. in Well, saving to him and his Heirs Pasture of sixty Cattle
to feed with the Cattle of the Canons, saving also the Annual Rent of 5 s. to
be paid to him and his Heirs. Confirmed by King John, An. Reg. 5.

[ Valued at 95 l. 6 s. I d. per Annum.]

PULTON, in Wiltshire.
FOunded in the Reign of King Edward the III. by Sir Thomas de Sancto Mauro,
Knt. and by him endowed with the Manor of Polton then valued at 10 l. per
Annum, the Manor of Chelesworth then valued l. per Annum, with other Lands,
King Edward the III. An. suo 28. granted to the Canons here very large
Liberties and Immunities.

Of the Order of the Holy Trinity, for the Redemption of Captives.
The RULES of the Monks of the Holy Trinity were
THat they should live in Chastity and without property, That all their
Revenue, or what comes to their hands lawfully shall be divided into three
parts; with two parts of which they shall supply their own Necessaries, the
third part shall be laid by for the Redemption of Chritian Captives, taken by
Pagans, either by purchasing their freedom for a Sum of Money, or by purchasing
Pagan Captives in order to exchange them for Christians.

That all Churches of this Order shall be entitled of the holy Trinity, and be
of plain work.

That the Brethren cohabit together, three Clerks, and three Laymen, besides
their chief, who shall be called their Minister.

Their Garments to be of woollen Cloth, and white. They may wear Cloaks and
Breeches, but must put them off when they liedown. They shall lie in Woollen,
and not on feather Beds in their own Houses, unless in time of Sickness.

They may not ride on Horses, but on Asses they may.

They may drink Wine, provided it be with Temperance.

From the Ides of September to Easter they shall fast on the Monday, Wednesday,
Friday, and Saturday (unless some solemn festival happen) to also in Lent and
other accustomed times of the Chruch.

Flesh they may eat if given them from abroad, or of their proper feeding, but
that only on Sundays from Easter to Advent, and from Christmas to
Septuagessima; and on Christmassday, Epiphany, Ascension, the Assumption, and
Purification of the Blessed Mary, and Feast of all Saints. They shall buy
nothing for their own Diet, but Bread, Beans, Pease, Herbs, Oil, Eggs, Milk,
Cheese, and Fruit; but no Flesh, nor Fish, nor Wine, unless for the necessities
of the Sick, and on Jorneys, etc.

In Towns where they have Houses of their own they shall not eat, nor drink out
of the same, unless Water, though invited; nor lie out of their own Houses. The
Infirm shall lie and eat by themselves: Strangers especially Religious men,
that come to their Houses shall be kindly entertained according to the ability
of the House. No Brother either Clerk or Lay but shall labor in some Office or
other. They shall observe silence in the Church, Refectory, and Dortour, unless
upon necessary Occasions, A Chapter shall be held every Sunday if possible, in
which they shall consider of the affairs of the House, and then also an
Exhortation shall be made in a plain manner to all the Brethren and others of
the House, instructing them in their duty of what they are to bel^ve and
practice. If any Brother give Scandal, or strike another he shall be punish at
the will of the Minister, more or less. A General Chapter shall be held once a
year, and that in the Oc^aves of Pentecost. The Minister shall be Elected by
the Common Council of the Brethren, not for the dignity of his Birth but the
Merits of his person. The Minister is either greater or Lesser; The Greater may
hear the Confessions of all the Congregations of his Order, the Lesser only of
his own House. If any desire to enter into this Order he shall first undergo a
years Probation, or more if there be occasion, and none shall be received under
the age of twenty years.

None shall swear an Oath unless upon great Necessity by License of the
Minister, or by command of the Bishops, and for an honest and just cause.


THis House, dedicated to God, St. John Baptisi, and St. Radegund the Virgin,
was founded by William Son of Wa^er de Cherlecote, for the Releif of the Poor,
and for the Receipt of Travelers, or Pilgrims and Religious Men there serving
God; he endowed in with several Revenues in Cherlecote. Other Benefactors were
Fulk Son of William de Lucy; William de Narford Lord of Bereford, who among
other things granted to the Minister and Friars of this House free Fishing in
his Water Avon, on all days but Sundays, with other great Liberties and
Privileges; and William de Bello Campo Earl of Warwick. All whose gifts and
Grants King Edward III. in the third year of his Reign, confirmed to Thomas de
Offynton at that time Minister, and the Friars of this House, and Kenylworth.

[ Valued at 23 l. 10 s. per Annum.]

MOTTIDEN, in KENT.
THis House of Friars of the holy Cross, was first founded by Sir Robert de
Rokesley Knight; the Modern Patron was the Earl of Northumberland.

[ Valued at 50 l. 13 s. ob. per Annum.]

INGHAM, in Norfolk.
WIlliam Staserton was the first Founder of this Priory, of later time Francis
Calthorp became Patron.

[ Valued at 61 l. 9 s. 7 d. ob. per Annum.]

A TRINITARIAN
Vol. 2. P. 831



KNARESBOROUGH, in Yorkshire.
KIng John gave certain Lands in Swinesco, to Friar Robert a Hermit in this
place, which his Son King Henry III, confirmed to Friar Ivo, by the title of
Hermit of the holy Cross of Knaresburg, in the twelfth year of his Reign.

Richard King of the Romans and Earl of Cornwall, Brother to King Henry III.
gave to God and to the Brothers of the Holy Trinity of Captives at Knaresburgh
the Chapel of St. Robert at Knaresburgh, and all the Land which King John, his
Father gave to the said Saint Robert in his life time, with other Lands, and
Commons of Pasture for twenty Cows, and three hundred Sheep, and Paunage for
forty Hogs, etc. Whose Deed bears date at London, An. Dom. 1257. All which was
afterward confirmed by King Edward I. and King Edward II.

[ Valued at 35 l. 10 s. 11 d. per Annum.]

Additions to the First Volum of the Monasticon Anglicanum.

Diverse other Grants of Lands, Revenues, Liberties, etc. were made to this
Monastery by several Kings and Bishops in the times of the Saxons, etc. King
Etheldred, An, 987, granted to the Abbot and Monks here quamdiu sides in
Anglorum catholica premanserit plebe. So long as the Catholic Faith shall
remain among the People of England; or, while the People, there, shall remain
Catholics.


IN the year 1197. Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, exchanged the Manor and
Church of Darent to the Monks of St. Andrew at Rochester, for the Manor and
Church of Lammedbe ( Lambeth) with all the Appurtenances thereto belonging, as
well in the said Manor as in Suwerc ( Southwark) And this was by the assent of
King Richard the I. and Gilbert then Bishop of Rochester.


KING William the Conqueror commanded the men of Carlisle, and those Parts, that
they should receive Christianity of the Bishop of Durham and his Archdeacon.
Nigellus de Albeney a great Favorite to King Henry the I. spoild'd the
Monastery of Durham of two Manors, but being afterward very sick and weak,
repented and restored them. Hugh Bishop of Durham was highly favored by King
Richard the I. who made him Earl of Northumberland, and committed the
Government of the Realm to his care during his absence in his Voyage to the
Holy Land, but afterward falling into the King's displeasure he was divested
to the Earldom of Northumberland before his death, which happened in the year
1194. Anthony Beek elected Bishop of Durham in the year 1283. was a man of so
great Authority, that he usually had in his retinue one hundred and forty
Knights. He had a grant of the Isle of Man for life; he was a great Builder; he
died, An. 1310. and was the first Bishop that was buried in the Church of
Durham.

Page 62. WESTMINSTER.
IN the year 1556. Cardinal Pole, then Archbishop of Canterbury and Legate de
Latere, upon the Petition of the Dean and Chapter of St. Peter's at
Westminster, granted them License to give and surrender all and singular their
Goods, moveable and immovable, Actions, and Rights, whatsover, to their
Church, or to them in right of their Church, belonging, to King Philip and
Queen Mary, that with the same they might endow the Abbot and Convent of the
said Church in perpetual Alms, and restore it to the condition of a Monastery
as formerly. Which License was dated at his Manor of Croydon, 17th. Kal.
October, in the second year of the Pontificate of Pope Paul the IV. (which was
3, 4. P. and M.)

Page 143. BARDNEY.
THE Monastery of St. Peter and St. Oswald at Bardney was re-edified and made
an Abbey by Gilbert de Gant, whose Offspring confirmed Gilbert de Gaunt, who
came into England with the Conqueror, descended the Earls of Lincoln of that
name. Hugh Bishop of Lincoln recited and confirmed the several Donations made
to this Monastery.

Page 152. EVESHAM.
THE first and principal Founder of this Monastery was King Ethelred Son of
Penda King of Mercia. Which King Ethelred after he had reigned thirty years,
relinquisht his Kingdom, and became a Monk at Bardney. Of later years several
of the name of Bushel were Benefactors to this House.

Page 169. CROWLAND.
LAngtost was given to this House, An. 819. And the Manor and Church of
Baston, An. 825. the first by Fiegistus, the other by Algarus, two Knights.

Page 176. DEREHAM.
SAint Wythburga the Virgin was Daughter of Anna (King of the East-Angels) and
devoted to a Monastic Life. She caused this Monastery to be built at Derham,
in which she lived a Nun; this House was at first so poor, that upon her
earnes^ Prayer, the Nuns here were supported by a kind of miracle, two Does or
Hinds, being used to come daily to be milked at a certain place for a long
time, till the Chief man or Bailey of Wythburg died and was buried in the
Churchyard at Derham; and five and fifty years after her Body was found
uncorrupted, and translated thence into the Church, An. 798. But in the year
974. it was translated from Durham, to Ely.

Page 191. WINCHCUMBE.
ANno 1175. Pope Alexander the III. recited and confirmed the Lands and
Possessions of this House, and by the same Bull granted the viz. that they
might present Priests of their own Election to the Bishop to be instituted in
the Churches belonging to their Monastery, which Priests were to answer to the
Bishop for the Cure, and to the Monastery for the Temporalties of the place;
that no one should exact Tithes of them for their Lands or Cattle, in their own
hands or Occupation; that they might have free Sepulture for those who desired
to be buried with them, saving the Rights and Dues of the Parish Churches: that
they might cellebrate Divine Offices in time of a general Interdict, with a low
Voice, and Doors shut, etc. That Chrisme and holy Oil, Consecration of their
Church, Ordination of their Monks and Clerks to Sacred Orders, should be
received from none but their Diocesan Bishop, if he be Catholic and in the
Communion of the Apostolic See, and if he will do his Office freely and
willingly, otherwise An. 1404; Richard Bishop of Worcester confirmed the
Appropriation of their Churches.

An. 5. R. 1. Robert the IV. was chosen Abbot of this House; he ordained, that
on every Morrow of All Souls ( November. 3.) yearly, one hundred poor People
should be relieved, here, with Bread, Drink, and Meat. 30 H. 3. John Yanworth
was chosen Abbot on the death of Henry. 9 E. 2. Richard Ydeburi was chosen
Abbot on the death of Thomas. 4 E. 3. Robert de Ippewell then Abbot did freely
and of his own accord, Abdicate the said Office, and Walter Winfort was chosen
to succeed him.

Page 191. WILTON.
WVlstan Earl of Ellendin was the first Founder of the Chantry at Wilton (which
is the same with Ellendin.) King Egbert founded the Priory, at the request of
Elburga his Sister and Widow of the foresaid Earl Wulstan. An. 773. In which
the became a Nun with twelve others. But the first Founder of the Abbey or
Monastery of St. Edith in Wilton was King Alrud, who gave all his Manor and
Liberties at Wilton to the Athelstan was a great Benefactor, An. 933, and 937.
So was King Edgar, An. 968, etc.

Page 193. AMBRESBURY.
THE Nuns here, being about thirty in number, were for their notorious scandal
and naughty Life, removed from hence, and placed in other Monasteries, and
other Nuns brought from Font Ebrald in France and established here; to whom King
Henry the II. upon their first establishment, gave diverse Lands; all which,
with other Revenues given by other Benefactors were confirmed to the said Nuns
of Font Ebrald by King John, in the second year of his Reign.

Page 242. RAMSEY.
IN the year 1100. several Great men of this Kingdom raised a War against King
Henry the I. who were forced to fly into Normandy; Guiscard de Lymosin, Lord
Molyns appeared there on the King's behalf, and prosecuted the War against
them, for which service he was highly favored by the King who brought him with
him over into England, and gave him Castles, Lands, and Honors. This Norman
Lord built that part of Ramsey Monastery which was called Norman's Isle. And
from him descend the Lords Molins. Roger a younger Son of this Family was
Castellan of Nottingham, and called himself Roger de Leumesin ( anglice
Waterhouse.)

Page 253. CHATERIDGE.
THIS Nunnery and Church were all burnt down by a casual fire in the time of
Robert Orford (who was Bishop of Ely, An. 1302.) whereupon the said Bishop
wrote to the Bishop of London setting forth the distressed Condition of the
Abbess and Nuns here, in order to have them excused from the Payment of Tenths
in consideration of their great Loss.

Page 276. BURTON.
NIgellus Abbot of Burton with the Consent of the Chapter there, gave to one
Orme their Land at Acovre, under condition that he pay yearly twenty pieces of
old Coin, each worth 16 d. (xx. oras) and thereupon the said Orme became the
Abbot's man, and swore fealty, and that when dead his Body should be brought (
cum tota pecunia sua) to be buried at Burton Abbey; after which his Son was to
appear in their Chapter House, Martlemass, to go with the Abbot to London when
he goes thither on the Affairs of this House, at the Abbot's Charge, and come
to his Court, if summoned, to judge Felons.


THIS Monastery was given in the time of William the Conqueror to the Abbey of
St. Nicholas at Angiers, by one Yvo Talboys, and became a Cell to that Abbey.
But it being found highly inconvenient to the good of this House that the Prior
and other principal Officers here should come from beyond Sea, and be
removeable at the pleasure of the Abbot of Angiers, they carrying away with
them what they could get from this place; after many contests it was agreed
that the Prior of this House should be instituted by the Diocesan, and be
immovable; and that the Abbot of St. Nicholas at Angiers should not have to do
with any of the Temporalities of this House, but only receive an annual Rent of
40 l. and the Board and Maintenance of four Monks.


ANno 1145. Radulph, Dean of St. Paul's in London, and the Chapter of that
Church, granted to Christina, and the Nuns of the Monastery of the holy Trinity
of the Wood near Merkyate, the Ground where the said Monastery is situated,
reserving a yearly Payment of 3 s. as a Ground Rent, and Fealty. Alexander
Bishop of Lincoln consecrated the Nuns Church here in the abovesaid year 1145.


WIlliam Earl of Ferrars granted to the Monks of St. Mary of Tutbury, the
Tithes of all his Forest of Du^^eld, viz. of Paunage, of hunting of Honey, and
of Money ( i. e. Rents.) William Prior, and the Convent, of Tutbury, granted to
William Fitz^ Herbert and to his H^irs, Norbury in Fee, at the yearly Rent of
100 s. and if he be (...) to assist or be present at the Pleas and Affairs of
the Church of Tutbury with Relief, and other H. 6. Nicholas Fitz-Herbert, Esquire
and Ralph Fitz-Herbert his Son and Heir apparent, set forth that whereas they
had demised to Thomas Gedney Prior of Tutbury certain Lands at Osmondstone in
Com. Derby, for four years; in consideration that the Prior and Convent had by
their Deed under seal released to the said Nicholas and his Heirs all their
Right and Claim of a Rent of 5 l. per Annum, and other Services issuing out of
the Manor of Norbury in the said County, they the said Nicholas and Ralph did
release to the said Prior, and Convent, and their Successors for ever all their
Right and Claim to and in the Lands demised as abovesaid, with Warranty.


THE Priory of Great Malvern was before the Conquest a Hermitage founded by one
Vrso d'Abytot; afterward a certain Abbot of Westminster, with the Assent of
the said Vrso, did place here a Prior and Monks, and gave them three Manors;
others gave other Lands, all which were confirmed by King Henry the I.

Page 370. St. NEOTS.
TEdbald de Eschalers gave Lands to the Monks here, whose Deed Et quoniam ego
Sigillum non babui, petitione-mea Dominus meus Stephanus hanc donationem meam
sub Sigillo suo confirmavit. Other Benefactors to this House were Roger de
Clare Earl of Hertford, William de Albiney Brito, and Peter de Montefort, which
last by his Deed dated at Presion, An. 1245. gave and confirmed to the Monks
here diverse Lands in Wenge ( Com. Rut.) with the Advowson of the Church there.

Page 439. COLNE.
SEveral Countesses of Oxford were Benefactors to the Monks here. Roger Bigot
Earl of Norfolk gave them the Church of Dovercourt and Herewich.

Page 479. BLAKEBERGH.
TO the Nuns of this House diverse of the Family of Scales were great
Benefactors. Emma de Bellofago Widow, gave to the Nuns of Blakebergh four
hundred Eels out of her Fishery at Wilton, per Annum, at the beginning of Lent,
in pure and perpetual Alms.

Page 489. STANFORD.
TO the Nuns of St. Michaels in Stanford were given by several Benefactors, the
Church of St. Clement's in Stanford, the Church of All Saints in Stamford, the
Church of St. Andrew in Stamford then (1170) held by Peter the Dean, who was to
enjoy it during his Life. Also the Martin at Stamford, of which last mentioned
Church it was certified by Oliver Bishop of Lincoln, An. 1289. that the
Vicarage of the said Church did consist in the whole Altarage of the same, the
Vicar paying yearly to the said Nuns two Marks, that the Nuns should be at the
Charge of supplying the Chapel of Burgele in the said Parish, that the Vicar
should pay the Sinodals only, but the Nuns the Archdeacons Procurations, and
all other Charges. They had also given them the Church of Corby and Chapel of
Vpton. William Earl of Waren granted them a Rent of 40 s. per Annum, for their
Kitchen.

Page 496. DENNY.
RObert the Chamberlain Earl of Richmond, gave diverse Lands to the Monks here,
exhorting and commanding his Children to do more for the advantage of this
Church, and cursing any one of his Heirs who shall take away any thing that he
has given. These Monks were first founded in an Isle called Elmeney, but for
the inconveniences of that Seituation, translated to a higher Ground, in the
Isle of Denney, by Albericus Picot.


AMong other Benefactors to this House were Osbert Fitzhugh, who gave a
Salt-pit in Wiche. So did Walter de Clifford for the health of Margaret his
Wife, and Rosamund his Daughter, whose Bodies were buried in this Nunnery;
dedicated to St. Mary and St. John Baptist.

Page 529. COLCHESTER.
HVgh Abbot and the Convent of Monks of St. John Baptist of Colchester, granted
and quit-claim'd the Church of Hecham to the Nuns of Lillechirche in Kent, in
exchange for Duniland; this exchange was confirmed by King Steven, and also by
Walter Bishop of Rochester, who Amphelisa then Prioress of Lilchurch established
a Settlement for the Vicar of the said Church. Pope Alexander granted an
Indulgence of forty days to all those who should contribute to the new building
of the Church of St. Mary of Hegham (the same with Lilchurch.)

Page 534. KYNGTON.
Roger de Mortuomari gave to the Nuns of St. Mary of Kyngton, in pure and
perpetual Alms, the whole Tith of de pane and allece). Roger de Villiers gave
them the second Tithes ( secundas decimas) of the Corn of all his Demesnes, and
the Tithes of his meat or flesh Provision, not bought in, ( decimas Carnis)
Robert Burnell Bishop of Bath and Wells gave them the Advowson of the Church of
Kyngton, belonging to that See.

Page 544. HOLAND.
THE College here dedicated to St. Thomas the Martyr, was at first founded for
Secular Canons, but in the year 1318. it was by the Patron Sir Robert de
Holland Knt. translated into a Priory of Benedictine Monks. Upon the death of
whose Prior the Monks were to choose three, out of whom he was to elect one to
be by him presented to the Diocesan to be Prior.

COLCHESTER, in Essex.
ON the South side of Colchester is a small hill, on the North side of Siricus
a Priest, and a Church composed of Boards and dedicated to St. John the
Evangelist, wherein in the night time was often seen wonderful light, and
music heard praising God, no body being then in the place. This Church being
famed for this and the like miraculous adventures, and being also of a
delicious Situation, Eudo the Kings Major Domo, or Steward, to whom King
William Rufus had given the Custody of the City of Colchester, erected here a
Monastery of which he laid the first Stone, An. Dom 1097. Which being finished
some Monks were brought hither from Rochester. Rochester. After this Eudo
received other thirteen Monks from the Abbot of York; these began upon a New
Foundation, which prosper'd so well that in a short time, one of the thirteen
was chosen Abbot, and Consecrated by Maurice Bishop of London, About the year
1104. Their number increased to above twenty, who all lived very regularly. The
founder Eudo dyed in Normandy, and devised his Body to be buried in the Abbey
Colchester, which was accordingly done, the Monks meeting it a Mile from the
Monastery, An. 1120. This Eudo endowed this Monastery with several Mannours,
Tithes, and Churches, among Mary in the Westcheping, Called the Newcherch, and
his Stone House near the same, also the Church of St. Steven Walebroch, in
London. King Henry II. released the Tax of Dan^geld, etc. in the Lands of these
Monks.

SNAPES in Essex. A Cell to Colchester.
WIlliam Martell, being Seized of the Manor of Snapes enjoyed Wreck of the
Sea from Thorp to Hereford Nesse, and gave this Manor to the Abbey of
Colchester for the founding of a Priory here, which Priory was founded
accordingly and made a Cell to that Abbey, An. 1155. This Priory paid half a
mark yearly to Colchester as a Pension of acknowledgment. Twice a year the
Abbot of Colchester was to Visit here, with twelve Horses, and abide here four
days.

St. HELENS in Bishopsgatestreet, London.
ALardus Dean of St. Paul's London, and the Chapter of that Church, granted
License to William Son of William the Goldsmith, Patron of the Church of St.
Helen, to constitute Nuns in the said Church, and ^rect a College there,
endowing them with the Advowson of the said Dean and Chapter of Paul's, and to
swear fealty to them, and to pay them a Pension of half a mark yearly at
Easier, etc, In the yeat 1439. Raynold Kentwode Dean of Paul's made other
Constitutions for the Government of this Nunnery; some of which were, That
Divine Service be by them duly performed night and day; That no secular person
be locked within the Bounds of the Cloister, nor come within it after the
Complin Bell, except Women Servants, and maid Children; that none of the
Sisters receive Letters from, or speak with any secular Person without License
of the Prioress, and some other Nun to be present; That they grant no Corody or
Pension without License of the said Dean and Chapter, that no Dancing or
Reveling be used in the House except at Christmas, and then among themselves
and in the absence of Secualr persons; That there be a These Orders were to be
Read publicly in their Chapel four times a year, and kept and observed under
the pain of Excomunication.

[ Valued at 314 l. 2 s. 6 d. per Annum.]

CATESBY, in Northamptonshire.
KIng Henry III. in the fifty seventh year of his Reign, recited and confirmed
to the Nuns of Kateby, the Church of the blessed Mary Kateby with the Chapel
of Helidene, with the Church and diverse Lands in great Esseby, and several
other Revenues given them by diverse Benefactors. Confirmed also by the Bull of
Pope Gregory the VIII.

[ Valued at 132 l. 1 s. 11 d. per Annum.]

St. MARY, de Pratis, adjoining to Derby.
KIng Henry II. granted and confirmed to the Nuns of St. Mary de Pratis near
Darby among other things, twenty seven acres of Land in Peak, with large
Commons in the said Forest; King Henry III. granted them 100 s. per Annum. to
be received from the Baylies of the Town of Nottingham out of the Farm of the
said Town.

[ Valued at 18 l. 6 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

GRIMSBY, in Lincolnshire
THe Church, and all the Monastery of Nuns here, being of the Kings Foundation
and Patronage, together with all their goods and Movables and all their
Writings and Evidences concerning their Lands and Estate in Lincolnshire and
Yorkshire, being burnt and consumed by a casual fire, King Henry IV. in the
seventh year of his Reign, confirmed to this Prioress and Convent all their
Grants, etc. made as well by his Progenitors as others.

NEWTON, in Yorkshire.
KIng Edward II. in the fifteen year of his Reign granted his License To his
well beloved Cousin Thomas Wake to give one Message with the appurtenances in
the Town of Neutone for the erection of a Religious House of what order he
pleased, and to endow it with Lands in Neuton and Cottingham, etc. Vid. 3. p.
88.

BROMHALE
HEnry de Lacy Earl of Lincoln and Margaret his Wife, did release and quit
claim to the Nuns of Bromhale one hundred acres of Land in their Wast of
Asserige with the Appurtenances.

Page 551. LEUESHAM, in Kent.
KIng Alured, and his Son King Edward the Elder, gave, and King Edward the
Confessor confirmed, to the Abbey of St. Peter's at Gant, the Manor of Luesham,
with all its appurtenences, viz. Greenwic, Wullewic, Modingham, and Cumbe, with
other Lands and great Liberties and Franchises, as large as the King himself
had in the said Lands, etc. Dated An. Dom. 1044.

Page 551. St. MICHAELS MOUNT, in Cornwall.
RIchard King of the Romans, Edmund Earl of Cornwall, and Conan Britany, were
Benefactors to this House. Pope Adrian in the year 1155. confirmed to the Abbot
and Monks of this House, by the Michael de periculo maris, all their Lands and
Revenues, lying most in Normandy, and also in England.

Page 558. BERGAVENNY.
HEnry de Bellocampo confirmed to the Monks of Bergavenny all those Possessions
which his Ancestors, Hamelinus de Balon, and others, Lords of Bergavenny, had
given them, and further gave and confirmed to the said Monks diverse other
Revenues.

Page 595. GOLDCLIVE.
RObert de Candos founded the Priory at Goldclive in Wales, being then Lord of
Karlyon; The Patronage of which House came afterward to William Earl of
Gloucester, and after that to Richard Duke of York.

CARESBROKE in the IIe of Wight.
WIlliam Fitz Osbern was Mareshal to William the I. and Conquered the I Will of
Wight at such time as the other Conquered England; King William made him Earl
of Hereford. The Estate of this William descended to Baldwin Earl of Exeter who
granted all the Churches and Tithes of this Island to the Abbey of St. Mary of
Lira. King Henry II. recited and confirmed the several Possessions given to
those Monks as well in France, as England, and Wales.


WIlliam de Boterell and Isabella de Say his Wife, gave the Church of St.
George of Clune to the Monks of St. Milburge at Wendloke.

Page 614. DUDLEY.
THe Church and Monastery of St. James at Dudley was founded and endowed by
Gervaise Paganel, or Painel, who granted that in whatsoever Pastures his own
Cattle fed, there also the Cattle of the Monks of Dudley, might freely feed,
except in his Parks; with tithe of his Bread, hunting, and fishing, while he
remains at Dudley. An. 1290, Roger Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield granted a
Remission of forty days penance to those who being truly contrite and confessed,
should say the Lords Prayer and Salutation of the Blessed Virgin, for the Soul
of Roger de Somery buried in the Conventual Church of Dudley, and for the Souls
of all the Faithful deceased.

Page 619. LEWIS.
TO this House did belong diverse Lands, Churches and Tithes in Devonshire,
Sassex, Surrey, Kent, and Norfolk, the several Names of which, and of the
Benefactors who gave them may be seen in the Book at large.


KIng Edward II. granted to the Monks here the Manor of Blaketon to hold in
fee farm at the yearly Rent of twenty pound, which Manor did formerly belong
to Edmund Earl of Kent.

Page 668. MONTEACUTE.
THis Monastery was founded by William Earl of Moriton, near the Castle of
Monteacute for Monks of Cluny; and to it he gave the Burgh, and Castle of
Montacute, and the Chapel in the Castle, together with many other Mannours,
Lands, Churches, Tiths, Fairs and Hundreds.

Page 687. TICKFORD.
GErvasius Paganell gave and confirmed to the Monks of the Church of the
blessed Mary at Newport, diverse Lands and Revenues given them by his Ancestors,
and by other men which held of his Fee, An. 1187. These Monks of Newport (the
same with Tickford) were here as a Cell to St. Martins called Majus
Monasterium, or Marmonstier, in France.

Page 704. WAVERLEY.
POpe Eugenius the III. by his Bull dated at Paris, An. 1147. granted to the
Monks of this House and their Successors, inter alia, that no Tithes should be
by any exacted of them for their Lands or Cattle in their own hands or
occupation.

Page 768. CUMBERMERE.
BAldwin and Hubert successive Archbishops of Canterbury confirmed to
Namptwiche.

Page 782. BILDWAS.
FOunded by Roger Bishop of Coventry. Hugh Bishop of Coventry gave these Monks
an Inn in Litchfield for their Reception when they came William Fitz-Alan gave
them the Town of Little Bildewas, with other Lands. Henry Abbot of this House
granted to Hamon de Benthale, in consideration that his Mother was burdened
with many Children, and at her instance, a certain Allowance and stipen'd in
this Monastery for Term of his Life, which afterward, 11 E. 2. in
consideration of a Sum of Money in hand paid to him, by John then Abbot, the
said Hamon did Release and Quit claim. An. 1287, Henry de Lacy Earl of Lincoln
and Chester confirmed an exchange made between the Monks of this House, and
those of Crokesden, viz. of Caldon Grange in Com. Stafford (being of his Fee)
for certain Lands in Edwyneye in Com. Salop.

Page 802. NEWMINSTER.
THE first and principal Founder of this Abbey was the Lord Ralph de Merley.
from whom descended two Sisters who became Coheirs to the Barony of Merley;
Mary, married to William Baron of Graystok, and Isabella, married to the Lord
Robert de Somervill; all whose descendants were great Benefactors to this
House, so also were the Bertrams Barons de Mitford, with diverse others. Ralph
Baron of Graystok who died, An. 1483. was also Baron of Wemme. George Dacre
Lord of Gillesland and Graystok died young and untimely, by the accidental fall
of a Wooden An. 1569. he being then in Wardship with the Duke of Norfolk.

Page 866. DOOR.
ROger de Clifford gave his Body to God and the blessed Mary, and the Monks of
Door, to be buried in the Church of Door, and with his body he gave them
certain Land, nomine Dotis.

Page 885. BLANCLAND
PAganus de Cadurcis Son and Heir of the Lady Hawisia de London, gave to the
Cistercian Monks of Albaland nineteen Acres of arable Land, that every Priest
of the said House should daily in the Canon of the Mass make special
commemoration for the Souls of such and such of his Family, pro vivis inter
Vivos, and pro defunctis inter mortuos. Whose Deed bears date An. 1270.


ROger de Menilwarin gave to the Monks of this House, for the Health of the
Soul of Ranulph Earl of Chester and Lincoln, his Mothers Brother, in pure and
perpetual Alms, free Common in his Wood of Pevere, House-bote and Hay-bote,
with Paunage for fifty Hogs.

Page 893. CLUNOCK-VAUR.
FOunded and endowed by one Gwithno. King Cadwalader, and diverse Welsh Lords
gave large Possessions to this Abbey, dedicated to God and St. Beyno.


ALice Countess of Eu, Daughter of William Earl of Arundell and of Queen
Alizia, gave Lands to this Abbey in pure and perpetual Alms, ad hospitalitatem
sustentandam, for the maintenance of Hospitality. Which Lands were confirmed to
them by William the third Earl of Sussex her Brothers Son, and by John de Augo
her Son.


KING John gave out of his Treasury one hundred Mark for the building this Abbey
in Newforest, and directed his Letters to all Abbots of the Cistercian Order,
to be helpful to the re-edifying of the same out of their several Stocks.

Page 936. VALE-ROYAL.
PRince Edward Son of King Henry the III. being in great danger of drowning at
Sea, as he returned from the Holy Land, vowed in case Mary, in some proper
place in England, and endow the same with sufficient maintenance for one
hundred Cistercian Monks. Which Monastery being afterward built and by him
named Vale Royal, a Convent was translated thither from the Abbey of Door. In
the year 1277, the said Edward being then King of England, laid the first Stone
of a new Building in the place designed for the great Altar, and after his
example, all the prime Nobility of the Land did the like in honor of our Lord
Christ, the Virgin Mary, and the Holy Confessors St. Nichelas, and Nichafius.
Their first Habitation was but small, yet there they remained for Munechene
wro, in Latin Monachorum silua, Munchene in old English signifying a Monk or
Nun, and Wro a Wood. It Is said that many years before Elianor his Wife was a
bountiful Benefactress, so that not only at all Masses here, but at all
Canonical hours the Monks of this House did use a special Collect for this King
and Queen, and at Grace aftermeat, Animae Regis Edwardi, Reginae Alianorae, and
omnium fidelium defunctorum per misericordiam dei requiescant in pace, to which
they all answered, Amen. At the Solemn Confecration and Benediction of this
House by the Patriarch of Jerusalem, Anthony Beck Bishop of Durham, with
several other Bishops, a Sentence of the greater Excommunication was solemnly
denounced against any one who should enter into this Monastery any other ways
than by the Gates of the same. The first Vale-Royal was John Chaumpneys, 2.
Walter de Hereford, 3. John or Hoo, this man was so highly favored by the
King, that he often bid him ask what he would and he would grant it, who
thereupon desired the King to give him leave to resign his Office, which though
the King was by no means willing to grant, yet at last he obtained after much
importunity. He was a very meek and compassionate man; always considering and
bearing in mind this Distich, Peccantes dampnare cave, nam labimur omnes;
Aut sumus, aut fuimus, aut possumus esse quod hic est.
The fourth Abbot was Richard de Ewesham, a holy Man, reported to have
Acton-Burnel (11 E. 1.) the Abbot of Vale-Royal was ordered to receive yearly
for the carrying on the said Work one thousand pound, partly out of the
Wardrobe and partly out of the Profits of the County of Chester. It appeared by
the Accounts of the Kings Treasurer that he paid for the new Work of the
Vale-Royal, in all, thirty two thousand pounds sterling.

MARHAM, in Norfolk.
ISabella de Albany Countess of Arundel, Daughter of William Earl of Warren,
and Widow of Hugh Earl of Arundel, founded and endowed this House for
Cistercian Nuns. This Nunnery was incorporated An. 1252.


KING Edward the III. in the one and fiftieth year of his Reign, reciting that
he had granted License to William de la Pole Sen. to found and endow an
Hospital of Chaplains and poor People at Kingston upon Hull, and that the said
William was afterward minded to change the said Ho^pital into a Nunnery,
granted his License to Michael de la Pole Son and Heir of the said William, to
establish there instead of the said Nuns, thirteen Carthusian Monks, thirteen
poor Men, and thirteen poor Women, and l. Rent held of the King, and with other
Revenues not held of the King to the value of two hundred Marks per Annum.

The Abbey de Loco Dei.
WIlliam Long spee Earl of Salisbury, by his Will dated, An. 1255. gave to the
building and establishing of this House for Carthusians, besides Land, and
Church Utinsils, one thousand Ewes, three hundred Muttons, forty nine Oxen, and
twenty Bulls, etc.

Additions to the Second Volum.
Page 49. HAGHMON.
KING Henry the II. at the desire of Alured Abbot of Haghmon, granted the
Custody of that Abbey, in times of Vacation, to William Fitz-Alan and his Heirs.
An. 3. H. 5, Ralph then Abbot of this House and his Convent, at the instance of
Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey, granted to Robert Lee one Corrody for his
Life, he being with the said Abbot as his Squire with a Boy and two Horses, to
have Meat and Drink for himself, Boy, and Horses, as others of the Abbots
Squires for the times past used to have, during such time as the said Robert
shall please to abide in the said Monastery, so also for Apparel. In the Reign
of Henry the VI. Thomas Holden Esquire granted to the Prior of the holy Trinity at
London and his Successors, in behalf of the whole Order of Canons Regular, one
Mess^age and Garden, in the Parish of St. Peter, and St. Michael, near the
North Gate in Oxford for a College for those of that Order (...) study in.
Richard Bishop of Coventry granted to this Monastery of Haghmon that the
Sacristan under the Abbot, might baptize as well Jews, as Children, in the
Monastery, and might use parochial Rights within the same. Nicholas Abbot of
this House, in the year 1332. allotted certain Revenues for etc. Richard
Burnell Abbot, in the year 1459. made certain Ordinances relating to the
Offices of the Prior and Sub-prior, whereby he settled their Precedencies, etc.
Pope Alexander the III. granted libera Sepultura); to present Clerks to the
Perochial Churches etc. Pope Boneface IX. granted Indulgences to those who
should visit this Church on certain days yearly, being truly penitent and
confessed.

Page 56. WYRKSOPE.
THIS House was founded on the 3 d. of March, in the third year of King Henry,
third Son of William the Conqueror, by Sir William who lies buried in this
Church near the High Altar, from Furnival, and the Talbots Earls of Shrewsbury.


RIchard Bishop of Winchester confirmed to the Canons of St. M^ry of Suwerch,
the several Churches and Possessions given them by their Benefactors.

Page 143. RANTON.
HVbert Archbishop of Canterbury confirmed the Grants of Robert Noel, and
Thomas Noel his Son, to the Canons of this House. By Composition between the
Abbot of Haghmon, and the Prior of Ronton, it was agreed, that the Prior and
Canons of Ronton should be called to the Election of the Abbot of Haghmon when
it should happen; that the Abbot of H. should visit at Ronton once a year, or
oftener if occasion be; that the Prior of Ronton may admit a Canon or Brother
into his House at R. without the consent of the Abbot of H. first asked, so long
as he makes his profession to the Abbot of H. and lastly that upon the Election
of a Prior of Ranton, the Canons of R shall elect one of the Canons of Haghmon,
and one of their own House out of which two the H shall make choice of one to
be the Prior at R. The Priory of Ronton paid to the Abbey of Haghmon a yearly
Pension of 100 s.

Vid. Vol. 3. p. 53.

Page 144. LILLESHULL.
THIS Church dedicated to St. Alcmund was in old time of high Veneration.
Aedelfleda Queen of Mercia is said to have founded it, but it was much enriched
by King Edgar, who descended of the same Alcmund. Gilbert de Cunedore
endeavoring to defraud these Canos of one of their Prebends he was
excommunicated, till at last he was prevaild with to restore the Prebend, and
to do penance, receiving from every Canon of this Church a Public Discipline
and Correction. In the time of Roger Bishop of Coventry, and Pope Eugenius, the
Secular Canons, or Prebendaries, were changed to Regular Canons, An. Dom. 1405.
the Canons of this House obtained of the Popes Nuntio in England, the
Appropriation of the Parish Church of Hulme; their Petition setting forth that
they could make no advantage of their Rents and Possessions by reason of the
Wars with Wales; and by reason of their situation on the Highway called
Watlingstreet, they were impoverisht by the continual conflux of Guests and
Travelers, who eat up their Provision, etc.

Page 564. KNIGHTS TEMPLERS.
ANno Dom. 1319. Walter Archbishop of Canterbury, having received the Popes
Bull directed to all Archbishops, and Bishops, setting forth that since the
Suppression of this Order diverse of the Knights had lived like Lay men, and
married Wives contrary to their Vow, which was not discharged by the Council of
Vienna at such time when it suppressed the Order, he commanded therefore that the
Brethren of that Order should be admonished Walter Archbishop of Canterbury
directed his Letters to the Prior of Christ-Church, London, for the Reception
of Roger Stowe a Priest of the Templers, into that Priory, which was
accordingly performed. In the following year the same Pope sent his Bull to the
said Archbishop of Canterbury John of Jerusalem, on whom the said Possessions
had been conferred, and united for ever, by Pope Clement the V. in the Council
of Vienna.


RObert Abbot of Molesme in Burgundy was the first Institutor of the
Cistercians (a Reform of the Benedictines) to whom Odo Son of Henry Duke of
Burgundy gave the place called Cistertius which gave name to the Order. This
order increased so fast that from the year 1098. to the year 1152. almost 500.
Chalons in Burgundy, the Carthusians began their order in the Diocese of
Grenoble: They observe their offices both by night and day according to the
Rule of St. Benedict.


RAlf de Tancerville gave diverse Lands to this Abbey, both in Normandy and
England, confirmed to them by William his Son, Chamberlain Henry II, among
whose Lands in England, was Edyweston lying Rutland; which Lands, King Henry
II. granted License to these Monks to convert into tillage, and conferred
diverse Liberties on them.

BEC, in Normandy.
FIrst founded in a Place called Burneville, by Gilbert Earl of Brionne, a
great Soldier, and Nephew of Richard the first, Duke of Normandy, Bec. King
Henry II. confirmed England, at Athelstone in Warwickshire. Islip in
Oxfordshire with diverse others places in other Countries.


THe Lands and Possessions of this House were confirmed by King John, and after
him by King Henry V. who also confirmed to the Abbot and Convent of this House
the grant formerly made to them by Blanch Queen of France of forty pound
Parisian money, per Annum, for the maintenance of one Mass there daily, and
supporting some other Charges, for ever.


FOunded by King William (the Conqueror) King of England, and Prince of
Normandy and Main, and by him largely endowed with Lands both in Normandy and
England. Several others of the Nobility of Normandy were Benefactors to this
House, all whose gifts were confirmed by King Henry I.

The HOLYTRINITY, at Caen in Normandy.
KIng William II. and King Henry I. gave to the Nuns of this Abbey diverse Lands
and Liberties in England. Confirmed by King Edward II. in his seventeenth year.

St. VIGOR at Cerify, in Normandy.
FOunded in a Place then called Ciriciac, An. Dom. 1032. by Robert Earl of the
Normans, who also endowed this Abbey with Possessions adjoining round about it.
William Duke of the Normans, Son of the Said Robert, Henry I. Am. Dom. 1120.

CORMEL, in Normandy.
POpe Alexander III. by his Bull dated 1168. confirmed the Possessions of this
House, granting them a free Sepulture of their own, to pay etc. King Henry II.
confirmed diverse Lands given them in England.

St. DENNIS, near Paris.
AN. Dom. 792. Bertoaldus, a Duke among the English Saxons, being afflicted
with a Distemper which the Physicians could not cure, travailed into France to
the Abbey of St. Dennis, and there found, through the mercy of God, a perfect
Recovery. Hereupon he gave to that Abbey his Town of Ridrefeld in Sussex, with
other profits; Confirmed to these Monks by King Offa, then Reigning. King
Edward the Confessor gave Oxfordshire, An. Dom. 1059. William Earl of Ferrers
granted them yearly one wax Candle or Torch, price thirteen pence, one fat
Buck, and one fat Boar, to be sent them by proper Messengers on the Feast of
St. Dennis, in perpetual Alms, whose Deed of grant bears date An. Dom. 1189.


TO this Abbey, built by St. Ebrulf a Confessor, in a Desertand Solitary place,
King William the Conqueror gave Lands in several Counties England, An. Dom.
1081. Also Robert Earl of Leicester, and Robert his Son were Benefactors.


KIng Henry II^ and after him King Henry V. confirmed to this Abbey (lying in
the Town of St. Oportune) their Lands as well in England, Normandy, given by
diverse Benefactors, among whom Robert


WIlliam, Patron of the Normans, and King of the English, confirmed to this
Abbey all its Possessions in England and Normandy with the grant of Liberties,
in like manner as his Predecessor Richard Earl of the Normans had given them.


KIng Henry II. confirmed to the Monks of this Abbey their Possessions, among
others their Cell of Sele in Suffolk.

FONTANE, in Normandy.
FOunded by Ralf Taxo, and by him endowed with large Lands and Possessions,
with the good will of William Prince of the Normans (qui Regnum Anglia armis
subjugavit, and strenue gubernavit) which King William the Conqueror confirmed
to the Monks of this Abbey four Churches with all their Tithes and Customs in
England, among which Toucester in Northamptonshire.


KIng Henry II. granted to the Nuns of this Abbey the Manor of Lecton in
Bedfordshire, with other Lands amounting to 60 l. per An. with the Confirmation
of a yearly Alms out of the Exchequer of 24 l. per Annum, granted by his
Grandfather King Henry I. King Henry III. confirmed to these Nuns all their
Lands, etc. in England.

FULCARDIMONT.
ALice Countess of Eu (Augum) confirmed to the Monks of this Abbey the several
Lands given them in England by John Earl of Eu, her Grandfather.

JUMIEGES, in Normandy.
KING Henry the II. confirmed the Lands given to these Monks by William Son of
Rollo, Robert Archbishop of Rhoan, King William, etc.


FOunded and endowed for Nuns by Hugo de Gornaio, and others.

GRANDIMONT, in Normandy.
KING Henry the V. An suo 8. confirmed to the Prior and Convent of this place
all the Lands granted by his Progenitors Kings of France England. Robert Earl
of Mellent was the Founder, and many the Henry the II. granted them an annual
Rent of 200 l. in free Alms, confirmed by King John.

GRESTAIN, in Normandy.
KING Richard the I. confirmed to the Monks of this House, their Lands given by
King William the Conqueror and others. The like Edward the II.

LIRA, in Normandy.
KING Henry the II. confirmed to the Monks their Lands and Cells England. The
Earls of Leicester were great Benefactors to this England.

LONLEY, in le Maine.
FOunded in the Chatellery of Danfront, and Diocese of Man's, by William de
Belesmo, and endowed with Revenues in and about Dumfront Normandy.

Marmonstier.
Major-Monastery, in Tourain.
KING Henry the II. granted to the Monks of this place diverse Lands and Tithes
in England.

St. JOHN's in Poictou.
KING John confirmed to the Monks here the Church of St. Nicholas.

MONTISBURG, in Normandy.
THE Estate of these Monks in England, given by Richard de Rivers Hen. II. and
King Edw. 3.

NOA, in Normandy.
FOunded by Maud the Empress, Daughter of King Henry the I. for Monks.


STeven Earl of Albamarl, and Havisia his Wise Daughter of Ralph de Mortuomari,
were Benefactors to the Monks here.

St. REMIGIUS, in the City of Reims.
KING Edward the III. An. suo 6. confirmed to the Monks of this Abbey diverse
Lands in England.


FOunded by King Henry the I. and by him and Maud the Empress endowed with
Lands both in Normandy and England.


THE Abbey of Nuns here was founded by Goscelinus the Viscount and Emmelina his
Wife. Endowed by them and several others, among William the Conqueror, and
Queen Maud.

SAVIGNY, in Normandy.
KIng Edward III. confirmed to the Monks of this Abbey their Lands in England,
among which their Cell of Benyngton in Lincolnshire.

St. MARTINS, at Alcey in Normandy.
FOunded and endowed by Steven Earl of Albamarl and his Ancestors, without the
Walls of the Castle of Albemarl.

St. NICHOLAS at Angiers.
FIrst founded by Fulk Earl of Anjou, An. Dom. 1020. whose Son Ieffrey married
Maud the Empress, daughter of King Henry I. She granted to the Monks of this
Abbey, diverse Lands and Churches in England, as Spalding in Lincolnshire, etc.
See more in Spalding, Vol. 1. p. 306.

St. SAVIORS, at Constantine.
THeir Possessions in England were confirmed to these Monks by King Henry II.
with the grant of great Liberties and Privileges in his Forests.

St. MARTINS of Troarne.
THe Possessions of these Monks were confirmed by Henry Duke of Normandy, and
Aquitain, and Earl of Anjou.

St. VICTORS at Calete, in Normandy.
KIng Henry II. Confirmed the Estate of the Monks of this place, which they had
both here and beyond Seas, with the grant of Liberties etc.

St. WALERIC, in Picardy.
KIng Henry II. Confirmed to the Monks here Takley in Essex. etc. with diverse
Liberties and great Immunities.

St. WANDRAGISILUS, in the Dioc. of Roan.
FOunded and endowed at Fontanell by Richard II, Duke or Prince of the Normans,
An. Dom. 1024.


KIng John confirmed the Liberties granted to the Nuns of this Abbey.

CLUNY, in the Duchy of Burgundy.
ROger Earl of Salop and Adelina his Wife gave the Manner of Chelton to this
Abbey.

AULNAY.
AN Dom. 1199. William de Similleio, and his Ancestors founded and Bajeux; for
Cistercians. They demised certain Tithes in Oxfordshire for the Rent of 40 s.
per Annum, An. 1304.

de BONOPORTU.
FOunded for Cistertian Monks by Richard I. King of England, and endowed among
other things, with one hundred marks yearly issuing out of his Rents in the
Town of Dieppe.


FOunded and endowed by King Henry II. and his Mother Maud the Empress,
Confirmed by King Richard I. and King Henry III. for Cistertians.


KIng Henry II. confirmed the Lands given to the Canons of this Abbey both in
Normandy and England.


WIlliam de Waren and Isabel his Wife gave diverse Lands and Rents to this
Priory of All Saints, An. Dom. 1135.

St. WLUAR, at Bologne in Picardy.
KIng Henry I. at the Solicitation of Ida Countess of Bologne, gave and
confirmed to the Canons of this Priory, Notfield in Surrey.

FOUGERES, in Britany.
COnan Duke of Britan gave the Canons of this Place the Church of Cestrehunt,
in the Diocese of London. Ranulph Earl of Chester writ to the Bishop of London
on behalf of these Canons, and because he had not his own Seal by him at that
time he sent his Letters under the Seal of the Lady his Mother, yet the Said
Letters conclude Test meipso apud Martillum.

The Hospital of St Mary Magdalen, at Bologn
KIng Henry I. confirmed to this Hospital 20 l. per Annum. arising out of Kent.

The Hospital of Lepers of Kenilli, near Roan.
KIng Henry II. founded this Hospital for Leperous Women, and gave it 200 l.
per Annum. King Richard I. gave them 40 l. per Annum. But this was Anjou pounds.

The Hospital of Vernon, in Normandy.
FOunded and largely endowed by St. Lewis King of France, An. Dom. 1260.

The Hospital of the Holy Ghost, at Rome.
FOund by Inquisition 20 Edward III. that King John gave the Church of Wrytele
in Essex for the maintenance of the Poor in this Hospital called the English
Hospital at Rome.

BLANCLAND, in Normandy.
FOunded for Canons, and endowed with Lands in England by Richard de Hay and
his Wife.

De BELLOPORTU, in Normandy.
AN. Dom. 1202. Alen Son of Earl Henry gave diverse Lands in England to the
Canons Regular of this Abbey, Premonstratenses.

Dominican Nuns, near Roan.
FOunded by St. Lewis King of France, beyond the Bridge at Roan, and by him
endowed with 500 l. Turnois, per Annum, and diverse Liberties, An. Dom. 1269.


Diverse Lands in England were formerly given to the Canons of this Church and
their Successors, by King Henry, Earl Otho, and more especially by King John,
viz. The Manor of Clear in Hampshire, Oteri in Devonshire, Kilburn in
Torkshire, etc.


St. ANDREWS, in the Territory of Ardes, (Ardee.)
FOunded by John de Curceio. At first a Cell to the Abbey of Lonley in Normandy,
and by them granted to the Archbishop of Armach.


FOund by Inquisition 29 E. 1. that it was not to the Kings damage for William
Barry and others, to settle certain Lands there mentioned on Agnes de Hareford
and other Nuns and their Successors in the House of St. John Baptist in St.
Iohn's-street in Cork.

St. PATRICKS at Down.
FOunded An. Dom. 1183. for Monks and a Prior from St. Werburgs at Chester, but
without any Subjection to the Church of Chester. The Bishop of Down was Custos
and Abbot of this Monastery, in like manner Winchester and Coventry. John de
Curci the Founder of this Monastery endowed it with diverse Revenues, and
Tithes, among other things of all his hunting.


POpe Innocent the III. An. Dom. 1207. confirmed the Lands given to this House
by Walter de Rideleford and others; the like confirmation was made by King John
in the ninth year of his Reign.

KILCUMYN.
FOunded by Philip de Wigornia, Constable of Ireland, and furnished with Monks
from Glastonbury.

NEDDRUM, a Cell to St. Bege, in Yorkshire.
ANno Dom. 1177. (23 H. 2) the Lord John de Curci subdued Vlster. An. 1178. he
gave Neddrum to the Monks of St. Bege, with great Privileges. Diverse
Benefactors gave Lands to this Priory, all which was An. Dom. 1202. by John
Cardinal of St. Steven in Mont Caelius, Apostolic Legate.

OCYMILD.
FOunded by William de Burgo, and given to Richard a Monk of Glastonbury.

ARKEL, a Cell to Furnes, in Lancashire.
FOunded by Theobald Walteri, Butler of Ireland, and by him given to the Monks
of the Cistercian Order at Furnes, with diverse Liberties.

BELLO BECCO, another Cell to Furnes.
FOunded and endowed by Walter de Lascy for Cistercian Monks, who Edward the
III. transferred their Estate here to the Abbot and Convent of Furneys.

DUNBROTHY, in the County of Wexford.
HArvey de Monte Marisco, the Kings Marshal of Ireland, gave this place with
diverse other Lands for a Cell to the Abbey of Bildwas in England, William
Marshal Earl of Pembroke was a great Benefactor to this House, whose Gifts were
confirmed by King Edward the III. among

JEREPONT.
FOunded by Dumwald King of Ossery, and endowed by him with Baleochellam in
which the Monastery was founded, and other Lands; all confirmed by John Lord of
Ireland and Earl of Morton.

KYLLECONIL.
FOunded by Donald O Bryan. Confirmed by King Henry the III. An. suo, 4.

MELLIFONT.
KING John confirmed to the Monks of the Church of St. Mary at Drogheda diverse
Land which they enjoyed before the coming of the French into Ireland. The like
confirmations were made by King Henry the III. and King Edward the III.


FOunded and endowed for Cistercian Monks by Mauritius mag Lochlain King of all
Ireland, by the unanimous consent of the Great men and Petty Kings of Vlster.

ROSGLAS.
FOunded and endowed by Dermitius O Demesy, King of Ofalia.


FOunded by William Marischal Earl of Pembroke, confirmed by King Henry the
III. with the grant of great Liberties. To this Abbey was afterward united the
Abbey of Kilkenny.

TYNTERNE.
FOunded according to the last Will of William Marischal Earl of Pembroke, and
ratified by King John.

DE VALLE SALUTIS.
FOunded by Dermitius an Irish, King, and by him and his Subjects endowed with
diverse Lands. Confirmed by King John.


FOunded An. Dom. 1205. and endowed with Lands and Liberties by Theobald
Walteri, Butler of Ireland.

St. CROSS in the County of Tiperary.
FOunded and endowed by Donald King of Lumney ( Lumnicensis.)

BALLINTOBBER, in the County of Maio. Canons Regular.
FOunded by Catholus O Conogher King of Connaught, An. Dom. 1216.

CONNAL, a Cell to Lanthony, in England.
FOunded An. 1202. by Maylerus Son of Henry for Canons Regular Confirmed by
King John.

The Hospital of St. Mary's near Droheda.
FOunded and endowed by Vrsus de Swemele, for the maintenance of poor and
infirm People, and such as are in Want, The Custos of which Hospital to be
chosen by the Good men ( Proborum hominum) of Drogheda.

ALL SAINTS, in the East-part of Dublin.
FOunded and endowed for Canons by Dermont King of Leimster, confirmed by King
Henry the II.

St. THOMAS the Martyr, in Dublin.
FOunded and endowed by William Son of Audelinus, Sewer to King Henry the II.
by Authority of that King, and for him.

FERN, in the County of Wexford.
FOunded and endowed by Dernatius King of Leimster, An. 1158. He also granted
them free choice of their own Abbots, according to the Rule of St. Augustine.

KENLIS, and Inistiock, in the County of Kilkenny.
JEffrey Son of Robert came into Ireland with William Earl Marischal, and
Kenlis in Ossorey, at which place he afterward built a Monastery for Canons
Regular, which he brought over from Bodmin in Cornwalk. One of whom was Hugh de
Rous, who after that became the first English Bishop of Ossery. About An. 1206.
Thomas Son of Anthony founded a Priory at I^istiock, which became as a Cell to
Kenlis. Hugh de Lacy and Walter de Lacy were Benefactors.


FOunded and endowed An. 1220. by William Marshall Earl of Pembroke.


POpe Celestin the III. An. 1195. confirmed their Lands and Possessions with
the grant of diverse Liberties.


FOunded about the year 1200. by Theobald Walter Butler of Ireland, and by him
endowed with Lands for the Maintenance of Canons, and thirteen poor and infirm
People.


FOundeds and endowed for Canons Regular of St. Augustine, by Alexander Son of
Hugh. Confirmed by King Edward the I. An. suo, 18.


FOunded and endowed by John de Curcey, and by him given as a Cell to the Prior
and Canons of St. Mary at Carlisle.

TRISTERNAGH, in the County of Mead.
FOunded and endowed about the year 1200. by Ieffrey de Constantine, for Canons
Regular.


STitrius King of Dublin gave the Ground where this Church now stands to
Donatus the first Bishop of Dublin, for the erecting of a Church to the Holy
Trinity, with Revenues. Which Donatus in his time built the Nave and side
Isles. Many years after, Laurence the second Archbishop of Dublin, and Richard
Strigul, and the Earl Marshal, etc. added the Quire, Bells, and two Chapels.
After Laurence; Henry, and Luke, two other Archbishops, carried on the
Building, and after them, John de S. Paul finished all. King John was a
Benefactor to this Church, while Earl of Morton, and after he was King.

Scotch Monasteries.
COLDINGHAM, a Cell to Durham.
SAint Ebba Sister of Oswy King of Northumberland, was the first Institutor of
a Religious Life in this Place, here she had a Monastery consisting of both
Sexes, under her Government. King Edward the III. in the first year of his
Reign granted his Letters of Protection for this Priory.

LINDORS.
FOunded by David Earl of Huntington, Brother of the King of Scotland, and by
him endowed with drivers Churches.

ABERBROTHE.
FOunded by William King of Scotland in honor of God and St. Thomas the
Archbishop and Martyr, and by him endowed with Lands and

DRYBRUGHE.
Founded and endowed by David King of Scotland, for Canons; with the grant of
diverse Liberties and Immunities.

DUMFERMLINGE.
FOunded by Malcolm King of Scotland ( in monte Infirmorum) and by him and
others endowed with large Possessions. Confirmed by King David the first,
youngest Son of King Malcolm and Margaret his Wife.

BELMERINACH, in Fife.
FOunded and endowed by Alexander King of Scotland, in honor of God, St. Mary,
and the holy King Edward, for Cistercian Monks:


SAint David son of Malcolm and Margaret founded Six of this Order. ^enry
Prince of Scotland Son of the said David founded Hadington. St. Malcolm Son of
the said Henry founded three. William King of Scotland founded one. Others of
the Nobility founded many others, viz. Patrick Dunbar Earl of March, and Agatha
his Wife founded Coldstream in the Marshes. The Earl of Fife founded
Northberwick where a piece of our Lord's Cross was preserved with great
Veneration. John Lord of Kirconell founded Sacrum-Boscum, commonly called
Holywood; of this House, it is said, was the famous John de Sacro bosco, who
writ of the Sphere and other Astronomical matters, etc.

The End of the Second Volum.
MONASTICON ANGLICANUM, ABRIDGED.

VOL. III.

OF THE CATHEDRAL and COLLEGIATE CHURCHES.

MONASTICON ANGLICANUM, Abridg'd.
VOL. III. and last.
Additions to the First Volum.
Page 31. ROCHESTER. Page 1

GVnaulphus Bishop of Rochester, by authority, will, and command of King
William, and by the advice, help, and assent (...) La^^ranc Archbishop of
Canterbury, did institute sixty Monks in the Room of five Clerks (all that then
were) in the Church of St. Andrew the apostle; and transferred the possessions
formerly given by diverse Benefactors to that Church, to the maintenance of
those Monks, with other endowments of his own gift, for the maintenance of
them, Strangers that should come there, and poor people, and for Sergeants to
serve them. He also made Provision for a Festival on St. Andrews day, for
himself and Successors, if they should be present at the Celebration of the
same. Whose Charter September 1089.

Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury, recited the Grant of Anselm his Predecessor
by which he granted and confirmed diverse Lands given to this Church by Bishop
Gundulf and others, in Kent, Surrey, Suffolk, Buckinghamshire, and
Gloucestershire, dated at London in a Council of Bishops A. D. 1101, Anselm's
Confirmation of Archbishop Lanfranc's Grant to the said Church, dated 1087. and
confirmed all the said recited Grants by his Deed of Confirmation dated 1254.

King Henry II. confirmed all their Lands and Possessions, with large
Privileges and immunities such as the Church of Cantebury enjoys, Nottingham.

An. Dom. 1197. An Exchange was made by consent of King Richard I. between
Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury and the Prior and Convent of Rochester, the
said Prior and Convent granting to the said Archbishop and Successors their
Manor of Lambeth with the Church there, and the Liberties and appurtenances
thereunto belonging as well in Southwark is in the Soke of London, except a
Mill which the Monks have upon the Thames over against the Tower of London,
etc. And the said Archbishop gave in Darent, etc. with mutual Warranty on both
sides, and a restriction that it shall not be lawful for the said Archbishop or
his Successors ever to alienate the Said Manor of Lambeth from the
Archbishopric, or for the said Monks to alienate the Manor of Darent, etc.

Page 413. NORWICH.
JOhn Archbishop of Canterbury at the request of the Prior and Convent of
Norwich, exemplified the Charter of Herbert Bishop of Norwich, by which he gave
to the Monks, whom he had established Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate
of the Greater Britain and Ireland, and Vicar of Pope Pascal, by which he
confirmed the Establishment of the Monks which the said Herbert had made in the
said Church of the Holy Trinity at Norwich, which Church King William, and King
Henry his Brother and Successor had constituted to be the head and Mother of
all the Churches of Norfolk and Suffolk. The foresaid Deed of Exemplification
bears date at Lambeth, An. Dom. 1281.

Radulphus Fitz Godric gave to this Church the Manor of Neuton confirmed to
the Monks by King Henry I.

Page 120. GLOUCESTER.
AN. Dom. 1138. King Steven in the third year of his Reign confirmed Peter of
Gloucester, all the Lands, Churches, Tithes, and other donations given by
Diverse Benefactors.


IVo de Taleboyse, from whom descended the Noble families of the Rosses Lords
of Work, Faucumberge, Twenge, and Belewe, etc. gave to the Church of St. Mary
in York and to the Abbot and Monks there, diverse Lands and Churches. This Ivo
de Tailbois held of the King in Capite the Barony of Hephall, which Barony was
held by his Ancestors in Thenagio, paying to the King 50 s. yearly, but King
William the Conqueror changed the Tenure into the Service of one Knights Fee.

Page 258. WHERWELL.
POpe Gregory the IX th. recited and confirmed to the Abbess and Nuns of
Wherwell all their Lands, Tithes and Churches, that they then etc. Whose Bull
bears date, An. Dom. 1228.


NIgellus de Albeney and Alan Fitz-Amfrid gave diverse Lands to the Monks of St.
Albans in the Church of the Holy Trinity of Wallingford, Confirmed to them by
Ioceline Bishop of Salisbury, and after him by Robert Bishop of Salisbury, and
by the Dean and Chapter of that Church, An. Do. 1243.

Page 525. WILBERFOSS.
GEorge Duke of Clarence and Lord of Richmond, as Patroonshe Nannery of
Wilberfoss, exemplified and confirmed to Elizabeth then Prioress, and to the
Nuns there, the several Deeds of Endowments and Grants made to them by Iordanus
Fitz Gilbert, William de Percy, etc. Whose Deed of Confirmation bears date at
Staunford 10th. of August, 4 Edward IV.

Page 487. STODELEY.
THis Nunnery was first founded by Thomas de Sancto Walerico, but his Estate,
and consequently the Patronage of this House, coming to the Crown, King Richard
II. in the first year of his Reign, on the death of Margery the last Prioress,
confirmed the Election of Elizabeth Fremantell then Subprioress into the Office
of Prioress, and signified the same to the Bishop of Lincoln.

Page 482. SANFORD alias LITTLEMORE.
ROger de Thoeni, Roger de Sanford, and Thomas Buscel (whose Deed bears date
1254 (8. Henry III.) gave Lands to the Church of St. Nicholas and Priory of
Nuns here. Robert Abbot of Abington and Benjamin Nicholas granted and confirmed
to them certain Tithes. Roger de Quency Earl of Winton, and Constable of
Scotland released to them their Suit to his Court. Pope Innocent IV. in the
second year of Pontificate Released ten days of enjoined Penance to all such
of the Diocesses of Lincoln, Ely, and Salisbury, who being penitent and
confessed, should contribute and assist to the reedifying of the Church of this
Priory.

Page 597. GROSMUNT, in Yorkshire.
JOan Wife of Robert de Torneham, and daughter of William Fossart, gave diverse
Lands, Profits, and Privileges in Yorkshire, to the Prior and Grandmont in
France, confirmed by her said Husband Robert de Torneham, who also gave other
Lands of his own.

Page 505. CRESWELL in Herefordshire.
THis was another Cell of the Monks of Grandemont, to which Walter de Lacy gave
Lands in pure and perpetual Alms, with warranty. Peter Bishop of Hereford
having bought Lands of the Prior of Creswell, for 550. marks granted by his
Deed dated 1256, that in case he or his Successors should happen to be
impleaded for the said Lands, the said Prior nor this Successors should not be
obliged to defend and Warrant the same beyond the Sum of 550 marks.


JOan de Pedinton widow of Guy de Ryhal, with Thomas Son and heir of the said
Guy, confirmed to the Canons of Missendin, the Hermitage of Muswell, which Ralf
the Hermit built and inhabited by permission of the foresaid Guy, with a
Chapel built in honor o^ the Holy Cross. Confirmed also by Albricus Earl of
Damarun, and Simon de Gerardmulin.


THe Turbervilles gave to the Church of St. Michael and the Monks there. diverse
Lands and Possessions, with Liberty of fishing in the River of Ewenny as far as
their Lands extend, and to retain a moiety of the fish so caught, the other
moiety to be the Turbervilles.

The Priory of Blithe, in Nottinghamshire.
POpe Honorius confirmed the Possessions of this House to the Monks William de
Crescy.

William Gifford Archishop of York, An. Dom. 1277, made certain orders for
their Government, viz. That Alms and Hospitality should be used as of old
time, that all and singular do humbly and devoutly obey the Prior as their head
etc. Vid. Vol. ^. p. 553.


KIng Henry VIII. by Patent dated in the 29th. year of his Reign, recites that
out of the sincere and entire devotion which he bears to God and the Blessed
Virgin Mary, and to the Increase of the Divine Worship, etc. He does erect,
found, and establish to endure for all future times, a Monastery or Conventual
House of one Abbot and thirteen Monks of the order of St. Benedict, in the
place of the late disolved Priory or Monastery of Bisham alias Bustlesham in
Barkshire, which on the fifth day of July in the 28th year of his Reign was
surrendered to him by William Bishop of St. David's then Prior of that Priory
and the Convent there, and this he did for the good estate of himself while
living, and for the good of his Soul after death, and for the good of the Soul
of his most dear Wife Jane late Queen of England deceased, and for the Souls of
his Children, and Progenitors. And gave all the Lands, Houses, Church, Bells,
and all utensils then in his hands and formerly belonging to the late dissolved
Monastery, to John Cordrey, whom he made Abbot of this new Monastery and to the
Monks of the same. Which John Cordrey was lately Abbot of the Monastery of St.
Peter at Chertsey in Surrey. He did also incorporate this new Monastery by the
name of the Abbot and Convent of the new Monastery of the Holy Trinity of King
Henry VIII. at Buslesham, with power to purchase Lands, and by that name to sue
and be sued, etc. and for the Abbot and his Successors to use an Episcopal
Miter. He also endowed the Chertsey, in diverse Counties of England and Wales,
and in the City of London, also with the dissolved Priories of Cardigan in
Southwales, and Bethelkellard in Carnarvanshire, with all the Lands and
Revenues of the same, and with diverse Rents issuing out etc. With etc. To hold
by the Service l. and 17 d. in the name of a Tenth, to be paid into the Court
of augmentations at Michaelmas. This new Monastery to be exempt from the
ordinary Jurisdiction, and to be visited only by the King his heirs and
Successors; and the present Abbot John Cordrey to be excused from the payment
of first Fruits and Tenths given l. 14 s. 9 d. ob. But no tenths, which amount
to 66 l. 3 s. 5 d. ob. q. non obstante the said Stat. or any other Law. Which
Patent bears test Westminster 18th. December in the foresaid twenty ninth year
of Henry VIII.

Page 648. LENTON.
KIng Steven granted the Chruch of the Holy Trinity at Lenton, which William
Peverell and others had endowed, to the order of Cluniac Monks to be enjoyed
with all its possessions, inviolably.

The Priory of HORKESLEY.
RObert Fitz God bold gave diverse Lands, Churches, and Tithes to the Cluniac
Monks of Tefford, with intention that the Convent of that House should transmit
some of their Monks to the Church of St. Peter at Horchesley there to reside in
the Services of God and St. Peter. Their Possessions so given was confirmed to
them by Gilbert Bishop of London, and Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury.

Page 867. SIBETON.
WIth King William the Conqueror, who came into England in the year 1066. came
Walter de Cadamo, who after the Conquest held the Barony of Horsford, He had
issue Robert who built the Church of St. Peter at Sibton, who had issue John
called the Vicount, and William. John being very infirm in his health vowed to
erect an Abbey of Cistercian Monks; but himself dying, left his vow to be
performed by William his Brother and heir, who enjoyed after his death his
Barony and Vicounty. This William founded the Monastery of St. Mary at Sibton
in the Reign of Steven, An. Dom. 1149. And endowed the same with Lands and
Revenues. He had issue Margaret married to Hugh de Cressy who confirmed her
Fathers Gift.

An. 28. Henry VIII, William then Abbot of Sibton Com. Suffolk, and the Convent
there, of their free will and unanimous Consent, gave, granted, and confirmed
to Thomas Duke of Norfolk, Anthony Rouse Esquire, and Nicholas Hare, Gent.
their heirs and assigns to the use of the said Duke his heirs and assigns for
ever, all the said Monastery, and Estate thereunto belonging, and Constituted
Thomas Heydon, and Robert Whinwery their lawful Attorneys to deliver Seizin
accordingly. This was under their

Page 887. HOLMCOLTRAM.
DAvid King of Scotland confirmed the Donations of his Son Henry, to this Abbey;
the like did afterward Malcolm king of Scotland Son of the said Henry.

John King of England in the 16. year of his Reign, granted to the Monks here
the Hermitage of St. Hilda in the Forest of Englewode, with all the Roger
Croky late Hermit held, and a Vaccary there for forty Cows, etc. John Bishop of
Carlisle licensed the Monks of Holmcoltram to build a Church or Chapel in their
territory of Arlosk for their Tenants and the Inhabitrants of those parts,
which Church or Chapel he did appropriate and annex to the said Monastery, and
exempt the same from the Visitation of the Ordinary; The said Church to be
served by a secular Priest of their election, but to be presented to the said
Bishop or his Successors, and by them admitted to the said Cure. The said
Priest so admitted to receive for his support 4 l. to be paid him yearly out
of the profits of the said Church, and a House and Curtilage to be assigned
him. The said Priest to pay to the Bishop in the name of a Cathedratic, half a
mark, and to the Archdeacon when he Visits 40 d. for procurations. Which Deed
of Linflock, An. 1304. Hugh Morville, Cecily Countess of Albemarl, Lambert de
Multon, and others, were Benefactors to these Monks. William Earl of Albemarl
gave them a Forge and Iorn Egremond; Robert King of Scots (whose Father lies
buried in their Church at Holmcoltram) gave them a yearly farm of 10 l. Pope
Lucius III. confirmed to them their Lands and Revenues, and granted them diverse
Liberties, as to be free from the payment of Tithes for their Cattle, and
Fishing, etc. Whose Bull bears date An. 1185.


THe Abbey of the Valley of St. Mary of Crokesdene was founded by Bertram de
Verdon, and by him endowed with diverse Revenues in Crokesdene, Stanfort,
Castretone, etc. and a Salt work in Midlewich.

Additions to the Second Volum.
Page 461. NORWICH.
JOhn Bishop of Norwich exemplified the Deeds belonging to the Hospital of St.
Paul in Norwich, viz. the Charter of the Convent of the Holy Trinity of
Norwich, (who founded and endowed the said Hospital to the support of poor
people, for the Soul of Bishop Herbert, etc.) of Adam de Bellofago, some
Bishops of Norwich his Predicessors, and Henry I. who were all Benefactors.
Which Deed of Exemplification bears date in the year 1301.

Page 181. TWINEHAM.
IN the Reign of King Steven, An. Dom. 1150, Henry Bishop of Winchester, and
Hillary then Dean of Christ Church, at the Petition of Earl Baldwin, introduced
Canons Regular into the said Church, in place of the Canons secular that then
were there, the secular Canons to enjoy their Prebends while they lived; But
all the Lands and Revenues belonging

Page 152. GISBURNE.
WAldenus Son of Earl Cospatric gave the Town of Apleton to the Church of St.
Bridget, commonly called Brydekirk, in the County of Cumberland. The Lady Alice
de Rumeley gave this Church of Brydekirk, Apleton, and all other Lands
thereunto belonging to the Canons of Gisburne.

Page 272. WORSPRING.
WIlliam de Curtenai founded a Convent for Canons Regular of St. Augustine, at
the Chapel of St. Thomas the Martyr in Worspring, and notifying so much to
John then Bishop of Bath, desired that by his authority the Church of Worle, at
that time vacant, might be appropriated to the said Convent.

Page 263. WORMLEY.
JOhn de Baskerville gave to God and the Church of St. Leonard of Pyonia, and
to the Prior and Canons there, in Frankalmoine, all his Land of Stanley which
he held of the Manor of Wormley; and Nickolas de Wormley Lord of the said
Manor, reciting the said Grant, confirmed the same to the said Prior and
Canons, and also released and quit claimed to them, one pair of spurs or
sixpence of yearly Rent, by which the foresaid John held that Land.

Robet de Staunton, Gilbert Talebot, Robert Boter, and others, Roger de
Montuomari Winfretone An. Dom. 1304 Gerard de Eylesford gave them the Pyona
Regis, or Kings Pe^ne; Peter Bishop of Hereford appropriated the Church of
Wormesley, of which these Canons were Patrons to this Convent, for the said
Canons to enjoy the Fruits thereof to their proper use, but so as not to
defraud the said Church of due Service. Whose Deed bears date, An. 1262. Here
was a Chantry Basilia de Bourhull.

Page 941. RANTON.
RObert Fitz-Noel, or Son of Noel, founded and endowed the Priory of Ranton,
for Canons under the Rule and obedience of Haman ( Hamanensis Ecclesiae) Whose
Donation was confirmed by Thomas Noel his Son. Noel who came into England with
King William the Conqueror, had issue Robert, and he Thomas. Thomas had issue
Alice and John, his Coheirs. Alice was married to William de Harecourt, and
had in partition the Manor of Elimhale, from whom descended Sir Robert
Harecourt Knight, who married Anne the daughter of Thomas Lymerik.


WIlliam Fitz Alan founded this Priory for Canons in his Manor House at
Coldnorton, to God, St. Mary, St. John, and St. Giles, and endowed it with
diverse Lands. Reginald Earl of Bolon, and Ida his Wi^e confirmed the Donations
of their Ancestors, An. 1201. Ralf Earl of Stafford, gave to this Priory his
Manor of Rowlandright in Oxfordshire, for the maintenance of two Canons to
celebrate for his Soul, etc. for ever, whose Charter indented bears date at his
Manor of Tysho in Warwickshire. 44 Edward III. Hugh Croft Esquire released
and conveyed ever to King Henry VII. all his right, title, and Claim, to the
said Priory, and Patronage of the same, and all the Lands and Revenues
thereunto belonging, formerly enjoyed by John Wotton late Prior of the said
Priory, whose Deed bears date 21. Feb. 22, Henry VIII.

It was found by Inquisition taken at Dorchester in Oxfordshire 24. of Apr.
Henry VIII. before William Young Escheater of that County, that John Wolton
late Prior of this Priory, was seized of the said Priory, the Manor of
Coldnorton, and diverse Lands, etc. in the said inquisition expressed in right of
the said Priory, and being so seized dyed on the eve of Palm Sunday in the 11
year of that King without having any Convent of Canons, or any professed Canon in
the said Priory at that time, and that the succession of the said Priory did
thereupon wholly finish, dissolve, extinguish and determine, by which means the
said Priory, and all the Estate thereunto belonging did Escheat to the King
whose Ancestors were Founders and Patrons of the same, and that the Revenue of
the said Priory is of the value of 50 l. per Annum, over and above all Reprises.

Page 232. DERLEY.
AN. 1271. Robert Saucheverel past a fine before John de Reygate, the Kings
Justiciary, of the Church of Bolton, to the Abbot of Derley; saving the
Presentation of a fit Chaplain to the same by the said Robert, and that such
Chaplain shall receive the small Tithes of Bolton, for serving the Cure.

Robert Fitz Steven the Kings Chamberalin, Henry de Luy, Hubert Fitz. Ralf,
William Peverel of Nottingham, Robert Earl of Ferrars, etc. were Benefactors.
Walter Bishop of Coventry confirmed the Lands given to the Darby erected at a
mile distance, and exempted the said Abbot and his Successors from paying
Tithes of their proper fields, and granted that the said Abbot and his
Successors shall be Dean of all their Churches in Derbyshire, especially of all
the Churches in Derby.

Page 41. BREDON.
WIlliam de Ferrariis Earl of Derby gave to the Canons Regular of Bredon,
diverse Churches, Lands, and Commons of Pasture in the Peke and elsewhere.

Pa. 564. TEMPLERS.
THomas de Santford gave all his Land of Saunford, etc to the Knights of the
Temple, in pure and perpetual Alms, for the relief of the holy Land, and for
the maintenance of one Chaplain to celebrate Mass for ever, at the House of the
Templers at Bustlisham. King Steven and Queen Matilda William Marescal Earl of
Pembroke were Benefactors William de Vernon granted Lands at Eremne for the
founding of an Hospital, to William Maskerel, which foundation was confirmed by
Baldwin. Archbishop of Canterbury, and Godfrey Bishop of Winchester, and was
afterward Maskerel to the Kinghts of the Temple of Solomon.

STANLEY Priory in, Gloucestershire.
THeobald Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of the English, and Apostolic
Leonard and Canons of Stanley.

SHELFORD Priory, in Nottinghamshire.
IT was found in a Plea of Assize taken before Hugh Bigod Justiciary of
England, An. 42. Henry III. Between William Bardolf, and Adam Everingham, who
both pretended to the Patronage of this Priory, that Ralf Ancestor of the said
William Bardolf was the ^ounder of the said Priory, and that William Bardolf
was the true Patron of the same, who thereupon had Judgment against the said
Adam, and the said Ad^m in misericordia. And the Archbishop of York was
commanded to admit a fit Person to be Prior there at the Presentation of the
said William.

[ Valued at 116 l. Per Annum.]

SANDELFORD Priory, in Barkshire.
STeven Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, and Cardinal of the
holy Roman Church, confirmed to the Canons of Sandelford diverse Lands and Rents
granted to those Canons by Ieffrey Earl of Le Perch (Pertici) in France).


EDmund Earl of Cornwall, Son and heir of Richard King of the Romans, gave and
confirmed to the Rector of the Good men Brothers of the Church founded in
honor of the precious blood of Jesus Christ at Esserugg, the Manor of
Esserugg and other Lands, etc. for the support of twenty Brothers, Clerks, of
which 13 at the least to be Priests; and with those Lands he etc.

[ Valued at 416 l. 165. s. 4 d. Per Annum.]


KIng John confirmed to God and the Church of St. Radegundat Bradsole, and the
Canons there of the Order of Premonstratenses, diverse Richard I. and others;
With other Lands of his own gift. He also granted them the Church of St. Peter
of Rivery and his House there, for the building a new Monastery for their use,
and Blakewose, which was subject to a Monastery of this order called Lavendene,
but the Canons of that place being poor and distant, it occasioned scandal,
whereupon the Canons of Blakewose were discharged of their obedience to the
Abbot of Lavendene and Subjected to the Abbot of St. Randegund. Hugo de Burgh,
Justiciary of England, and Hamon de Crevequer were Benefactors to this Abbey.

Page 622. STANLEY.
HVbert Fitz-Ralf, and Serlo de Grendon, confirmed to the Canons of Stanley
Park, the Estate formerly given by William de Grendon Maud de Salicosa Mara,
daughter of William Fitz Ralf late Steward of Normandy, was also a Benefactress
to this House.

The Abbots of Stanley Park.
1. Walter de Senteney, ruled 31. years. 2. William, Ruled here 2. years. 3.
John Grauncorth, governed 19. years. 4. Hugh de Lincoln, governed 14 years. 5.
Simon 5. years. 6. Laurence, 16. years. 7. Richard de Normanton, ruled the
first time 8. years. 8. John de Lincoln, 6. years. 9. Richard de Normanton, the
second time, Ruled 1. year. 10. John Horsley, 26. years. 11. Ioh Wodhouse, 15.
Weeks. 12. William Horsley, 21. years. 13. Roger de Kyrkton, 3. years. 14.
William de Bone, 42. years. 15. Herry Monyasche, 39. years. 16. John Spondone,
33. years. 17. John Stanley, 22. years. 18. Richard de Nottingham, 19. years.
Page 605. CROXTON.
AVicia de Romely Lady of Bescaudeby was married to William Paynel who came
into England with William the Conqueror, and of whose guilt Yorkshire,
Lincolnshire, and Leicestershire, which William and Avice, had issue a daughter
named Alice (or Avice) whom King H. II, gave in Marriage to Robert de Gant, who
had issue by her another Al^ce (or Avice) whom the same King Henry gave in
Marriage to Robert Fitz-Harding of Bristol, who had issue Maurice, who dying
without issue, his Mothers I^heritance came to Andrew Lutterel, as next of the
Blood of the Paynells.

Page 607. LEYSTONE.
RAnulfus de Glanville founded the Abbey of St. Mary at Leestune and endowed it
with the Manor of L^estune, which he had of the gift of king Henry II. and
with certain Churches, which he had formerly given to the Buttele, and now by
them resigned to the Canons of this place. King Richard I. confirmed the Estate
so given to these Canons of Leystone with a Grant of diverse Franchises,
confirmed also by Richard Archbishop Canterbury, and by Roger Bygot Earl of
Norfolk. Pope Lucius granted these Canons diverse Privileges and not to pay
Tithes of their proper Goods etc.

Page 643. BEGEHAM.
WIlliam de Burgelle granted certain Marish Lands to the Canons of Otteham
(afterward translated to Begeham) saving to the Lord of the soil, the Service
of half a pound of Pepper, to be paid yealry on the Vigil of Chirstmass for all
Custom and exaction.


FOunded and endowed with Lands, etc. by Henry Hesatus Lord of Herting Sussex;
confirmed by King Henry the II. who also granted them a Fair for three days
yearly at Herting, viz. on the Nativity John Baptist, and two days next before.
Confirmed also by Hillary, and Seffrid Bishops of Chichester, and by William de
Percy. etc.

[ Valued at 98 l. 4 s. 5 d. Per Annum.]


KING Henry VIII. in the 29th. year of his Reign, out of the sincere Devotion
which he had to the Virgin Mary, and for the increase of Virtue, and the Divine
Worship, etc. founded a new Monastery of Nuns of the Order of
Praemonstratenses, in the place Site and Precinct of the Old Monastery of
Stixwold in Com. Lincoln, lately suppressed by Authority of Parliament, to
consist of a Prioress and Nuns, there to officiate in the Divine Offices for
the good Estate of him and of his most dear Consort Jane Queen of England while
they lived, and after their deaths for their Souls, and the Souls of their
Children and Progenitors. And made and Mary Missenden Prioress of the said new
Monastery, and incorporated the said Prioress and Nuns by the name of the
Prioress and Convent of the New Monastery of King Henry the VIII. of Stixwold.
with capacity to receive Lands by that name, to sue and be sued, and to have a
Common-Seal. He further gave and settled on them, all the Lands, and Estate
real and personal belonging to the old Monastery of Stixwold, in as full and
ample manner as Helena Key late Prioress of the said Monastery enjoyed the same
on the same on the 4th. of Feb. in the seven and twentieth year of his Reign,
or any time before, at which time it came to his hands by reason of an Act of
Parliament then past for the dissolving of certain Monasteries. Which said
Revenue was then rated at the clear yearly value of 152 l. 10 s. 7 d. and was
granted to the said new Monastery, to hold in Capite by the twentieth part of a
Knights Fee, and by the yearly l. 5 s. 1 d. to be paid into the Court of
Augmentations at Michaelmas, and Lady Day; the Statute of Mortmain, or any
other Statute non obstante. Whose Grant bears date on the 9th. of July in the
said nine and twentieth year, and is witnessed by Thomas Archbishop of
Canterbury, and diverse others, among whom Sir Thomas Crumwell Knt. Lord
Crumwell Keeper of the Privy Seal, etc.

Vid. 1. Vol. 486.

Page 376. BRACKLEY.
RObert Earl of Leicester gave to Solomon the Clerk and his Successors one Acre
of Land in Brahole (Brackley) in the love of God, and honor of St. John the
Apostle and Evangelist, to build a House thereon for the Receipt and
Entertainment of poor People. This was confirmed afterward by Robert his Son
and Heir, which Father and Son endowed the Frankalmoine Hugh Bishop of Lincoln
confirmed the Foundation of this Hospital, with all the Lands Henry III. in the
twelfth year of his Reign.

Page 423. DOVER.
KING Henry the III. in the twelfth year of his Reign, confirmed to the
Hospital of St. Mary at Dover, diverse Land and Rents given by Simon de Wardune;
he also confirmed the Manor of Rivere to the said Hospital at the Petition of
Hubert de Burgo who founded the same for the sustentation of poor People and
Travelers who should come thither. He also ordained that upon the death or
removal of the Master, the Brothers of the said Hospital shall freely choose
another, and present him to the King or his Chief Justice, who shall without
difficulty Cantebury to be by him instituted. He also granted to the said
Hospital the tenth part of the Profits of the Passage in the Port of Dover,
besides 10 l. and 50 s. which by two Deeds he had formerly granted them. With
other Revenues elsewhere.

Page 899. NEWTON.
THomas Archbishop of York made a Decree between Edmund Litchfield, who
pretended to the Office of Custos or Master of the Hospital of St. Mary
Magdalen at Newton in Holderness, and Edmund Percy then in Possession of the
said Hospital, containing that the said Percy (whose title the Bishop confirms)
and his Successors shall pay to the said Litchfield during his Life a yearly
Pension of 100 s. on the day of the Annuciation of the Blessed Virgin, in the
Collegiate Church of St. Thomas of Acon in London, under pain of incuring the
Sentence of Excommunication, if upon request he does not within thirty days
perform this Decree, Litchfield on the Possessions of the said Hospital to
enter and distrain, and the distress to detain till his said Annuity and the
Arrearages and his Expenses be fully satisfied. This Decree was made by consent
and approbation of both Parties, and bears date in the Archbishops Inn at
Westminster (now Whitehally An. Dom. 1485. Approved, ratified, and confirmed by
the Dean and Chapter of York, and by the Master, Brothers, and Sisters of the
said Hospital, in the same year.

Page 381. RIPPON.
IT was found by Inquisition taken at Rippon, 10 E. 2. that in the Hospital of
St. Mary Magdalen there, according to the Foundation, there ought to be two
Chaplains daily celebrating; that Strangers, poor Clerks, or other indigent
People, coming to the said Hospital in their travells, ought to be lodged there
one night, and entertained with Victuals, and Bed, and in the Morning depart;
and that on St. Mary Magdalen's day yearly ought to be distributed in Alms to
every poor Body that comes, one Loaf of the value of a halfpenny, the quarter
of Wheat being prized at 5 s. But they find that then Costos of this Hospital
had perverted the Founders Charity in several particulars.

Page 461. WELL.
RAlph de Neville, Knt. Lord of Midleham, by Indenture dated A. 1342 Well in
the Archdeaconry of Richmond, for the Augmentation of Divine Worship, and for
the sustentation of poor and miserable People, and other Works of Piety, and
endowed the same with Lands and Revenue; and established therein one Master, two
Priests, and four and twenty poor and infirm People. And appointed that the
Master and two Priests should constantly observe and keep the Canonical hours,
and celebrate three Masses daily.

KYPIER Hospital, in the County Palatine of Durham.
FOunded by Ranulphus Bishop of Durham, An. 1112. to the honor of God and St.
Giles, for the Relief of the Clergy there serving, and Hugh Bishop of Durham,
Hugh granted to this Hospital Common of Pasture in his Forest with certain
Privileges, viz. that the feet of their Dogs should not be cut or clipped, but
that the Shepherds ligatos) for the safety of their Cattle from wild Beasts and
Wolves. An. 1297. A Composition was made between the Prior and Convent of
Durham, and the Hospital of St. Giles, whereby the said Prior and Convent did
quit-claim to the Brothers of that Hospital their Tithes of Corn at Clifton,
which till that time they had used to pay to the Church of St. Oswald, in
recompense whereof the Brothers of the said Hospital were to pay yearly upon
the Altar of St. Oswald on the Bisantium or 2 s. etc. The Men of
Bedelyngtonshire being obliged by their Lords the Bishops of Durham, to give to
the Hospital of St. Giles without Durham, one Thrave of Corn out of every
Plowland which they held, they granted under their Seals, in lieu thereof 9 s.
in money, to be paid to the said Hospital at the Feast of St. Michael, with a
Nomine paenae.

[ Valued at 167 l. 2 s. 11 d. per Annum.]

STOKE Hospital, near Newarke, in Nottinghamshire.
JOhn Chauson, Master of the Hospital of St Leonard's at Stoke, and others,
Confraters of the same, settled, by their Deed oated in the year 1332. forty
Acres of Land, and thirty shillings of Rent, which they had obtained of
Friends, for the profit of the said Hospital, and provided that the Master of
the same should cause sixty Masses to be celebrated yearly for ever, for the
said Benefactors, etc. To this every Master is to William Archbishop of York.

St. GILES Hospital, near Maldon, in Essex.
IT was found by Inquisition taken before Helming Leget, Escheator in the
County of Essex, that the Kings of England were Founders of this Hospital, for
the support of Leprous Burgesses of Maldon; that they had the Forfeitures of
all Bread, Ale, Flesh, and Fish, that was not good and wholesome in the said
Town; and that when the Master of that Hospital should cease to take the same
for the support as aforesaid, then the said Hospital should come and revert to
the King as forfeited; that Robert Manfeild, Clerk, late Provost of Beverley,
being made Custos of this Hospital, for above three years past has maintained
neither Chaplain nor any Leprous Person in the same, and that the said Hospital
was therefore seized into the King's hands. But King Henry the IV. being
advised etc. and meddle no further.

GINGES Hospital, in Essex.
MIchael de Capra, and Rose his Wife, and William his Son and Heir, gave to God
and the Church of St. Mary and St. Leonard in their Wood of Ginges, and to Toby
Prior of the said Place and the Brothers of the same, one Hide of Land, Paunage
for forty Hogs, and diverse other advantages.

BURCESTRE Hospital, in Oxfordshire.
KING Edward the III. in the nine and twentieth year of his Reign, licensed
Nicholas Jordan Hermit, Custos of the Chapel of St. John Baptist of Burcestre,
to found an Hospital at Burcestre to the honor of God, the glorious Virgin
Mary and St. John Baptist.

[ Valued at 147 l. 2 s. 10 d. per Annum.]

CALC Priory, in Derbyshire.
MAtilda Countess of Chester gave to the Canons of this place, an Estate at
Rependone near Trent, conditionally that they should make it the head Seat of
their Convent to which Calc should be subject as a Member. Hugh Earl of Chester
confirmed their Revenues.


KING Richard the II. An. 18. Licensed Richard Earl of Arundel to give four
Messuages and two Tofts to the Master and Chaplains of the holy Trinity at
Arundell, for the founding of an Hospital called Meysondewe in honor of the
holy Trinity, etc.

[ Valued at 42 l. 3 s. 8 d. per Annum.]

FOSS-GATE Hospital, at York.
JOhn Archbishop of York, Primate of England, and Legate of the Apostolic See,
ordained and established in the Foss-gate-street at York an Hospital in honor
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the blessed Virgin Mary, That there be one
Chaplain to have the Government of the same, and to be named Master or Custos,
the right of presenting to the Office of Custos to belong to Mr. John de
Roucliff and his Heirs, in their de^ault to the Mayor of York for the time
being, in his default to the Official of York Court, and in his default that
the Archbishop or Dean and Chapter may for that time confer the place without
presentation, the Custos on his admission to be sworn to a just and true
Administration, etc. That there be d. of Silver, the Custos to have ten Marks
of yearly Revenue, which is judged sufficient for his support, that it shall
not be lawful for him to convert to his own use more than that Sum of the Goods
of the said Hospital, etc. Which Orders are dated at Thorpe near York, An Dom.
1373.

[ Valued at 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. per Annum.]

WHITINGTON'S Hospital, at London.
JOhn Coventry, John Carpenter, and William Grove, Execuors, of Richard
Whitington late Citizen and Mercer of London, and several times Mayor of that
City, according to the desire and appointment of the said Richard Michael Royal
at London, where the said Richard and Alice his Consort lie buried, a College
of certain Priests and Clerks to celebrate daily for the said Richard and
Alice; also an Almshouse for 13 poor People in the Parish of St. Michael
aforesaid and adjoining to the Church, And established diverse Orders by License
of King Henry VI. and Henry Archbishop of Canterbury, etc. touching the same;
as, that there shall be always inhabiting in the said Hospital 13 poor People
of one or both Sexes, of which one to be Chief, and called Tutor, the first of
which Office they placed themselves, by name Robert Chesterton, to whom they
gave the said Hospital with all the Appurtenances for a perpetual habitation
for him and the poor People and their Successors, by the name of the House of
God, or the Almshouse, or the Hospital of Richard Whityngton; that the Mayor of
London, and his Successors, shall be Supervisers, and the Wardens and
Communalty of Mercers, Conservators of the said House; that the Tutor and poor
People have Lodgings or Cells apart and several; London; that as the poor
People dye, the Master of the foresaid College shall place one in the first
Vacancy, and the Wardens of the Mercers in the Six next Vacancies, then again
the Master in the next one, and then the Wardens for the six next, etc. yet it
London, and especially the poor of the Mercers, who are not, nor have been of
the Livery, ( qui de liberata minime fuerint) and whom the Company are not
bound to maintain, and poor Clerks and inferior Officers of the College
aforesaid, are to be preferred to the said places before others; that the Tutor
and poor People be daily present at Mattins, Masses, Vespers, and Complin, in
the College or Church abovementioned, and at the prayers to be there made for
the Souls of Richard Whitington and Alice their Founders, Sr. William
Whitington Knight, the Lord Ivo Fitz-Waryn, and the Lady Maud his Wife, Parents
of the said Richard and Alice, King Richard II. and Thomas late Duke of
Gloucester, etc. That they shall say for the said Souls as often as they can
conveniently, three, or at least two Psalters, i. e. fifty Aves, and fifteen
Paters and three Creeds; that they should all go daily to the Tomb of the said
Richard and Alice, and there say the Psalm de Profundis, after which the Tutor
to say aloud in English God have mercy on our Founders Souls, and all Christen,
and the rest answer, Amen; that the Tutor shall not be absent from the said
etc. That the Tutor have and receive every week for his Pension 16 d. and every
poor person 4 d. that no Leprous, or mad Man be admitted into the House, etc.
if any Estate falls to any poor Man of the clear yearly value of five marks,
that he be removed, and another poor Person put in his place, but if it be
under five marks per Annum, let him give half to the Common Chest and keep the
other half; Vicious persons after the third December An. Dom. 1424. (3. H. 6.)

RUTHYN Hospital in Denbighshire.
QUeen Elizabeth, at the Petition of Gabriel Goodman Doctor of Divinity, and
Dean of the Collegiate Church of Westminster, erected, created, founded, and
established, an Hospital in Ruthyn in the Couuty of Denbigh, to be called
Christ's Hospital in Ruthin, to consist of one Preacher and twelve poor People
for ever; and ordained, that there should be one President, and one Warden of
the same, and nominated the then Bishop of Bangor and his Successors, for the
time being, to be President, and Eubolus Theloall Master in Arts, to be the
first Warden of the said Hospital, and all the Possessions, Lands and Goods
thereunto belonging; that the said President and Warden be a Body corporate for
ever, by the name of the President and Warden of Christ's Hospital in Ruthin,
by the said name to purchase and receive Lands, etc. as well of the said
Gabriel Goodman, as any other person, for the support and maintenance of the
said Hospital; that they have a Common Seal; that they may sue and be sued by
the said Gabriel Goodman during his Life to elect, nominate, and appoint the
Wardens and poor People of the said Hospital as often as there shall be
occasion, and to make and appoint Statutes and Orders for Govrnment of the
same; with license to the said President, and Warden, and their Successors to
purchase Lands not exceeding the clear yearly value of 100 l. etc. the Statute
of Mortmain or any other Stat. non obstante. Letters Patents to be past of all
this under the Great Seal of England without any manner of Fine or Fee to be
paid etc.


FOunded by Vrsus de Swemele, without the West-Gate of Droheda, for the relief
of poor and helpless People, and by him endowed with all the Lands and Rents
that he had in Ireland, and gave the Election of the Custos (after his death)
to the Honest men, or Freemen ( probos homines) of Drohida.

Page 792. SEMPRINGHAM.
THE Master and Canons of Sempringham declared by their Deed, that they and
theirs in the place called Mirmaude, the Gift of Ralph de Hauvill, are subject
to the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Ely as their Diocesan, notwithstanding
their Privileges.


GIlbert the II. Master of the Order of Sempringham, and John Prior and the
Convent of Ellerton, obliged themselves to the maintenance of thirteen poor
People in the Hospital of the Church of Ellerton, founded by William Fitz Peter.

Page 514. St. John of Jerusalem, in the Suburbs of London.
KING Philip and Queen Mary by their Letters Patents, and Cardinal Pole Legate
a Latere, restored and established the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem in
England, to its Pristine Estate, and the Priory and Hospital John of
Clerkenwell lately dissolved, and constituted Sir Thomas Tresham Knt. Prior of
the same, Richard Shelley, Peter Felices, Cuthbert Laithen, Edward Brown,
Thomas Thornell, Henry Gerard, George Aylmer, James Shelley, and Oliver
Starkey, Commendators or Preceptors of the said Hospital, whom the said King
and Queen incorporated by the name of Prior and Confraters of the Hospital of
St. John of Jerusalem in England, to have perpetual Succession, and by that
name to sue and be sued, to purchase and take Lands, etc. and to have a Common
Seal; and gave them all that Capital House and Site of the said Hospital of
St. John of Jerusalem, situate and being near Clerkenwell, in Middlesex, with
the Church and all Houses and Buildings, Gardens and Orchards, etc. thereunto
belonging, also all that Wood and Wood-ground called Greet St. John's Wood,
lying near Maribone-Park in Middlesex, and all other Lands and Tenements
whatsoever that were in the Possession of the Prior and Confraters of the said
Hospital at the time of the Dissolution of the same, and all Goods and
Furniture belonging to the said House, etc. Which Letters Pattents bear date at
Grenewiche, April the 2 d. in the fourth and fifth year of their Reign.

Page 247. BUTLEY.
KING Henry the VII. in the four and twentieth year of his Reign granted to
Robert Brommer Prior of the Monastery of Butley, and the Convent of the same,
the Priory of the blessed Mary of Snape in Suffolk, with all Lands and Revenues
thereunto belonging, or which Thomas Neylond late Prior of the said Priory
enjoyed in right of the same, to hold in pure and perpetual Alms without
Account or any Rent, and to be annexed to the said Priory of Butley.

NEWINTON-LONGVILLE, an alian Priory in Buckinghamshire.
THIS was a Cell to the Abbey of St. Faith at Longville in Normandy, to which
Walter Gifford Earl of Buckingham, gave and confirmed diverse Lands and
Revenues, with great Privileges in his Forest of Waddon, free and discharged
of all Exactions, etc.

CATHEDRAL CHURCHES Of Canons Secular.

ANno Dom. 673. Ceadwalla King of the South Saxons, at the Request of Bishop
Wilfrid, gave diverse Lands for the Building and Endowment of a Monastery at
Selesey. Brnny of Sussex, Northelmus King Sussex, An. 692. Numa King of Sussex,
An. 714. Oslac Duke of Sussex, 780. were Benefactors to this Religious House of
Selesey. Abbot Pleghaard having transferred certain Revenues in Deaton to the
Episcopal Church at Selesey, which Revenues he had of the Gift of King Offa,
they were fixed and established to the said Church, in a Synod held at Clobeham,
825. King Athelstan gave Lands to the said Church, An. 930. the Edmund, King
Eadwyn, King Ethelred, and Ethelbert. William gave Lands and Liberties to the
Church of Chichister (the Sea being Henry the I. and King Steven, Trinity at
Chichester, and to Hillary Bishop of the same, diverse Lands and Franchises,
some of which Lands the said Bishop and his Successors were Maud his Queen and
her Successors. William Earl of Chichister gave to this Church among other
things, the fourth part of the City; King John confirmed to this Church all the
Lands, etc. and Liberties which they then had or should have; The like did King
Henry Ralph the II. Bishop of Chichester, his Chancellor. The Prior
Bartholmew's at London granted to the Bishops of this See, certain Houses in
the Parish of St. Sepulchers, without Newgate, to hold by the yearly Rent of
one pound of Frankincense, or sixpence, at Michael. Ranulphus Bishop of
Chichister, (who writes himself the humble Minister of the Church of
Chichister) caused to be provided for the Manors of that Bishopric, a stock
or store of Cattle, viz. two hundred and fifty two Oxen, one hundred Crows, ten
Bulls, three thousand one hundred and fifty Seep ( Bidentia) one hundred and
twenty she Goats, and fix he Goats, and ten Plow-horses, which Stock he ordered
to be continued by all his Successors under censure of Excommunication, and to
be Anathema Maranatha; Confirmed and ratified by King Henry the III. John Earl
of Eu, restored to this Church, by Deed dated An. 1248. the Manor of Bixle,
which his Grandfather and Father had unjustly taken, and a long time detained
from it.


ON Easter Day, An. 627. Edwyn King of the Northumbers was baptized by Paulinus
at York, in a small Church built on purpose, of Wood. This Church dedicated to
St. Peter, was made the Archiepiscopal Seat of the said Paalinus, who had
converted all that Province to the Christian A CANNON SECVLAR
Vol. 3. P. 115.

Faith. Afterward in the year 1067. Thomas a Canon of Bayeux, being made
Archbishop, built the Church of Stone, after a larger manner. An 958. Eadway
gave Suthwell to Oscytell Archbishop of York. King Athelstan, King Canute the
Dane, King Edward the Confessor, were Benefactors to William Rufus, who styles
himself Son of King William, who succeeded King Edward by hereditary Right,
gave to Thomas Archbishop of Tork and his Successors the Abbey of St. German of
Seleby, and the Church of St. Oswald at Gloucester, in lieu of the Jurisdiction
which the said Archibishop claimed over Lincoln, and Linsey, which the said
Archbishop thereupon quitted, for ever. The said King confirmed all the
Liberties Honorius, who exempted this Archbishop from Subjection to that of
Canterbury. Pope Alexander granted to Thomas Archbishop of York the Pallium, to
be by him worn on Solemn Occasions. King Hen. I. and II. and Maud the Empress,
granted Lands, Roger Archbishop York, built anew the Quire and Vaults under it
at St. Peter's, Mary and the holy Angels, endowed it with eleven Churches, and
settled therein thirteen Ministers, viz. four Priests, four Deacons, four
Subdeacons, and one Sacristan to be chief, each Priest to have ten Marks per
Annum, each Deacon 100 s. and each Subdeacon six Marks, the rest to the
Sacristan; Sewallus who was consecrated Archbishop of York in the year 1256.
perceiving the Revenue Thorp-Arches, Colingham, Berdeseye, Otteleye, Calverley,
Hoton-Paynel, Sutton, Everton, Hayton, Clareburgh, and Retford, the Vicars of
all which he etc. Henry the VI. in the three and thirtieth year of his Reign
granted his License to William then Archbishop of York and others to purchase a
House to be a College, wherein the Chantry Priests of the Cathedral Church
might inhabit together, which said Priests be incorporated, with License to
purchase Lands to the value of ten Marks per Annum. The like Letters Pattents
Edward. IV. in his first year, for erecting a College of the said Chantry
Priests, ( Persons in Kyrk of York) with License to the said College to
purchase Lands, etc. to the value of 100 l. Pope Innocent confirmed the Lands,
etc. of this Church, and Pall to the Archbishop. Pope Paschalis, and Calixtus,
exempted this Archbishop from Subjection to Canterbury.

William King of Scotland certified to Pope Alexander that the Church of
Scotland was of old times subject to the Church of York, and desired that by
his Authority it may be made so again. Pope Honorius writ to the King of Norway
to restore to Ralf Bishop of the Orcades consecrated by, and Subject to the
Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of York, the Possessions belonging to the said
Bishopric. Olaus King of the Isles writ to the York at the recommendation of
the Abbot of Furnes, to obtain from him the Consecration of a Bishop to
propagate the Christian Religion in the Isles. Pope Calixtus writ to the Bishop
of Glascow, commanding him to submit himself to the Jurisdiction of the
Archbishop of York within thrirty days after the receipt of his Letters. Pope
Honorius writ to the Bishop elect of Galloway ( Candida casa) to repair to the
Archbishop of York as his proper Metropolitan, for Consecration, etc. Paschal
writ to all the Bishops of Scotland to submit to York as their Calixtus and
Innocent, which last writ to the Archbishop of Canterbury, his Legate, to
denounce the Bishop of Glascow excommunicate unless he submits himself to the
Archbishop of York within three Months, after admonition. Pope Honorius writ to
the Archbishop of Canterbury and all the Bishops of England, and to King Henry,
that the Archbishop of York may, according to ancient Custom, be permitted to
have his Cross born before him, in all parts of England, Galloway made a formal
Act of Subjection and Canonical Obedience to this Archbishop, in like manner as
did Durham, and Carlisle.

Roger de Mowbray, Peter de Ros, William Paynell, the Lord William de Percy,
Topcliffe, to the Fabric of this Church, (in Mary at Topcliffe, s. yearly)
Ieffry Fitz Peter Earl of Essex, the Abbot and Convent of Albemarl, who gave
Preston, and other Churches Holderness An. 1228. Nicholas de Stutville who gave
Michael de Hamelscia Henry Fitz Thomas, and others, were Benefactors to this
Church. An Inquisition was taken An. Dom. 1275, (4. Edward I.) in which all the
Lands and Liberties Peter, in the City and Suburbs of York, were set forth and
expressed, some of which the Jury then found to have belonged Walter Gray
Archbishop of York York by Deed dated, An. 1241. All his Mansion etc. in Thorp
St. Andrew, or Bishops Thorp, with Provision that the said Chapter reconvey the
Premises to his Successors to hold by the Rent of 20 marks per An. at the
feast of St. Martin, etc. The said Walter in the 33 year of his consecration
caused certain Vicarages to be endowed in the Churches of Tickhill etc. which
Churches were appropriated to the Prior and Convent of St. Oswald of Nostel; in
particular to the support of the Vicar of Tickhill, and one associate Priest, a
Deacon, and Subdeacon there, he appointed the whole Altarage, in which name he
specifies all Oblations, Tithes and profits of the Church of Tickhill, except
Tithes of Corn, pulse, and hay, and the Lands belonging to the said Church,
saving a Competent Mansion to be assigned to the Vicar, which Tithes of Garbs,
and Hay, and the said Lands, shall remain to the said Convent of Nostell, etc.
Herbert the Chamberlain, Steven, and Steven and Reginald his Sons were
Benefactors Peter. King Henry II. granted to Archbishop Walter, and his
Successors Free Warren, in their Mannours of Shirburn, Cawood. Aufridus de
Chanci, Paganus de Vilers, John Constable of Chester, Robert de Vavasour, and
others, were also Benefactors. Thomas York, before mentioned, dyed at York on
the Octaves of St. Martin, An. Dom. 1100, in great Reputation; as appears by
his Epitapth entered in the Register of that Church.

There were certain Customs and Orders used of old time in this Consecration,
he was to be received in solemn Procession, so also when he returns at any time
from beyond Sea, etc. That the Bishop of Durham was to present him with a rich
Cope after his Consecration; that every Prebendary should in his lifetime give
a Cope value 10 l. or after his etc. That the Dean is bound to feed forty poor
People daily, that he is the greatest in the Church, next The Archbishop, and
in the Chapter the greatest of all, An. Dom. 1200. the then Dean and Canons did
order and ordain, that four Persons should be constantly resident, viz. the
Dean, the Chantor, the Chancellor, and the Treasurer, the Archdeacons to reside
for three months in a year, other Canons for half a year, the common Profits to
be divided among those only who are resident, that no Vicar shall be admitted
for favor, but only Henry the VIII. made and established new Statutes by
Letters Patents, in the time of Edward Archbishop of York, whereby reciting
that they had in this Church an evil Custom, long used, that every Canon
Prebendary was bound to spend in feasting the first year of his Residency one
thousand Marks, or else he could not partake of the Emoluments of the Place, he
abolishes the said Custom, and all Statutes relating thereunto, and Orders that
the Statutes relating to the great Residency be Peter, That all Canons then
being in the City of York, as well not resident as resident, be called to
assist at all Chapters, that to the Chest wherein the Common-Seal is kept, be
three different Locks and Keys, one to be kept by the Dean, the other two by
the two Senior Residents, or if there be not at that time two Residentiaries
then by the Precentor, and Chancellor, etc. that all Custom encouraging Pomp
and Prodigality be abolisht, that a division of the Profits be made at the
Feast of St. Martin according to the Days, Weeks, or Months of the
Refidentiaries residing; which Canons in the time of their Residency are to be
present at Vespers, Ma^tins, and high Mass, at least, etc. Every Canon
Residentiary to live at a House within the Close of the Cathedral, and to have
in Benefices at least 100 l. per Annum, That the Vicars Choral shall when every
Canon begins his greater Residence, receive 5 l. and afterward 6 l. 13 s. 4 d.
per Annum. That every Canon having a Prebend worth 8 l. per Annum, shall yearly
at the Feast of St. Martin contribute and pay into the hands of the Chancellor
of this Church 6 s. 8 d. for the providing of Preachers in the said Church,
which Preachers are to be provided on the Rogation-days, Sundays, and other
days at discretion, this not to excuse the Dean, and Chancellor, or any etc.
Which Letters Pattens bear date 3 June 33 H. 8.

To this Cathedral Church did belong abundance of Jewels, Vessels of Gold and
Silver, and other Ornaments, rich Vestments and Books, viz. ten Miters of great
value, among which one small Miter with Stones for the Bishop of the Boys, or
Children ( pro Episcopo puerorum) one Silver the Bishop of the Boys; Chalices,
Vials, Pots, Basins, Candlesticks, Thuribules, S S. etc. with Sums of old Gold,
and Silver deposited in the years 1517, 1518, 1519, and 1520.

HEREFORD Cathedral.
MIlefrid King of the Mercians built and endowed this Church, and Ethelbert
(King of the East-Angels, murdered by Offa King of Mercia, and) reputed a Saint
and Martyr. King Edward the Confessor granted Liberties to the Priests of this
Church. In the time of the said King Edward, Walter then Bishop of this Church
had one hundred Masuras wanting two (each Masura contains about four Oxgangs of
Land) Robert Bishop here (who succeeded the other) found forty Hides of Land
belonging to this See, but all wasted. The Canons of Hereford held many Manors
and Lands, etc. in right of their Church at the time of the Conquest, as
appears by Domesday-Book, a true Copy whereof expressing the particulars in the
several Hundreds where they lay, is transcribed and P. 182, 183, 184. the whole
in the said Bishopric amounting to 300 Ralph Bishop of Hereford granted to the
Dean and Chapter of that Church, all his Land of Hamme, then valued at 15 l per
Annum, which he had lately purchased of Simon de Clifford, to hold by the
service of one Knights Fee and a half, and the said Dean and Chapter granted to
him to celebrate the Divine Offices on the day of his Obit, yearly. The Manor
of Hamme, in which the said Land lay, was given to the Prior and Convent of
Crassewell, by Walter de Lascy, and by the Prior and Convent Crassewell sold
and conveyed to Peter de Aquablanca Bishop of Hereford and his Heirs, for the
Sum of five hundred Marks; which Peter gave the said Manor and several other
good Gifts to the Church of Hereford. King William the Conqueror restored to
this Church diverse Manors unjustly taken from it by Earl Herald. Ralph Murdac
confirmed to the Church of St. Mary and St. Ethelbert, and to the Canons of the
same, the Church of Putley, given them by William D'evereus his Predecessor.

LANDAFF Cathedral.
ANno Dom. 156. Lucius King of the Britains, having applied himself Elutherius,
He and the Chief of his Kingdom were baptized into the Christian Religion; the
sincere Doctrines of which they preserved uncorrupted till the Pelagian Heresy
arose; to reform and confute which, St. Germanus, and Lupus, being sent for out
of France, they before they went back consecrated Bishops in several parts of
this Isle, in particular they consecrated Dubritius a holy and great Doctor, an
Archbishop; and appointed for him an Episcopal Seat, which was by the grant of
King Mouric, founded at a place called Podum Lantani in honor of St. Peter,
and by that King endowed with all between Taf, and Eiei, and by Apostolic
Authority with great Ecclesiastical Privileges. This Dubricius founded diverse
Churches, and settled Bishops in the Right side of Britain (per dextralem
Britanniam) in particular he consecrated Daniel Bishop in the City of Bangor.
Guorduc offered up ( immolavit) his Virgin Daughter Dulon to Dubricius
Archbishop of Landaff, whom he consecrated An. Dom. 612. Dubricius Bishop of
Landaff departed this life, and in the year 1120. was with great Solemnity
translated from the Isle of Enli, to his Church of Landaff, at which time and
action, some miraculous Events are said to happen. Urban Bishop of Landaff
complained to Pope Calixtus that whereas this Church was at its first erection,
the Mistress of all the Churches of Wales, and had once four and twenty Canons,
of which there remained at that time but two, and the Revenues almost desolate,
by the Invasion of Laymen and Monks, and also of his own Brothers, the Bishop
of Hereford, and the Bishop of St. David's, he therefore prays the said Pope

Idon a British King was a great Benefactor to this Church, in the time of St.
Teliau. Successor to the foresaid Dubricius. Also King Margetud, Aircol, and
one Tutuc, gave to the same Archbishop Teliau, diverse Lands and Possessions, as
an expiatory penance for certain Murders. ^ing Mouric before mentioned was the
Son of King Teudiric, who having settled Saxons, and his Son in great danger of
losing it, he was admonisht by an Angel that he should leave his Retirement and
head the Army, that they would fly at his sight, and that he should, however,
receive a wound and die in peace after three days; all which happened as
foretold, and he dying in an Isle called in Welsh C^hni, his faid Son built
there an Landaff, this was in the time of Oudoceus the third Bishop of this
See. The said Mouric having by treachery killed Cynvetu, after he had sworn to
a firm peace with him, before the Relics of the Saints, was Excommunicated,
for redemption of which, and as part of his penance, he gave to this Church
four Towns with their Liberties. King Morcant, Augustus King of Brecknoc, and
King Iudhail, were Benefactors; so was Gurvodius upon his having obtained a
great Victory Saxons. In the time of Bishop Gurvan, Teudor and Elgist
Brecknock, swore a firm and mutual Peace with each other, before the Relics of
the Saints, after which King Teudor took occasion to Kill Elgist; for which
Homicide and Perjury being excommunicate, and upon his Absolution being
Enjoined for Penance, Alms, Prayer, and Fasting, he gave in Alms to this
Church of Landaff diverse Briteon hail Son of Devon sacrificed ( immolavit) to
God, and St. Dubricius, six Churches with all their Liberties and Clotri and
King Iudgvalaun, having sworn a firm Peace before the holy Gospells and
Relics upon the Altar, in Presence of Bishop Berthguin and the Clergy, after
which Clotri killing Iudgvalaun, he was for his homicide and perjury,
excomunicated with all his Progeny and Kingdom, by the said Bishop and Clergy
in a full Synod. Afterward being absolved and enjoined Penance, as part of the
Landaff. Guidnerth having slain his Brother, was for his homicide and
Fratricide, excommunicated by Bishop Oudoceus in a full Synod, and after three
years, having performed an enjoined Penance into Cornwall (the Brittons and
those of Cornwall being of the same language and Nation though divided in
territory) he was upon Gurcan who succeeded Guinan, having lived incestuously
with his Mother in Law, was therefore in full Synod excommunicated by Erthguin,
and after upon his reformation being absolved, gave diverse Lands to this
Church. King Clitauc Son of Clitguin, was a Prince who governed his Kingdom in
Peace and exact Juctice, and became afterward a Martyr on this account: A
young Virgin of quality was in love with him so far as to declare she would
never marry unless to Clitauc, whereupon a Nobleman of the Court, whose Suit
she had refused, for the Kings sake, in revenge murdered the innocent King in
hunting. After whose Murder the Bishop of Landaff caused to be built, and
consecrated, Myngui, etc. Which with diverse Lands given to the same, was
afterward a granted to the Bishops of Landaff, by King Iudhail Son of Morcant.
A Noble man of the same name, Iudhail Son of Edelvirth, going with his Wife on
a Sunday to hear divine Service at St. Clitaue's, was so far prevailed upon by
the Devils insligation and his own lust, (...) to lie with his Wife in a Meadow
on the Bank of Mingui, and having performed the Act, and about to withdraw, he
found himself not able to disjoyn, but was forced to remain in that Posture
inseparable from his W^^e, whereupon he called out to his Attendants, and
ordered them to repair to the Monument of the Martyr Clitauc, and there offer
in his name that Meadow which he had unjustly taken from that Church, this
being done, with promise of amendment of Life, he was again Convur bought
certain Lands of King Fernvail, Son of Iudhail, for an excellent horse of the
price of 12 Cows, a Dog that had killed Birds, with a Hawk ( cum Ancipitre) of
the Price of 3 Cows, and another Horse of the Price of 3 Cows, which Landaff
Fernuhail, Convelin, King Ris Son of Iudhail, and abundance of other Kings
Wales, were Benefactors to this Church. King Hotel being excomunicated by the
Bishop and Synod at Landaff for killing Galcun, after a peace swern, upon his
Absolution gave diverse Lands to this Church; the like did Ili Son of Conblus,
who was excommunicated for killing Camauc after a Peace sworn between them.
Agvod Son of Iovaf having an angry Contest betwixt his family and the Bishops,
came up to the Church Door, and threw stones into the Church, and then fled,
under an Anathema; for which he afterward begged pardon and gave diverse Lands
to Corenhiro then Bishop and his Successors. King Nongui gave Lands for
violating the Liberties of this Church and committing Sacrilege. An. Dom. 955.
Pater being then Bishop of this Church, six men of the Family of Nongui, broke
into a Church in this Dioces^, and there killed a Deacon before the Altar, who
had fled thither for Sanctuary, for which they were delivered up to the Bishop,
and remained imprisoned six months in Chains, and they were further sentenced
by a Synod that they should forfeit all their Lands and Substance to the Church
which they had profaned. Asser Son of Marchvid, having killed Gulagguin by
treachery gave to this Church the Town of Segan, etc. Brochmail Son of Mouric,
gave to Etgar Son of Levi had a Son, incestuously. Teudur King of Brecknock,
King Grifud, etc. were also Benefactors.

An. Dom. 982. Gucaun Bishop of Landaff was consecrated by the Metropolitan
Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury, and had his Pastoral Staff given him by Edgar
the Supreme King of the English. At the same time, lived Edgar King of all
Britain, Hawel da, and Morgan hen, which two last were subject to King Edgar.

Etguin King of Guenti having a great contest with Bledri Bishop of Landaff, it
went so far that the Bishop himself was wounded, whereupon he summoned and
assembled all the Clergy from Taratir in Gui, to Tigui, who in full Synod
Anathematized the King, with his whole Family, and put his Country under
interdict; but the King seeking absolution, obtained it, and thereupon gave
diverse Lands to this Church. Muric Son of Hivil, after he had solemnly sworn to
a Peace and Friendship with Etguin Joseph Bishop of Landaff seized upon the
said Etguin, cast him in Prison, and put out his eyes, which occasioned his
death, for which being cursed in a Synod, he afterward obtained absolution, and
gave several Towns to this Church. King Mouric, and Caratanc one of his Lords,
being under censure for violating the Sanctuary of this Catguallaun,
Ringuallaun, Gistinus, and others, who being guilty of like Crimes, made the
like Compensations.

When King William conquered England, Hergualdus was Bishop of Landaff,
Catguacaun Son of Mouric King of Glatmorcant, Caratoc, and Riderch Kings of
other parts of Wales, all which Kings served King William, and died in his time.

LITCHFELD Cathedral.
THIS was formerly called the Mercian Church, and first founded in the year
657. upon the Conversion of this Province to the Christian Religion, it was
then made a Cathedral, and Duina the first Bishop of the Mercians or middle
English, who governed here but two years and died. To him succeeded Cellach, a
Scot. After him Trumhere, and Iarman, both Englishmen, but ordained Bishops in
Scotland. To these succeeded St. Cedda, An. Dom. 667. who had been before that
Bishop of York. After whose death succeeded Winfrid, and after him Sexwolf who
founded the Abbey of Peterborough, after whose death the Province of Mercia was
divided into two Diocesses ( Par^chias) Litchfield and Leicester, though after a
while they were both united again under Hedda Bishop of Litchfield, who died,
An. 721. In the time of Ethelred King of Mercia the Bishopric of Litchfield
was divided into five Diocesses, viz. Hereford. Worcester, Litchfield,
Leicester, and Lindisey. After this division Litchfield had five Adulphus who
was made Archbishop of Litchfield by Pope Hadrian, An. 764. and a Jurisdiction
given him over all Mercia and the East Angles, but after him there was no more
Archbishops. From his time to the Norman Conquest were fifteen Bishops of
Litchfield, soon after which the Episcopal Seat was translated from Litchfield
to Chester. An. 1075. The second Bishop of Chester was Robert de Lymesi, who
An. 1095. removed his Seat again, from Chester to the rich Monastery at
Coventry, not long before built, and magnificently endowed by Earl Leofrick and
Godeva his Wife. To him succeeded Robert Peche, Roger de Clinton, Walter
Durdent, Richard Peche, and Gerard de Puella, all of them successively Bishops
of Coventry and most buried there. The following Bishops were called Bishops of
Coventry and Litchfield, whole names are Hugo de Novant, who in the year 1190.
displaced the Monks from the Monastery at Coventry and introduced Secular
Canons in their stead (but the Monks were restored again after seven years (
Ieffrey de Muschampe, An. 1199. William de Cornhill, An. 1215. Alexander de
Savensby, An. 1224. in whose time Pope Honorious ordered that one time the
Election of the Bishop should be made in the Church of Coventry by the Convent
of Monks there and the Chapter of Litchfield, and the next Litchfield by the
said Convent and Chapter. Hugo de Pat^shull, An. 1240. Roger de Wescham, An.
1245. Roger de Meyland, An. 1256. Walter de Langton, An. 1296. he was a great
Benefactor to the Church of Litchfield. Roger de Norburgh, An. 1322.

Penda King of the Mercians, a Man phanatical and impious ( fanaticus and
impius) after he had reigned thirty years was overcome by Oswy King of the
Northumbers, An. 656. Which Oswy becoming King of Mercia, was the occasion of
the Conversion of that Province to the Christian Faith, and founded the Mercian
Church, now called Litchfield, and died, An. 670. In the City of Litchfield
were two Monasteries, one in the East-part where St. Cedda used to make his
Prayers, and preach to the People, which place is since called Stow, the other
was in the West-part, and dedicated to the blessed Virgin Mary; here the Bishop
made his Seat, his Habitation contained fix and thirty foot in length, and
twenty eight in breadth; the Deans Apartment adjoined to that of the Bishop,
and contained Deans. Roger de Clinton the third Bishop of Coventry was the
first Erector of a College of Canons at Litchfield, there being before that
time only five Priests in that Church serving at five Altars. These Canons of
Litchfield did sometimes refuse to admit the Bishop when chosen and
enthonizated at Coventry, the Prior of which place Coventry and his Convent
pretended to have the sole and free choice of the Bishop, but King John after a
long contest with them, over-awed them at Nottingham to chose William de Gray
his Chancellor their Bishop, and not only so, but to join with the Canons of
Litchfield in the Election. But the Election William de Cornhull, Archdeacon of
Huntington; all this was done in the time of a general Interdict.

The Episcopal Seat was translated from Litchfield to Chester in the time
William the Conqueror, and from Chester to Coventry in the Reign of King Henry
the I. Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury recited and confirmed Roger Bishop of
Coventry and Litchfield, whereby, with the Consent of the Prior and Convent of
Coventry he granted and confirmed to the Dean, and Chapter, and Church of
Litchfield, diverse Lands and Rents, and allotted the same to such and such
Offices and Duties, and ratified the Constitutions of Hugh his Predecessor, and
granted and established Coventry and Litchfield should have equal Power in the
Election of the Bishop. Which Confirmation by the Archbishop of Canterbury
bears date, An. Dom. 1259. King Richard the I. granted diverse Lands and
Franchises to this Church, confirmed by Pope Honorius. John Archbishop of
Canterbury made and provided etc. Dated, An. Dom. 1280. King John, while Earl
of Moreton, Henry the III. An. 50. Roger called the Amnener gave and confirmed
Roger de Mulent Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, a parcel of Land and
Buildings lying in the Parish of St. Mary le Stronde without London toward
Westminster, between the Highway that leads from London to Westminster and the
Thames, to hold to the said Roger and his Successors, by the s. payable at
Easter, for the purchase of which the said Bishop gave twenty Marks of Silver.
Pope Eugenius confirmed the Lands and Possessions given to this Church, and
established the Episcopal Seat at Coventry, An. 1151. William Bishop of Coventry
gave and confirmed Litchfield the Church of Hope, and Chapel of Tideswell
Steven granted to Cedd at Litchfield, and Walter Bishop of Coventry and his
Successors for ever, a Mint for the Coining of Money at Litchfield King Edward
the I. granted to Roger Meuland Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, and his
Successors, the Forest or free Chase of Canok in Staffordshire, with the usual
Liberties, to hold in Frankalmoine etc.

An. Dom. 1397. Thomas de Stretton Dean of Litchfield and the Chapter of that
Church, deposited two hundred Marks in a Chest called the Chest Steward has not
sufficient of the usual Income to supply etc. All which was confirmed and
ratified by Richard Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield. Anno Dom. 1411, John
Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, granted and demised to the Chantry Priests
in the Church of Litchfield a common Lodging or Litchfield, to have and to hold
to them and their Successors for the term of ninety eight years at the Rent of
12 d. per Annum payable to the Bishop and his Successors. There were formerly
in this Church seventeen Chantries founded by several Persons.

Ieffrey Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, James Denton Dean, and the Chapter
of the said Church, made a Collection of all Statutes and Orders that had been
made in the times of former Bishops, altering some, and adding others as there
was occasion, and having out of that Collection compiled a body of Statutes,
presented it to Cardinal Wolsey. Archbishop of York and Legate de Latere, to be
confirmed by his Legantine Authority; In which Statutes are contained
directions for saying the Divine Offices Litchfeild, viz. The Dean, Precentor,
Treasurer, and Chancellor, also of the Sacristan, and after what manner the
several Bells are to be tolled or Rung at the several hours and Offices. etc.
The Office and duty of the Vicars, and secular Clerks Clerk Vicars; The manner
of installing the Canons, all etc. and what habits and colors are to be used
upon such and such days; Ash Wednesday and Advent Sunday, etc. Michaelmas
yearly, to receive and Cedde, and the assumption of the Virgin Mary, the Dean
Trinity Sunday to Christmas Mattins be immediately said etc. That Salisbury
use; That in case any difference shall happen among the Canons it shall be
composed among themselves, if it may be, if not, by the Dean and Chapter within
two Months, if not by them, then by the Bishop etc. All which Statutes and
Ordinances with many more, filling twenty one Folio's and a half, were declared
and established by the foresaid Dean and Chapter, and confirmed by the Bishop in
the year 1526. The Bishop of Litchfeld is sworn to defend the Rights and
Liberties of this Church to his ability, to observe the Statutes and approved
ancient Customs of the same, and not to alienate the Episcopal Possessions.
The Dean is sworn to make continual Residency as is accustomed, to be faithful
to the Church, not to reveal the secrets of the Chapter, to observe and defend
the Statutes, and approved and ancient Customs, to behave himself with
humility and Patience, and to excite all those who are Subject to his
Government to do the like. Every Canon is sworn to be obedient to the Dean and
Chapter in Canonical Commands, to defend the Rights and Liberties of this
Church, to observe the Statutes and ancient and approved Customs, to be
faithful to the Church and not to reveal the Secrets of the Chapter. Every
Vicar is sworn to be obedient to the Dean and Chapter, to be faithful, to
perform the Day and Night Service according to his reasonable ability. The
Sergeant is sworn to be true to the Church of Litchfield, to keep Council,
truly to do his Office of Sergeantship, and when he is sent on Errands to give
a true Report, etc.

LINCOLN Cathedral.
PAulinus Archbishop of York, who converted a great part of the North among the
rest converted to the Christian Religion the Prefect of the City of Lincoln
called Bletta, and caused a Church to be erected, and therein consecrated
Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury.

An. 1092, Bishop Remigius removed his Episcopal Seat from Dorchester by
License of King William the Conqueror to Lincoln, and began to build there a
sumptuous Church, on the Hill near the Castle, but Thomas then Archbishop of
York pretending that Lincoln and all the Province of Lindsey was within his
Diocese, gave some obstruction for a while. But it was afterward finished by
King William II, who caused it to be dedicated William Rufus Confirmed all the
Lands and Revenues which his Father had given to this Church, and was himself a
great Benefactor, he quieted the Dispute York and the Bishop of Lincoln, about
Jurisdiction, giving Thomas Archbishop of York such satisfaction to quit his
Claim for ever, as has been already mentioned, page 131. King Henry I. gave to
this Church among other Lands the Manor of Bicheleswade with Newark, on St,
Mary Magdalens day and four days before; he also granted to Robert Lincoln
Liberty to make a Passage through his Castle Wall, he also granted to the said
Bishop and the Canons of this Church his Vineyard Lincoln and all that belongs
to it. He also granted them several Churches, Hempingham, Derby, Wercheford, to
be Prebends, with all the Lincoln within and without the Borough, and
Freewarren Lincolnshire and Nottinghamshire. King Henry II. granted and
confirmed to Robert Bishop of Lincoln and his Successors the Andrew Holburn, at
London, which the said Bishop had purchased of those Knights for one hundred
marks, and the yearly Rent of three pieces of Gold ( tres aureos). The same
King gave to this Church and Bishop all the ground from the Bale Westward to
the City Wall Eastward, at Lincoln, to build on; he also Lincoln, and Robert
Abbot of St. Albans about the Jurisdiction over fifteen Churches to the said
Abbey belonging. Pope Honorius An. 1125. confirmed the Revenues given to this
Church; Innocent, who also granted that no Bishop should be Lincoln without the
free election of the Clergy and People, An. 1138. King Henry III, in the
fortieth year of his Reign upon the Petition of the Dean and Canons of Lincoln
for his License to remove some part of the City Wall, that so they might
enlarge their Church Eastward, issued out a Writ of Quod damnum, in order to
the same.


Ralf Ramerus. Simon (...) An. Dom. 1100. Adelmus, 1162. Hamo. Ieffry Killing.
Rober de Rolveston, 1198. William de Tornaco, 1227. Roger de Wescham, 1237.
after Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield. Henry de Lenington, 1243. after Bishop
of Lincoln. Richard de Gravesend, 1254 after Bishop of Lincoln. Robert de
Mariscis, 1260. William de Lenington, 1262. Richard de Mephum, 1273. John de
Maydencton 1275. Olive Sutton, 1276. after Bishop of Lincoln. Nicholas de
Hecham, 1280. William Wicham, 1577. after Bishop of Lincoln and Winchester.
Philip de Willughby, 1289. Gotzesinus de Kyrington, 1305. Raymundas, a
Cardinal, 1307. Roger de Martival, 1310. after Bishop of Sarum. Henry de
Mansfield, 1315. Anthony Beak, 1328. after Bishop of Norwich. John de
Nottingham, 1340. William de Norwich, 1343. after Bishop of Norwich. John de
Offord, 1345. Simon Bresley, 1348. John de Stretley, 1364. John de Shepy. 1388.
John Mackworth, 1412. Robert Fleming, 1451. George Fitzbugh, 1483. Ieffry
Simion, 1505. Thomas Wulcy, 1509. afterward Bishop of Lincoln, and York, and
Cardinal. John Constable, 1514. George Heneage, 1528. John Tailor, 1539. after
Bishop of Lincoln. Matthew Parlur, ( or Parker) 1552. after Archbishop of
Canterbury. Francis Mallet, 1554. John Whitgift, 1571. after Bishop of
Worcester, and Archbishop of Canterbury, Ralf Griffin, 1585. John Rainold,
1598. William Cole, 1599. Laurence Staunton, 1601, Roger Parlur, 1613. Anthony
Topham, 1629. Michael Honywood, 1660.
Anno 1536. (28. Henry VIII.) An Inventory was made of all the Jewels,
Vestments, and other Ornaments belonging to the Revestry of of this Church,
consisting in Chalices, in number six, one of which was all Gold enricht with
Pearls and diverse precious stones in the foot, weighing thirty two Onnces,
Several rich Feretrums, one of Silver and gilt for the etc. Diverse Rich
Candlesticks, among which one Pair of extraordinary size and Workmanship was
all Gold, and weighed 450 Ounces, the gift of John Duke of Lancaster Son of
Edw. III. Five Pair of Censors Silver and gilt, Several rich Basins Silver etc.
Pastoral Staves, Texts of the Gospells with Rich Covers, Chrismatories and
Ampuls sot Oil Silver and gilt, eight Myters, Chesables, Orate pro anima, etc.
of green, of black, rich Morses of Silver and gilt, Garlands etc. King Henry
VIII. 6th of June in his two and thirtieth year, to George Heneage then
Archdeacon of Taunton, and others, to take down etc. in this Cathedral Lincoln,
and to see the same safely and surely to be conveyed to his Jewel-house in the
Tower. Which Commission was executed on the 11th of June 1540. And by force
thereof there was taken out of the said Cathedral in Gold two thousand six
hundred and twenty one ^unces, in silver four thousand two hundred and eighty
five ounces, besides a great number of Pearls, Diamonds, Saphires, Rubies,
Turkey, Carbuneles, etc. The Bishop of Lincoln had a Miter wonderfully thick set
with precious Stones. Here were then two Shrines, one of St. Hugh all of Gold,
the other of St. John of Dalderby all of Silver.

In the seventh year of King Edward the VI. another Inventory was etc.
AltarCloaths meetly good, and five other Cloths of Diaper sore worn.

In the fourth and fifth Ph. Ma. An. Dom. 1557. another Inventory was made, and
there was then in this Church seven Chalices Silver etc.

St. PAUL's Cathedral, in London.
ANno Dom. 185. Lucius King of the greater Britain, now called England,
obtained from Pope Eleutherius, two Doctors to be sent hither to instruct the
King and Kingdom in the Christian Faith; then were the Temples of Idols
dedicated to the Service of the true God, and three Metropolitan Seats placed
in the three chief Cities, viz. London, to which all the Southern part of
England was subject; York, under whose Jurisdiction was all the North of
Humber, and Scotland; and Cehster, whose Jurisdiction extended over Wales.
London continued the chief Episcopal Seat and Primacy, till the coming of St.
Augustine, who in the year 604. transferred the Metropolitan Dignity to
Canterbury; and made Mellitus London. To which Mellitus, King Ethelbert gave
the Land then called Tillingham, for the Support and Maintenance of his
Monastery of St. Paul. Pope Agatho granted to Erkenwald Bishop of the Monastry
of St. Paul in London, that the Election of the Bishop should belong solely to
the Congregation of that Monastery. Which Erkenwald was a Scholar to Bishop
Mellitus, and built two Monasteries, one for himself at Chertsey in Sussex, the
other for his Sister Edleburga at Barking in Essex. He was a man of most
exemplary Piety, and after the death of Bishop Cedde, became Bishop of London.
He died at Barking; after whose death his Body was much contested for, by the
Nuns of Barking, the Monks of Chertey, and the Citizens of London, but the
latter prevailed, and he was buried at London, with the Reputation of a Saint.
King Athelstan renewed and restored the Liberties of the Monastery of St. Paul
Gentiles, in London. King Edgar granted to the same, Ethelred, C^^te King of
Denmark and England, King Edward the Confessor, King William the Conqueror, who
confirmed all their Lands and Liberties to be as free as he desired his own
Soul to be in the day of Judgment; he also granted and confirmed the four and
twenty Hides of Land adjoining to the City of London, which King Ethelbert gave
to this Church when he founded it. It appears by Domesday-Book that at the time
of the Conquest, the Church of St. Paul's held Lands in Middlesex, Essex in
diverse Hundreds there, Hertford, Surrey. An. 1070 A Provincial Council was
assembled in the Church of St. Paul at London under Lanfranc Archbishop of
Canterbury, where among other things it was decreed that none should marry in
his own Kindred till the seventh Degree; That none should buy or sell holy
Orders, or an Ecclesiastical Office with cure of Souls, which crime St. Peter
first condemned in Simon Magus; and that no Bishop or any of the Clergy should
judge in loss of Life or Limb. In those times it was proved, York ought to be
subject to that of Canterbury. The foresaid King William granted to Maurice
Bishop of London the Castle of Stortford and other Lands with Soc and Sac.

In the year 1295. A Visitation was made in the Treasury of this Church, by
Ralph de Baudak, then Dean, and an Inventory taken containing diverse rich and
curious Morses, some all of Gold, Silver Candlesticks, d. weight, diverse rich
Feretrums, diverse rich etc. Church Books as Psalters, Antiphonaries, Homelies,
Martyrolgies, Processionals, Missals, Manuals, etc. Epistolaries, and
Gospellaries, etc. Also a Chronicle composed Ralph de Diceto, etc. Baudekins,
and other sorts of Clothes; Paul's Church yard; in the Chapel Radegund; at our
Ladies Altar in the Nave of the Church; Steven, at that of St. Thomas the
Martyr, of St. Silvester, Cedde, of the Apostles, of St. James, of St. John
Baptist, of the Michael, of St. John the Evangelist, Catherine, of St. Andrew,
of St. Laurence over against the Sacristy: Faith in the Vaults Paul's. Ralph de
Diceto once Dean of St. Paul's gave to this Church diverse Relics, beside which
there were diverse others, among the rest the Cheek-bone of St. Ethelbert the
Confessor, Founder of this Mellitus, etc.

The Bishop of London is, at his first coming to St. Paul's Cathedral,
West-Door, in solemn Procession and ringing of Bells, at other times with
ringing of Bells only. He ought to administer in Person on Christmas, Easter,
Ascension, and Whitsundays, and on the F^ats of St. Paul and St. Erknewald,
Ashwenesday, and Corpus Christi: He is to dispose of all the Thirty Prebends
and Dignities London, Essex, Middlesex, and Colchester, the Treasurer,
Precentor, and Chancellor. The Dean is chosen by the Chapter, and then
presented to, and confirmed by the Bishop, and by him also, or his Deputy,
installed; his Office is to reside, to govern over all the Canons, Saturday; he
is to invest the Canons, the rest of the Canons Residentiary being present; and
ought to visit within the Jurisdiction of the Dean and Chapter every third
year. The Sub-dean is chosen from among the etc. The Treasurer's Office is to
keep the Plate, Vestments, Relics, etc. of the Church, under him is the
Sacristan, who is his Coadjutor; under the Sacristan are three etc. The etc.
His Deputy is called the Succentor; the Chancellor is the Scribe of the Church
and Chapter, he has the custody of the Seal, he Presides over the reading part,
as the Chantor does over the singing part of the Choire, and he appoints the
Master of the Grammar School, as the Chantor does of the Song School; and the
Chancellor has under him a Subscribe or Register. The Almoner of this Church
ought to educate Paul instituted by Pope St. Augustine, and all constantly
resided, but in process of time they became Collet collected the Sum, viz. that
every Canon at the time of his Instalation shall swear on the Evangelists to be
obedient to the Dean and Chapter, to be faithful to the. Church of St. Paul, to
defend her Rights etc. Every Canon shall diligently observe the Canonical
Hours, and humbly and devoutly perform the Divine Office, etc. A Canon
Residentiary is so called from his duty to be continually residing, which he
ought solemnly to promise in the Chapter before all the Brethren; if after such
promise he resides in any other Church, he shall lose the profit and advantage
of this. To reside in the Church of Paul's is to be present at the Canonical
hours, on great Feasts at every Office, on other days at some one; the Vicars
of this Church were formerly thirty in number, every Canon had his Vicar, but
in Dean Collets time there were but six. some of which were married, they ought
to officiate constantly in the Quire day and night, they ought not to be
Proctors or Attorneys, etc. The Petty, or Minor Canons, were to be Priests, who
daily attended the Service of the Quire, and said Masses at the high Altar
instead of the Canons, etc. Here were also diverse other Priests who had
Chantries and celebrated at particular Altars; but these used to assist in the
Quire, especially on the greater Feasts, at Mattins, etc. King Richard II. in
the two and twentieth year of his Reign, directed his Letters to the Bishop of
London, and Dean and Residentaries (or Stagiaries) of this Church, commanding
that the Residency in this Salisbury. The Thirty Canons belonging to this
Church, had each his several Prebend, and peculiar Seat in the Quire, and to
each belonged certain Psalms to be by him said daily for the living and

An. Dom. 1518, John Collet Dean of St. Paul's exhibited certain matters to the
Cardinal of York, Legate a Latere, for the Reformation of the State of the
Residentaries, consisting of several Heads, relating to the Dean etc. Of the
Chapters. That the Residentaries live near the Church, etc, Thomas Archbishop
of York and Chancellor of England decreed by consent of the Dean and Chapter,
that the number of Residentiaries should not exceed four with their Dean, at
one time. The State of the Lands of this Church, amounted l. 11 s. 2 d. q. per
An. besides Casualties, as Fines, etc. 79 1 l. 3 s. 9 d. So that there remained
405 l. 7 s. 3 d. q. and out of that they Set off for Reparations 200l, and for
Casualties 26 l. 14 s. 4 d. Remains 178 l. 13 s. 11 d. q.

The Names of the Thirty Prebendaries of St. Paul 's are; To^ehal, Wesden,
Holburn, Wildeland, Sneating, Kentistown, Ruculnesland, Wilesdon, Wenlakesbyri,
Kadington, Portepole, Cudington, Cheswicke, Twisord, Brandeswood, St. Pancrace,
Ealdeland, Herlestone, Chaumberlengeswood, Ealdstreet, Oxgate, Consumpta,
Brunnesbury, Neweton, Hoxton, Rugemere, Iseldon, Mapelsbyri, More, Halywell.

To the Patronage of the Dean and Chapter of St. Paul's, belong twenty one
Churches in the City of London.

In the seventh of Edward VI, an Inventory of the Plate and Ornaments etc. of
this Church was delivered into the Kings Commissioners at Guildhall, out of
which at the request of the Dean and Chapter, they left only when he comes to
Paul's, two Palls for Funerals, twenty four old Cushions, etc. as things of
necessary use.

In the year 1430. (9. Henry VI.) John Carpentor, Citizen and Clerk of the
Communalty of London, Executor of Richard Whytington, late Citizen and Mercer,
and often Mayor of the said City, founded a perpetual Chantry of one Chaplain
to celebrate daily in the Chapel of the Blessed Mary formerly built over the
Charnel House in St. Paul's Churchyard, by Roger Beyvene and other Citizens of
London, and endowed the same with eight Marks of yearly Rent, etc. An. Dom.
1458. An Inventory or Catalogue, Indented, was made by William Say Dean and the
Paul's of all the Books given by Walter Shirington a Canon Residentiary of this
Church, and placed in a new Library by him erected over the Cloister about the
Churchyard called Pardon Chirchehawe. Which Library consisted of many Volums,
among which, Chronica Radulphi de Diceto; Postilla Radulphi de Diceto super
Ecclesiasticum and librum The Works of St. Augustine; and of St. Thomas: Visio
Sancti etc. There were also diverse other Books remaining in the Treasury, An.
1486. relating chiefly to the Church Service, among which Vetus Missale
secundum usum St. Pauli; etc.

The Names of the Bishops of London.
Mellitus consecrated by Augustine Archbishop of Canterbury, An. 605. Ceddus,
621. Wine. Erkenwald, 680, Walter. Inguald. Eguf Wychet. Filbrith. Edgar.
Kenwald. Ebald. Herbert. Osmund. Ethenod. Celhert. Cerulph Stributulph. Etstan.
Wulfius. Edelward. Elstan. Wlstan. Elsun, 1000. Alwyn, 1044. Elphword. Robert,
1050. William, 1051. Hugh de Aurevalle. Mauricius, 1077. Richard, 1108.
Gilbert. Robert de Sigillo, 1139. Richard Beumies, 1151. Gilbert Foliot, 1163.
Richard, 1190. William, 1199. Eustachius de Faukenbergh, 1221. Roger le Veir,
1229. Fulc Basset, 1244. Henry de Wengham, 1259. Richard Taleboth, 1262. Henry
de Sandwic, 1262. John de Chishull, 1274. Richard de Gravesend, 1290. Ralph de
Baldok, 1306. Gilbert de Seagrave, 1313. Richard de Newport, 1317. Steven de
Gravesend, 1319. Richard de Binteworth, 1338. Ralph de Stratford, 1339. Michael
Northburgh. Simon de Sudbury, 1362. Robert Braybroke, 1381. Roger Walden, 1404.
Nicholas Bubwith, 1406. Richard Clifford, 1407. John Kemp, 1422. William Gray,
1426. Robert Fitzhugh, 1431. Robert Gilbert. Thomas Kemp, 1449. Richard Hill,
1489. Thomas Savage, 1496. William Warham, 1503. William Barnes, 1505. Richard
Fitz-Iames, 1506. Cuthbert Tunstal, 1522. John Stokesly, 1530. Edmund Boner,
1540. Nicholas Ridley, 1549. Edmund Grindal, 1559. Edwin Sands, 1570. John
Elmer, 1576. Richard Fletcher, 1594. Richard Bancroft, 1597. Richard Vaughan,
1604. Thomas Ravis, 1607. George Abbot, 1609. John King, 1611. George
Mountain, 1621. William Laud, 1628. William Iuckson, 1635.
The Names of the Deans of St. Paul's since the Conquest.
Vlstan. William. Elfwin. Luired. Ralph, 1150: Alard de Burnham. Robert de
Watford. Hugh de Marinis. Ralph de Diceto, 1183. Martin de Pateshull. Walter de
Langford. Ieffrey de Lucy, 1237. William de S. Mariae Ecclesia, 1237. Henry de
Cornhill, 1245. Walter de Salern. Robert de Barthone. Peter de Neuport. Richard
Taleboth. Ieffrey de Feringes, 1263. John de Chishulle. Hervicus de Borham,
1276. Thomas de Ingelesthorpe, 1279. after Bishop of Rochester. Roger de la
Leye, 1287. William de Montfort, 1292. Ralph de Baldok, 1297. Arnald de
Cantilupo, 1308. after a Cardinal. John de Sandale. Richard de Neuport. Vitalis
Basco. John de Everton, 1328. Gilbert de Bruera, 1339. Richard de Kilmington.
Thomas Trillek. John de Apelby. Thomas Evere. Thomas Stowe. Thomas More.
Reginald Kentwode. Thomas Lyseus, 1441. Laurance Both, 1456. William Say,
1457. Roger Ratclyff, 1468. Thomas Wynterburne, 1471. William Worsley. Robert
Shirburne. John Collet. Richard Pace. Richard Sampson. John Incent. William
May. John Fecknans. Henry Cole. Alexander Nowell. John Overall. Valentine Carry.
Dance of Death (formerly painted about the Cloister of St. Paul's) was writ in
French by one Machabree, and translated into old English Verse by Dan John of
Lydgate, Monk of Bury. In this Dance Death leads Emperor, then the Cardinal,
the King, Patriarch, Constable, Archbishop, John Rikil, the Parson, Juror,
Minstral, Laborer, Friar Minor, the

The Cathedral Church of Salisbury.
OSmund Bishop of Salisbury, who succeeded on the death of Bishop Herman in the
year 1076, built the new Church at Salisbury, and composed the Book of the
Ecclesiastical Office called Consuetudinarium, which was used, in a manner,
throughout all England, Wales, and Ireland. Bishop Osmund's Deed of Foundation
and Endowment of this Church bears date, An. Dom. 1091. (4 William 2.) King
Henry the I. King Henry the II. and King John were Benefactors to this Church
of St. Mary of Sarum. King Henry the III. in the eleventh year of his Reign
confirmed the translation of this Church from the Castle to a lower Situation,
and made New Saresbirie a free City, and granted to it all the Liberties which
the City of Winchester enjoys, and granted to the Bishops here a yearly New
Saresbury from the Vigil of the Assumption to the morrow after the Octaves of
the said Feast, and every Week a Mercate on the Tuesday, etc.

COLLEGIATE CHURCHES Of Canons Secular.
A Second Part of the Third Volum.
BEVERLEY, in Yorkshire.
[Provosts of Beverley. Vol. I. p. 171.
1. Thomas, Nephew of Thomas Archbishop of Tork. 2. Thurstinus, afterward
Archbishop of Tork. 3. Thomas Normannus. 4. Robertus. 5. Thomas Beket. 6.
Robertus. 7. Galfridus, Temp. H. 2. 8. Simon. 9. Fulco Basset. 10. Johannes
Cheshub. 11. Gulielmus Eborisensis, Temp. H. 3. 12. Johannes Maunsel. 13.
Alanus. 14. Morganus. 15. Petrus de Chester. 16. Haymo de Charto. 17. Robert de
Alburwik. 18. Walterus. 19. Gulielmus de Melton. 20. Nicholaus Hugate. 21.
Gulielmus de la Mar. Temp. E. 3. 22. Richard de Ravensar. 23. Adam Limbergh.
24. Johannes Thoresby. 25. Johannes Manfeld. 26. Gulielmus Kinwolmarsh. 27.
Robertus Nevile, Temp. H. 6. 28. Robertus Rolleston. 29. John Gerningham. 30.
Laurence Bouthe, afterward Bishop of Durbam. 31. John Bouth, afterward Bishop
of Exeter. 32. Henry Webber. 33. Petrus Tastar. 34. William Potman. 35. Hugh
Trotter. 36... 37. Thomas Dalby. 38. Thomas Winter]
John of Beverley therein deposited in the year 1197.

King Adelstan in his march against Constantine King of Scotland, visited the
blessed John at Beverley, and promised, in case he obtained Victory, to augment
the Revenues of this Church, Vid. Vol. 2. p. 367.
which he did in his return. Being in Scotland, he besought. God that at the
Prayer of St. John of Beverley, he would show some sign whereby the Scots may
be known to be of right subject to England, hereupon the King struck a Stone
with his Sword, near the Castle of Dunbar, and made therein a gash of an Ell
long. King Richard the II. in the twelsth year of his Reign, confirmed to this
Church, certain Revenues given by King Athelstan, in the East Riding of
Yorkshire; the like had been done before by King Henry the II. Thomas
Archbishop of York, by advice and consent of the Chapter of this Church, made
diverse Statutes and Orders for Government of the same; namely, that there be
always nine Canons, a Precenter, a Chancellor, etc. That all beside the Canons
be obliged to continual Residence; That the Provost l per Annum, by quarterly
Payments; to the Precentor 10 l. to the Chancellor, and Sacristan, as formerly,
to the Clerks and Virgers 6 s. 8 d, each, and to the Parsons 6 l. 13 s. 4 d.
each, and further to each of the nine Canons and three Officers
abovementioned, two and forty quarters of Oats yearly; to each Vicar 8 l. per
Annum, etc. That the Provost makes York, and as much to this, etc.

SUTHWELL, in Nottinghamshire.
AT the time of Domesday Survey, Thomas then Archibishop of York, and the
Canons of this Church, held Lands in Torgartone Wapentac, valued at 40 l. 15 s
and in Binghamhou Wapentac other Lands, amounting in Value to 150 s. Turstan
Archbishop of York gave one Prebend to this Church, and the tenth of all the
Increase of his Lordship of Southwell. Pope Alexander the III. granted to the
Canons of St Mary of Southwell Power to excommunicate any of their Parishoners,
who should be injurious to them; and that as well the Clerks as Laity of the
County of Nottingham do repair to this Church in Procession, at Whitsuntide,
yearly, according to ancient Custom, etc. Whose Bull bears date, An. Dom. 1171.
King Henry the I. confirmed the Liberties of this Church, and the Lands
Turstan. John Archbishop of Tork, and Robert Malluvell, were Benefactors to
this Church. Alexander, Archishop of Tork and Legate, at the Petition of
Richard de Chesterfeild Canon of the Collegiate Church of Suthwelle, in the
year 1379. granted his License for the building of a new House for the
Habitation of the Vicars in the Church yard, their old House being too remote;
which House was afterward set out and appointed by the Parishoners to be
erected in the East part of the said Churchyard. King Henry the VI. in the
seventeenth Ravendale in Lincolnshire, then valued at 14 l. per Annum. which
with other Lands, was also granted to this Church, by King Edward the IV.

This Collegiate Church being founded anew by King Henry VIII. Queen Elizabeth
in the twenty seventh year of her Reign confirmed and established certain
Statutes and Orders for Government of the same, consisting of twenty six
Chapters, in which it is provided that Divine Service be performed here as in
the Metropolitan Church of York, thrice every day, and Sermons by the Canons or
Pr^bendaries every Sunday and Holyday; d or 4th. of Novemler; Grammar School;
That to make a Chapter there must be persent three Canons at the least; that
there be etc. and to observe the Statutes of this Church; The Vicars and under
Officers to be sworn to the same purpose.

[ Valued at 16 l 5 s. 2 d. per Annum.]

St. MARTINS LE GRAND, in London.
William the Conqueror (consanguinitatis haereditate Anglorum Basileus)
confirmed the Lands and Estate given to this College by Ingelricus, and
Girardus his Brother, the Founders, and further gave to the same all the More.
Land without Criplegate. etc. and freed this Chruch Soc and Sac Tol and theme,
with all those ancient Liberties, etc. in the fullest manner that any Church in
England has. Whose Charter bears date in the year 1068. the Second year of his
Reign. Con^irm'd by John and Peter Cardinals of Rome. and Legates of Pope
Alexander.

St. MARY'S at Warwick.
HEnry Consul, or Earl, of Warwick, gave diverse Lands to this Church, confirmed
and augmented by Earl Roger, his Son. The same Roger granted to the Canons of
this Church of St. Mary to have a Dean and London, Lincoln Salisbury, and York.
He also in the year 1123, translated the College which was in the Castle of
Warwick to the Church of St. Mary and All Saints, and by and with the Episcopal
authority of Simon Bishop of Worcester, the Canons and Clerks were transferred
thither. The same Simon consecrated an Altar Sepulchers, and a Burial Place
there for the Canons only, the same Sepulcher. To this Colleg^te Church the
aforementioned Roger Earl of Warwick gave several Churchtes. among others, the
Church of the Holy Sepulcher at Warwick, and the Paristh Church of Greetham in
Rutland; Which Churches being alicnered from this College; the said Church of
St. Sepulchers being made a Priory of Canons Regular, and Greetham appropriated
to the same, those two were not in a Possibility to be restored, but the other
Churches which had been alienated, seven in number, were restored and reunited
to the Collegiate Church of St. Mary at Warwick, by Decree of William Bishop of
Worcester; and all the Parishoners of the several Churches in Warwick ordered
to repair to the said Church of St. Mary for Sacraments and Sacramentals, and
not to bury elsewhere than in the Churchyard of the same. The said William
Bishop of Worcester decreed that the Dean, who is bound by this Place to
reside, receive 40 l. every residing Canon, twenty marks every other Prebend
who does not reside but 40 s. only, and every Vicar ten marks, per Annum.

[ Valued at 247 l. 13 s. ob. per Annum.]

WALLINGFORD, in Barkshire.
IN the tenth year of Edward I. Edmund Son of Richard King of the Almains, and
Earl of Cornwall, gave to the Chapel of St. Nicholas in his Castle of
Wallingford 40 l. of yearly Rent, for the maintenance of six Chaplains, six
Clerks, and four Acolyts or Taber-bearers. To the Dean and Chaplains of this
College, Edward the Black Prince, King Richard II. and Henry VI. give other
Revenues in augmentation of their Endowment.

[ Valued at 147 l. 8 s. ob. q. per Annum.]

LANCADANC, in the Diocese of St. David's.
AN. Dom. 1283, Thomas Bishop of St. David's, with the Assent of King Edward,
and the Chapter of St. David's, made the Church of Langadanc Collegiate, and
endowed the same with Revenues for the maintenance of twenty one Canons under
the Government of a Precentor, of which Canons seven to be Priests, seven
Deacons, and seven Subdeacons,

LANGECESTRE, in the County Palatine of Durham.
AN. Dom. 1283, Anthony Bishop of Durham made the Church of Langecestre, lying
in his Diocese, and being of his Patronage, a Colegiate Church for one Dean and
seven Prebendaries, the Dean to be continually resident and to have the Cure of
Souls, and to find two Chaplains to assist him therein, and to cause three
Chapels of ease to be Hebdomodarius in his turn, to order, correct, and govern
the Choire. He also endowed the Church with diverse Revenues, etc. All which was
by consent of this Chapter of Durham, and confirmed by King Edward I.

AUKLAND, in the Bishopric of Durham
TO this Collegiate Church of St. Andrew of Aukland, the foresaid Anthony
Bishop Durham had been a Benefactor, and made diverse Orders for Government of
the same in the year 1292, as that the Vicar of the Church be a Dean, that the
Canons have all Vicars daily to officiciate, the five first Canons, Priest
Vicars, the four next, Deacon-Vicars, the others, Subdeacons; that the Divine
Offices be sung according to the York, or Salisbury, etc. To which Orders
Thomas Bishop of Durham, in the year 1428, made some alterations and additions,
namely, that every per An. the Deacon-vicars seven marks per An etc. That
Mattins be not said at Midnight, but in the Morning, etc.


THE beforementioned Anthony Bishop of Durham, in the yeas 1286. perceiving the
Parish of this place to be large, and the Revenues of this Church to be
sufficient to maintain many Ministers, made it etc. with other Orders, as he
before made in the case of Langecestre abovementioned, mutatis mutandis. That
the tenth part of the Portion of every Edward I.

St. ELISABETH's, near Winchester
JOhn de Pontisaria Bishop of Winchester, founded this Chapel of St. Elizabeth
daughter of the King of Hungary, before the Gate of his Castle of Wolvesay, and
therein established seven Chaplains, of which one to be Provost, and six Clerks,
three of which to be Deacons, and three Subdeacons. The Provost, Chaplains, and
Clerks, to be placed and supplied, upon all avoidences, by the Bishop of
Winchester for the time being, or his Lieutenant, the Chaplains and Clerks to
have their Board from the Provost; all to live and Diet together in the same
House, every Chaplain etc. that in all the Divine Offices they observe the
Salisbury use; that no Woman shall enter into any part of the House except the
Chapel and the Edward I.) Simon de Farham, and diverse others were Benefactors
to this Chapel, and gave diverse Manors, Lands, and Rents to the same. All
confirmed by Edward I. and II.

[ Valued at 112 l. 17 s. 4 d. ob. per Annum.]

KIRKBY Super Wretheck, in Leicestershire.
ROger Beler founded a Chantry of one Custos and twelve Chaplains, in the
Chapel of St. Peter adjoining to his Manor of Kirkeby, and endowed the same
with the Advowson of the Church of Kirkeby, the Manor Bokeminster, and other
Lands and Rents, with Warrantry; and Lincoln. etc. Whose Deed of Foundation
bears date in the year 1319 (13. Edward II.)

WENGHAM, in Kent.
POpe Gregory X. licenced John Archbishop of Canterbury to establish a Provost
and a College of ten secular Canons, in the Parish Church of Wengham, instead
of a Rector, the said Provost to have the Parochial cure of Souls; which
College being accordingly founded by the said John, he appointed that six of
the said Canons should be Priests, two Deacons and two Subdeacons, and set out
their several Prebends, and how the etc, Whose Deed of Foundation An. Dom.
1286. and was confirmed by King Edward I.

MEREWELL.
FOunded by Henry de Blois Bishop of Winchester for four Priests, and by him
endowed with 13 l. per An. of Rent. Peter de Rupibus Bishop of Winchester made
certain Orders for the Government of the said four Chaplains or Priests, as
that they keep one Deacon to serve them in the Church and at home, that they
choose yearly one of them to be their Prior, that what ever Chaplain be guilty
of Incontinency or other foul crimes, An. Dom. 1226.

GLASENEY, in Cornwall.
PEter Bishop of Exeter, in the year 1288., made a further Provision for the
Vicars of this Church, first founded by his Predecessor Walter, for thirteen
Canons, and as many Vicars.

[ Valued at 205 l. 10 s. 6 d. per Annum.]

The Collegiate Church of Ruthin in Denbighshire.
JOhn Gray Lord of the Cantred of Deffencloyt in the Diocese of Bangor,
instituted a College in the Chapel of St. Peter at Ruthin, for at least seven
Priests to celebrate there daily the Divine Offices, one of whom etc. to hold
in pure, An. 1310.

OTERY, in Devonshire.
THe Dean and Chapter of Roan, in the year 1335 (9. Edward III.) granted, with
License of the Apostolic see, and the King of England, their Manor of Otery
St. Mary, in the County of Devon, etc. to John de Grandisson Bishop of Exeter,
and instead of Warranty they delivered up to the said Bishop all their Deeds
and Writings concerning the same. King Edward III. in the eleventh year of his
Reign granted his License to the Exeter to erect a Monastery or Collegiate
Church to consist of a certain number of secular Canons at Otery St. Mary,
either in the Parish Church there or in some other place, and to endow the same
with the Manor of Otery, and to appropriate the Tithes of the said Town to
the same. Which College was accordingly founded and endowed by the said
Bishop, An. 1337,

[ Valued at 303 l. 2 s. 9 d. per Annum.]


THe Chapel of St. Steven in the Palace at Westminster was nobly finished by
King Edward III, though begun by his Progenitors, which King founded therein a
Dean and twelve Canons, with as many Vicars, and other Ministers accordingly,
and gave them by his Patent, dated in the two and twentieth year of his Reign,
his great House in Lombardstret, London, with some advowsons, obliging himself
and Royal Heirs to l per An. In the two and thirtieth year of his Reign he gave
them a Tower in Bokelesbury in London, called Sewtes Tour, with the
Appurtenances. In the three and fortieth year of his Reign he gave them another
House in London called the Role, l. per An. In further a^gmentation of the said
Foundation, he granted them all the ground from the said Chapel Northward to
the receipt of the Exchequer, between Westminister Hall and the Thames, for
making a Cloister and other necessary Building, with free Entrance day and
Night at the Gate adjoining to the Kings Bridge also a Chamber within the said
Gate formerly belonging to his Clerk of the Kitchen, with the Houses formerly
used for Stables of War horses and other Horses, etc. with a Free Passage to
the said Chapel by their Lands from the Payment of any Aids, or Taxes
whatsoever. King Richard II. completed the full endowment of this College, by
settling on Kent. etc. according to the direction and desire of his Grandfather
in his Testament.

[ Valued at 1085 l. 10 s. 5 d. per Annum.]

The Royal Collegiate Chapel in the Castle at Windsor.
A Chapel for eight Canons secular having been begun in the Castle of Windsor,
King Edward III. who was baptized there, finished and completed the same, in
honor of Almighty God, his glorious Virgin Mother, St. George the Martyr, and
St. Edward the Confessor, and established therein a Custos or President to the
former eight Canons, and an l. per An.

Pope Clement the VI. granted power to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
Bishop of Winchester, to establish the said Canons and Knights by Apostolic
authority, and exempted the said Chapel and College and all George, yearly.
The foresaid King Edward III. granted to this College per An payable by the
Bailiffs of the Town of Nor^hampton out of the Kings Farm of the said Town.
King Henry IV. granted to the Wodehawe, for Building Houses for the Vicars and
Choristers. King Edward IV. granted and confirmed to them the Alien Priory of
Okeburn with all the Lands and Churches thereunto belonging, which had been
formerly granted to John Duke of Bedford by King Henry IV, late de facto and
non de jure, King of England, and afterward by the said John Duke of Bedford
given to this Collegiate Chapel, (the said Duke being desirous wholly to
abdicate such spiritual Profits, and restore them to their pristine Nature)
which gift was afterward ratified and confirmed by Henry V, de facto and non
de jure, King of England, non obstante Mortmain and now by the said King Edward
IV. in the first year of his Reign; Which King gave them also the Alien Priory
of Vphavenne Monkenlane in the County of Hereford, he also gave them the
Custody and Advowson of the Hospital or Free Chapel of St. Anthony in London,
and to enjoy the same with all the Estate thereunto belonging to their own
proper use when it shall become void by death, resignation or otherways. He
also gave them the Alien Brimesseld and Charleton, and diverse other Lands in
the seventeenth year of his Reign. The said King Edward IV, in the ninteenth
year Edward III, and that Henry VI. de facto and non de jure King of England,
in his Parliament held at Westminister in the eighth year of his pretended
Reign, had past an Act whereby he willed and declared that this College should
bear the name of the Custos or Dean, and Canons of the free Chapel of St.
George within his Castle of Wyndesore) did for the future incorporate them by
the name of the Dean and Cannons of the Free Chapel of St. George within the
Castle of Wyndesore, by that name to purchase, sue, and be sued, etc. And
granted License to John Duke of Suffolk and Elizabeth his Wife to confer the
Manor of Leighton-Buzzard and other Revenues on the same, and also his general
License to all other Persons of this Kingdom of England, to grant Lands, Rents,
or l the Statute of Mortmain, or any other Statute or Law notwithstanding.

Richard II. Walter Almaly being then Custos etc. belonging to this Chapel
Royal, in which is particular mention of diverse Missales, and other Church
Books, several Volumes of etc. Vestments of different Colors, etc. A Silver
Bell to ring before the Body of Christ in the Visitation of Mary, another for
her Son, and the third for St. Edward.

RIPPON Collegiate Church.
ANno 1331. William Archbishop of York finding in his Visitation at this
Church, the same almost destitute of Canons Residentiary, ordered, Suthwell,
and Beverley. King Henry the V. in the second year of his Reign, granted that
the six Vicars belonging to this Church (for whom Henry Archbishop of York
proposed to build a Habitation within the Close of the Church, where they might
eat and sleep together) might choose among themselves a Superior etc.

[ Valued at 35 l. 3 s. 8 d. per Annum.]

SIBETHORP, in Yorkshire.
THomas de Sibethorp Parson of the Church of Bekingham, by License of King
Edward the III. (An Reg 10.) gave sixteen Messuages one Toft, three Bovates,
one hundred and seventy Acres of Land, fifty Acres of Meadow, and 30 s. of Rent
in Sibethorp, etc. to John Cousin Custos of the Chapel of the Blessed Mary of
Sibethorp, for the maintenance of him and other Chaplains in the said Chapel,
and Successors, and for the finding of thirty Wax-lights in the same, and a
Lamp to burn before the Crucifix.

TUXFORD, in Nottinghamshire.
KING Edward the III. granted his License to John de Lungvilers to found a
College of five Chaplains, of which one to be Custos, in the Parsonage house
of the Church of Tuxford, and to give the Advowson of that Church (which was
held in Capite of the King) to the maintenance of the said five Chaplains there
celebrating; But the said John not pursuing his Foundation in that manner, the
said King, on his Petition, granted him a new License in the one and thirtieth
year of his Reign, to give the said Advowson to the Prior and Canons of Newsted
in Shirewode, for their finding five Chaplains viz. three in the Church of
Tuxford, and two in the Church of the Convent of Newsted, to celebrate for his
Soul, etc.

SUDBURY, in Suffolk.
KING Edward the III. in the nine and fortieth year of his Reign, granted his
License to Simon of Sudbury Bishop of London, and John his ^rother, to give and
assign a Message Called Lamberds-hnll, and three Shops in the Pari^h of St.
Mary Magdalen Old Fish-street, London, to the Prioress and Convent of
Nun-Eaton, in exchange for the Advowson of the Church of St. George of Sudbury;
with Power to the said Bishop and his Brother to found in the said Chaurch a
College to consist of certain Chapplains, of which one to be Custos or Warden.
King Richard the II. in the third and seventh years of his Reign, granted to
this Simon, then Archbishop of Canterbury, and John de Chertsey, License to
endow the same with certain Manors and Lands.

[ Valued at 122 l. 18 s. 3 d. per Annum.]

ASTELEY, in Warwickshire.
SIR Thomas de Asteley, Knt. founded and endowed a Chantry in St. Mary's
Chapel in the Church of Asteley, for one Warden and three other Priests, and
afterward supplicated Roger Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, that it might
be made a College to consist of a Dean and two Secular Canons, Priests; and it
was accordingly so made by the said Bishop; and several Orders established, viz:
that the Dean be sworn to a a Personal Residence in the same, that he have for
his Habitation the Asteley, that he distribute to the poor 10 s. yearly; that
the Dean find and present to the Diocesan a perpetual Vicar to officiate in the
said Church, and that he pay him the Sum of five Marks per Annum, quarterly;
that he find also a Parish Chaplain, and a fitting Clark; etc. that he pay the
Procurations and Sinodals of the said Church of Astely, and bear all other
Charges, except Books and Vestments; that every Canon find a Vicar,
presentable, to whom he is to pay five marks yearly, and one other Priest also,
unless he be willing to reside himself, and celebrate Mass etc. Which orders
were ratifyed under the several Seals of the said Bishop, and Thomas the
founder, An. Dom. 1343.

[ Valued at 39 l. 10 s. 6 d. per Annum.


KIng Edward III. in the twelfth year of his Reign, granted his License to John
Giffard, Clerk, to give and assign the Manor of Cotherstoke and diverse other
Revenues, to a Praeposit and twelve Chaplains, secular or Religious, for the
maintenance of them and two Clerks daily celebrating in the said Church, to
hold in free, pure, and perpetual Alms, discharged and quit of all secular
exactions,


KIng Edward III. granted his License to the Prior and Convent of Durham to
appropriate the Church of Hemmingburgh. of which they had the Advowson, to
their own proper use for ever (...) coudition that they find a Monk or secular
Chaplain to celebrate daily in the Church of Durham in a place there called the
Galeley, for the Soul of King Edward I. and his Ancestors. and two other Monks
or secular Chaplains to celebrate daily, one at the Altar of St. Cuthbert
there, and one in this Church of Hemmingburgh, with a certain number of
Waxlights, and that they observe the Anniversary of K. Edw. III. in the Qure of
their Church, yearly, and on that day distribute to one thousand poor People 1
d. a piece. But this never taking effect by reason they could not obtain the
Popes License and Confirmation for the said appropriation. King Henry VI. in
the fifth year Durham, to erect in this Church of Hemmingburgh a College to
consist of one Praeposit, three Prebendary-Canons, six Vicars, and six Clerks,
with other Ministers to celebrate, and observe the Anniversary abovementioned,
the said King in the Charter of License incorporating the said Colle^ge, by the
name of the Praeposit or Custos, Prebendaries, Vicars, and Clerks of the
Collegiate Church or College of the Blessed Mary of Hemmingburgh.

[ Valued at 36 l. 0 s. 7 d. per Annum.]

BRUSEYARD, in Suffolk.
FOunded by Matilda de Lancaster, late Countess of Vlster, but at that time a
Nun in the Collegiate Church of Nuns of Campess, for five Chaplains; for whose
Government William Bishop of Norwich made in the year 1354. the following
Orders, viz. that the said five Priests sleep Salisbury use in the Divine
Offices; That they choose one of them for Treasurer, whose Office is to take
care of all matters relating to the Chapel; That the Custos be chosen by
majority of voices, and in case he be not chosen in four months time, then the
Election to be in the Bishop, that turn; that the Custos Campesses Letters of
Presentation to the Bishop, who is thereupon to confirm him in the Office; that
there be a Chest with three different Keys in which the Common-Seal and
Accounts are to be kept, etc.

ABERGWILLY, in the Diocese of St. David's.
HFnry Bishop of St. David's, in the year 1331. with the consent of the Chapter
of this Collegiate Church of Abergwilly, made and created viz. the Precentor,
Chancellor, and Treasurer, and appointed certain Prebends to belong
particularly to the said Offices, etc.

[ Valued at 42 l. per Annum.]

ARUNDELL, in Sussex.
KIng Richard II. in the third year of his Reign granted his License to Richard
Earl of Arundell and Surrey, to found a Chantry or College Nicholas at
Arundell, without the Walls of the Castle there; which was at that time a
Priory of Monks of the Order of St. Benedict sometimes belonging and Subject to
the Abbey of Sees in France, and which seldom or never had in it more then one
Prior, and three or (at most) four Monks, with License to the said Prior and
etc. to the same belonging, to the said Earl, and he to confer the same on
thirteen secular Chaplains, of which one to be chief and called Master,
therein, to be establi^ht, etc.

[ Valued at 168 l. 7 d. ob. per Annum.]

St. MICHAELS in Crooked Lane, London.
THere having been several particular Chantries in this Church, founded and
endowed with diverse Rents by several Citizens of London, which were by course
of time Impoverisht, William de Walworth Citizen and Merchant of London,
supplicated King Richard II. that with the Rents belonging to the said
Chantries and other Revenues of his own augmentation, he might found there a
College of one Master and nine Chaplains, to celebrate for ever, for that
King, the said William, Margeret his Wife, and John Lovekyn his late Master,
etc. Which King did in the fourth year of his Reign, grant his License to the
said William out of the special Affection which he had for his Person, and in
consideration of the laudible Service which he had often done him, to found the
College accordingly.


KIng Richard II. in the sixth year of his Reign granted his License to William
Wykeham Bishop of Winchester to found a College, House or Hall, near
Winchester, for the honor and glory of God, and the glorious Virgin Mary his
Mother, and therein to establish a Custos or Warden, and seventy poor Scholars,
Students in Grammar. Infra. 133.

[ Valued at 628 l. 13 s. 6 d. per Annum.]

PONTFRACT, in Yorkshire.
KIng Richard II. in the eighth year of his Reign, granted his License to
Robert Knolls Chevalier, and Constance his Wife, to found a College or
Chantry, in Pontfract of seven Chaplains, whereof one to be Custos,

[ Valued at 182 l. 14 s. 7 d. per Annum.]

BUNBURY, in Cheshire.
KIng Richard II. in the tenth year of his Reign, granted his License to Hugh
de Calveley Chivalier to found a Chantrey or College of one Master and six
other Chaplains in the Church of Bunbury, with Liberty to the said Hugh to
endow the same, and the said Mr. and Canons to have a Common-Seal.


KIng Edward III. granted License to the Abbot and Convent of Peterburgh, and
John Pyel, to erect a College of six Canons secular, of which one to be Dean,
and four Clerks, in the Parish Church of St. Peter of Irtlyngburgh, the Right
of Presenting to the said Canons places to be in the Abbot and Convent of
Peterborough, and the said John, by Turns; But the said John dying before this
Foundation was perfected, King Richard II. in the eleventh year of his Reign,
for twenty marks paid by John his widow and Executrix, granted his License to
complete the same.

[ Valued at 64 l. 12 s. 10 d. ob. per Annum.]

CLOVELEY, in Devonshire,
KIng Richard II. in the eleventh year of his Reign, Licenced William Carry to
convert the Parish Church of Cloveley, the Advowson whereof did belong to the
said William, into a Collegiate Church, for seven Chaplains, of which one to be
Custos or Warden, to found a College and Buildings for their Habitation, in
the Rectory, and to appropriate the said Advowson to them.

RUSHWORTH, in Norfolk.
KING Richard the II. in the thirteenth year of his Reign granted his License
to several Persons to confer the Manor of Rushworth, etc. on the Master or
Custos of the College of St. John the Evangelist of Rushworth and the Brethren
of the same. An. 1360. Thomas Bishop of Norwich made several Statutes and
Ordinances for the Government of this College, late founded by the Lord Edmund
de Gonevill, viz. That there be in the said College, Rushworth^ with direction
for their saying of their Masses and Offices, and etc.

[ Valued at 85 l. 15 s. ob. per Annum.]

The Collegiate Church of St. David's, in Pembrokshire.
JOhn Duke of Lancaster, and the Lady Blanch his Wife, and Adam Bishop David's
considering that Priests were procured out of En^^^^ with great difficulty and
charges to officiate in the ancient M^^^^politan Church of St. David's, they
therefore founded a Chapel or C^antry of one Master and seven Priests, in the
manner of a College, on the North side of the said Cathedral Church, and built
there diverse Buildings and a Cloister for their Habitation, and endowed the
same with the Appropriating to it diverse Churches, An. Dom. 1365. Which Bishop
made diverse Statutes and Orders for Government of the same, viz. that the said
Master and Priests should live together in a Collegiate way; that they should
perform the Divine Offices in their Chapel according to the Salisbury use,
etc. That the said Master and Chaplains shall assist on all Sundays and double
Feasts, at High-mass and Vespers, in the (vel Gownis, non Cotis curtis) unless
they ride, or go abroad; David's, but is not bound to reside there; etc. Which
Orders bear date, An. Dom. 1382.

[ Valued at 106 l. 3 s. 6 d. per Annum.]

BRADGARE, in the Diocese of Canterbury.
KING Richard the II. in the sixteenth year of his Reign, granted his License
to Robert de Bradgare Clerk, and others, to found a College of one Chaplain,
and two Clerks Scholars, to celebrate in the Parish Church of Bradgare, and to
endow the said College with three Messuages, two hundred Acres of Land, one
hundred and fifty Acres of Pasture, sixty Acres of Wood, thirteen shilling and
four pence of Rent, and the An. Them. 1398. the said Robert made diverse Orders
for the Government of this College, viz. that the said Chaplain and his
Successors shall continually reside in the College except only the space of
one month, containing thirty two days; that the said Chaplain and his
Successors shall maintain at their own Charge one Servant to serve them daily
at Mass, and in other Offices; that the Chaplain shall not procure to himself
any other benefice or Office whereby his personal Residence here may be
hindered; that the Chaplain and Clerk be Natives of the Diocese of Canterbury,
and of the Consanguinity or affinity of the said Robert; that no Chaplain be
admitted unless he can read, construe, and sing well, nor any Clerk unless
Canterbury for the time being, to whom they shall pay 6 s. 8 d. per Annum, etc.

PLECY, in Essex.
KING Richard the II. in the seventeenth year of his Reign granted his License
to his dear Uncle Thomas Duke of Gloucester to found and establish in the Parish
Church of Plecy a College of nine Chaplains one of which to be Master and
Custos, and of two Clerks, and two Choristers, non obstante, etc. And to endow
the same with diverse etc.

[ Valued at 139 l. 3 s. 10 d. per Annum.]


KING Richard the II. in the nineteenth year of his Reign granted his License
to William de Courtney Archbishop of Caunterbury and Legate, his dear Kinsman,
to convert the Parish Church of the ^^essed Mary of Maidenstone into a College
of one Master or Custos, and as many Fellows, Chaplains, and other Ministers as
he should think expedient, and to endow the same with Lands and Churches, in
particular with the Hospital of St. Peter and St. Paul of Maidenstone, with all
the Lands thereunto belonging, etc.

[ Valued at 159 l. 7 s. 10 d. per Annum.]

KING Richard the II. in the nineteenth year of his Reign granted William de
Wykehum Bishop of Winchester, whereas by his License he had founded a College
of one Custos, and seventy Scholars learning Grammar, commonly called Saint
Mary Collegge of Wynchestre, and endowed the same with Possessions for the
Maintenance of the said Custos and Scholars, and ten perpetual Chaplains,
three other Chaplains, and three Clerks, he now also freed and acquitted the
said College and etc. and from all Taxes and Exactions whatsoever, and that
the said College shall never Edward the IV. in the first year of his Reign,
ratified and confirmed to this College the alien Priory of Andever in the
County of Southampton, and all Lands, etc. to the same belonging, to hold in
free, pure, and perpetual Mortmain, or that the said Priory was of the
Foundation of the Kings Progenitors, or that the Lands were given by them for
the support of Chantries, Hospitality, or other works of Piety, there, or that
express mention is not made of the true value of the same in this present
grant, or any other Statute, Act, Law, or Restriction to the contrary
whatsoever.

BOLTON, in Yorkshire.
KING Richard the II. in the twentieth year of his Reign, granted his License
to Richard le Scrope Chivalier, to found a Chantry of six Chaplains, of which
one to be Custos, in his Castle of Bolton, and to endow the same with a yearly
Rent of 43 l. 6 s. 8 d. Also to give to the Abbot and Convent of St. Agatha in
Yorkshire, the yearly Rent of 106 l. 13 s. 4 d. for the support of six
Chanons-Chaplains to celebrate for him in the said Abbey, and for the finding
and maintenance of two and twenty poor men in the said Abbey for ever to pray
for him, etc.

WENSLAW, in Yorkshire.
KING Richard the II. in the twenty second year of his Reign licensed the
beforementioned Richard le Scrope de Bolton, to erect the Parish Church of the
Holy Trinity at Wenslaw, being of his Patronage, into a l. which yearly Sum he
had formerly granted to the Abbot and Convent of St. Agatha in Yorkshire, for
the finding of ten Canons above their own number, and two Secular Chaplains,
with two and twenty poor men, but they had released his Grant.


KING Henry IV. in the first year of his Reign, reciting, that Henry Duke of
Lancaster his Grandfather, had begun the Foundation of a Collegiate-Church at
Leicester; in honor of the Annunciation of the blessed Mary, and certain
Buildings for the Habitation of Canons, and Clerks, and infirm People there
dwelling, and that John Duke of Lancaster, his Father, did desire to complete
the same, he approving their pious Intentions, assigned John de Byngham, and
others, to provide Masons, Carpenters, and other Workmen to the number of four
and twenty, and to provide Timber and Stone for carrying on and finishing the
Work, commanding all Mayors, Bailiffs, etc. to be aiding and assisting.

Infra p. 140.

LEDBURY, in Herefordshire.
KING Henry the IV. in the second year of his Reign, licensed John Bishop of
Hereford to found a College in the Parish Church Ledbury for nine Chaplains,
of which one to be Master or Custos, and they to have a Common Seal, be capable
of purchasing and receiving Lands, of suing and being sued, etc.

IN the eighteenth year of King Henry the VI. Henry Cardinal of England Bishop
of Winchester, Henry Archbishop of Canterbury, and Sir Walter Hungerford Knt.
Feoffees of Henry late King of England, of certain Lands in the Duchy of
Lancaster, granted and settled upon the Dean and Canons of the Collegiate
Church of the blessed Mary at Leicester, a per Annum arising out of diverse
Towns in Darbyshire, and payable at Michaelmas and Easter.

[ Valued at 595 l. 7 s. 4 d. per Annum.]

NORTH-YEVEL, in Bedfordshire.
KIng Henry IV. in the sixth year of his Reign, granted his License to Gerard
Braybrok Chivalier, and others to purchase of John Wateryng Clerk, and others,
the Advowson of the Parish Church of North-Yevell, and to erect and change the
same into a College to consist of one Master or Custos, and as many
Fellow-Chaplains, and other Ministers, as they shall think expedient and to
endow the same by appropriating thereunto the said Church of North-Yevell, and
that the said Master and Chaplains, Qure in the County of Cambridge.

[ Valued at 61 l. 5 s. 8 d. ob. per Annum.]

ATTILBURGH, in Norfolk.
KIng Henry IV. in the 7th year of his Reign, for 100. Marks granted his
License to Henry Packenham Senior, and Simon Parson of the Church of Scultone
to found a Chantry in the Parish Church of Attilburgh in honor of the
Exaltation of the Holy Cross, to consist of five Chaplains, one of which to be
Custos or Master; and to endow the same, among other things, with the Church of
great E^ngham to be appropriated to the said College, provided that a Vicar of
the sud Church be sufficiently endowed, and a comparent Sum of money be
appointed by the Ordinary of the Place to be distributed to the Poor of the
said Parish, according to the Statute. 15 R. 2. c. 6.

[ Valued at 21 l. 16 s. 3 d. per Annum.]

STAYNEDROPE, in the County Palatin of Durham.
THomas Bishop of Durham, in the third year of his Pontificate, granted his
License to Ralf de Nevill Earl of Westmerland, to found a College of one
Master or Custos, and certain other Chaplains continually to reside, and for
certain poor Gentlemen, and other poor People in the Town of Staynedrope in his
Liberty of Durham; and to endow the same with the Advowson of the Church of
Staynedrope, which was held of him in Capite; Mortm^ in non obstante, and by
the same Grant incorporated the said College, making the said Master and
Chaplains, etc. capable of purchasing and receiving Lands, to sue and be sued
and Granted them a Common-Seal. Dated at Durham in the third year of his
Pontificate.

[ Valued at 1^6 l. 5 s. 10 d. per Annum.]

TONGUE, in Shropshire.
KIng Henry IV. in the twelfth year of his Reign, for the Sum of 40 l. paid
into the Hanaper, granted his License to Isabel Widow of Fulk de Penbrugge
Chi^al^r, and others, to purchase of the Abbot and Convent of the Abbey of
Salep, the Advowson of the Church of St. Bart^^mew at Tongue, and to erect and
change the same into a College of five Ch^pl^^^, etc. Settling the Patronage
of the said College on ^ichard de Penbrugge in special tail, with diverse
remainders over. King Henry V. in the third Leicester, all the alien Priories
were given to him and his Heirs, granted to the Custos and Chaplains of this
College the Priory of Lappeley, and all the Revenues thereunto appurtaining,
being heretofore part Remigius at Reymys in Champeyne, Provided that the
Vicarage of the Church of Lappeley be sufficiently endowed, and a competent S^m
allowed to the Poor of the Parish, according to the Statute. The foresaid
Isabel and others who were Founders of this College, made diverse orders for
Government of the same; among others, that none of the Chaplains be capable of
holding any other Ecclesiastical Benefice, except only the Custos, who may;
that there be two Clerks, of the first Tonsure, to affist in the Divine
Offices; that there be thirteen poor People; that the Master or Custos be
chosen out of the Litchfield, if they neglect Canterbury; The Custos on his
admission to be sworn to a faithful Administration of his Office, and to
observe the Statutes, every Chaplain to be sworn to be obedient to etc. That
the Custos be Confessor to the other Chaplains and that every of them be
obliged to confess to him at least once a per Annum; That Mattines shall begin
soon after day, and that it be celebrated according to the Salisbury use, with
directions for the several Masses; that after Vespers and Complin they shall
say the Antiphon Salve or some other Antiphon of the blessed Mary, according to
the time; etc. that no Priest or Clerk shall use Hunting, or Hawking, or
keeping a hunting Dog in the College; That the Masters Sallary shall be ten
Marks per Annum, Every Chaplains four Marks Per Annum, The Parochial Chaplain,
and the Steward to have half a mark each, more than their Sallary yearly, and
each of the poor Men one Mark per Annum, besides their Habitation; That the
Sigillum commune S. Bartholomaei Apostoli de Tongue, which Seal to be kept in a
Chest under two different Locks, and in the same Chest the Charters,
Indentures, and Muniments of the College; that the Custos and Priests shall
not grant any etc. he shall no longer administer in his order, but shall be
expelled; if it be such a Crime, as after penance he may continue to minister
in his Order, as Adultery, false Witness, Sacrilege, Theft, etc. he may after
penance, be tolerated in his Office and Order, making Oath that for the future
he will never be guilty of the like Crime again; if he be guilty of a lesser
Crime, as simple Fornication, Disobedience, Drunkenness or the like, being
twice admonisht by the Custos, upon the third offense he shall be expelled the
House as incorrigible, etc. Which Statutes and Orders bear date Anno 1410. (12
H. 4.) And were confirmed by John Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, An. Dom.
1411.

[ Valued at 22 l. 8 s. 1 d. per Annum.]

FODRINGHEY, in Northamptonshire.
KING Henry the IV. in the thirteenth year of his Reign, together with Edward
Duke of York, founded a College of one Master, twelve Chaplains, eight Clerks,
and thirteen Choristers, upon six Acres of Land in the Lordship of the said
Edward Duke of York at Fodringhey, and the said King incorporated them by the
name of the Master and College Mary and All Saints of Fodringhey, etc. and
granted to them the Profits of the Alien Priories of Newent, and Anebury,
during his Wars with France, etc. And exempted and discharged this College
from Frankpledge, Felons Goods, etc. with abundance of Royal Liberties and
Franchises. King Henry the V. in the third year of his Reign, Edward Duke of
York liberty to en^eoff Henry Bishop of Winchester, Thomas Bishop of Durham,
Sir Walter Hungerford, Knt. Roger Flore of Okham, and others, with his Castle,
Manor, and Town of Fodringbay, and several other Manors and Lordships which
he held of that King in Capite, for the carrying on and completing the
Buildings and Charges of this College. William Horwod of Fodringhay Indented
with William Wolston Esquire, and Thomas Peckham Clerk, Commissioners for the
Duke of York, to make up a new Body of the Church joining to the Quire of the
College of Fodringhey, of the same height and breadth with the said Quire, to
be fourscore foot in length. etc. A South side twelve foot in length, another
Porch on the South Side adjoining to the Cloister, and in the West End of the
said Body a Steeple fourscore foot in higth from the Ground Table Stone, twenty
foot square within the Walls, and the Walls six foot thick, the Duke to find
Carriage and Stuff, for which well and duly to be made, the Horwode to have 300
l. Sterling; which Indenture bears date 13 H. 6.

[ Valued at 19 l. 11 s. 10 d. ob. per Annum.]

STOKE-CLARE, in Suffolk.
THIS being formerly a Priory of Benedictines, was by Edmund Earl of March, by
whose Ancestors it was founded, changed into a Collegiate Church of a Dean and
Secular Canons, which change was ratified by the Papal Authority of John the
XXIII. and Martin V.

Thomas Barneslay Dean of the Collegiate Church of Stoke juxta Clare, Edmund
Mortimer Earl of March and Vlster, and Lord of Wigmore and Clare, first Founder
and Patron of the said College, made several Statutes and Ordinances for
Government of the same, viz. That there be always one Dean and six Secular
Canons, that every Canon reside full two and thirty weeks in the year, or
otherwise he shall receive but 40 s. for his Prebend that year in which he has
not so resided; that neither the Dean nor any Canon lie in Bed in the Quire;
that the Chorists have five Marks per Annum each; that there be two in^eriour
Clerks who are to take care of the Vestry, and ringing the Bells, that they
ring to Mattins at five and go at six, to high Mass at eleven, and that they
ring to Vespers so that they may be ended about five in the Afternoon; That no
Canon who cannot spend 40 l. per and no Vicar nor Clerk shall use hunting, nor
any of them keep any Hounds in the College, except the Dean, who may keep
four; that no Canon or Clerk shall wear any Arms in the said College, under
the penalty of forseiting the said Arms for the first offense, and of twenty
shillings for the second; that none of the Canons, Vicars, or Clerks Coverfeu
time, and admit etc. who is to receive on that account 20 s. per Annum, That
the College have a Common Seal, to be kept with their Evidences and Jewels,
in a common Chest under three different Keys, one of which to be kept by the
Dean, the other two by the two Senior Canons; That there be no precedence among
the Vicars at the Table, but that they sit l. and make a Feast for the Canons,
etc. or s. That upon vacancy of the Deanery, the Patron of the College present
to the Bishop, a Graduate in some University, at least Master in Arts, or
Batchelour in Law, to be instituted Dean; which

[ Valued at 324 l. 4 s. 1 d. ob. per Annum.]

NORTH-CADBURY, in Somersetshire.
KING Henry the V. in the fourth year of his Reign, granted his License to
Elizabeth Widow of William Botreaux the elder, Chivalier, to found this
College for seven Chaplains of which one to the chief, to have the Cure of
Souls there, and to be called Rector of the College of St. Michael of
North-Cadbury, and for four Clerks, with License to the said Elizabeth, and
William Botreaux the younger, to appropriate the North-Cadbury thereunto, and
endow the same with diverse Lands, etc.

MANCHESTER, in Lancashire.
KIng Henry V. in the ninth year of his Reign, granted his License in
consideration of two hundred marks paid in the Hanaper, to Thomas Bishop of
Durham, and other Feoffees of Thomas la War Clerk, to erect the Church of
Manchester into a Collegiate Church, and to establish therein a Master or
Custos with as many fellow Chaplains, and other Ministers, as they should think
fit, whom he incorporated, etc.

HIGHAM-FERRERS, in Northamptonshire.
IN the 10 Henry V. that King granted his License to Henry Chichley Arch bis^op
of Canterbury to found a College at Higham-Ferrers, the Place of his Nativity,
for eight Chaplains of which one to be Master, Mary, St. Thomas of Canterbury,
and St. Edward the Cons^ssor, of Higham-Ferrers, and granted License to endow
the same with Lands, etc.

[ Valued at 156 l. 2 s. 7 d. per Annum.]

St. MICHAEL Pater noster Church, or Whitington College, in London.
HEnry Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year 1424. granted his License, to John
Coventre, John Carpenter, and William Grove, Executors of Richard Whitington
late Citizen and Mercer, and several times Mayor, of London, to erect a
College, pursuant to the Will of the said Richard in the Parish Church of St.
Michael called Pater noster Church in the Riol, in London, for five or six
Chaplains and other Clerks and Ministers, and an Almes-House of thirteen poor
People, and to make orders for the Government of the same. And accordingly the
said Executors did found such a College in honor of the Holy Ghost, the
Blessed Virgin Mary, Michael, and All Saints, and made diverse Orders touching
the said Foundation; as that there shall be five Chaplains not elsewhere
beneficed, one of which to be Master, two Clerks besides the Parish Clerk, and
four Choristers, appointing the first Chaplains to be William Brook, John
White, Nicholas Gaytone, Richard Olyue, and Gregory King; and that William
Brook, at that time Rector of the said Church of St. Michael, be the Master of
the College, that on all Sundays, when Sermons are Preached Paul's Cathedral,
the Masses in this Church be finished in such time, that the Parishoners of this
Parish, and Mr. and Chaplains of the College, may go to Paul's and be present
at the Sermon, unless there be a Sermon in this Church also on the same day;
That in the Canon of their Masses special mention be made of the Souls of the
said Richard Whityngton, and Alice his Wife, and of Sr. William Whityngton K^t,
and the Lady Joan his Wife Parents of the said Richard, etc. That two Solemn
Obits be Richard and Alice, one on the three and twentieth or four and
twentieth of March, the other on the thirtieth or one and thirtieth of July,
and that then the Master receive 20 d. every Chaplain 12 d, every Clerk 6 d,
and every Chorister 3 d. That the said Master, Chaplains, Clerks, and
Choristers, inhabit altogether in a Message built for that purpose at the East
end of the said Church of St. Michael; s, and every Chorister five marks,
beside their habitations; that they keep Commons together in the Hall of the
College, and that there be always at their Meal time, something read out of
the Holy Scriptures, Sermons or Homilies of the Saints, etc. That there be a
Common Chest for keeping the Seal and Evidences, etc. under three different
Keys, one to be kept by the Master, the other two by two other of the
Chaplains, and that no one presume to keep all three, or any two of the said
Keys; and that all overplus Revenue and Income, more then defrays the usual
charges of the College, be laid up and carefully preserved in the said Chest,
for the Common Benefit of the House; That London for the time being be
Overseer, and the Wardens of the Company of Mercers, Conservators and Patrons
of the College, etc. Which Orders bear date the seventeenth and eighteenth of
December 1424. (3 Henry VI.) vide inf. p. 189.

[ Valued at 20 l. 1 s. 8 d. per Annum.]

BATTLE-FEILD, in Shropshire.
KIng Henry IV, in the eleventh year of his Reign, granted to Roger Yve Rector
of the Chapel of St. John Baptist of Adbrigton Husee two acres of Ground in
that Lordship adjoining to Shrewsbury, in a Place called Bateleyfeld, being the
Place where be fought with, and overcame, Henry Percy, and the Rebels with
him, for the building thereon a Chapel in honor of St. Mary Magdalen, for the
Master and five Chaplains, of which Chapel and five Chaplains he appointed the
said Roger, and his Successors Rector of the said Chapel of St. John Baptist,
to be Masters or Wardens; and Richard Husee Lord of Adbrigton and his Heirs to
be Patrons Roger and his Successors, to be held there yearly on the Feast of
St. Mary Magdalen. Which Roger Yve by his Will dated 30. October. An. 1444. (24
Henry VI.) gave to this College three Chalices Silver and gilt, one Paxbrede,
Silver gilt, two Phiols Silver, three Bells in the Steple, three Crosses gilt,
with several Vestments and Books for Church Service, etc, and increased the
Stipends of every of the five Chaplains from eight marks to ten marks per
Annum, Conditionally that they pray in a more especial manner for the Souls of
King Henry IV. and King Henry V. Founders of this College, Richard Husee first
Patron of the same, etc. and for the Souls of all the Faithful slain in the
sight of Bataylfeld, and there buried; All the Residue of his goods and
Chattels he gave to the Fabric, and Work, of the said College, and to the
releif leif of the Poor in the Hospital of the same. He also appointed a new
Seal to be made for the College with this Circumscription, S. Commune Domini
Rogeri Ive primi Magistri, and Successorum suorum Collegii beatae Mariae
Magdalenae juxta Salop.

[ Valued at 54 l. 1 s. 10 d. per Annum.]

THE beforementioned John Coventre, John Carpenter, and William Executors of
Richard Whytington, by their Deed dated 13 Feb. 3 Henry VI. granted a yearly
Rent of 63 l. sterling, to the College by them Founded as before mentioned,
and altered and added some few things to the Statutes and Orders relating to
the said College.

THELE, in Hertfordshire.
KIng Henry VI. in the ninth year of his Reign, at the request of William
Bishop of London, Patron and Ordinary of this College, which had been founded
and endowed for the maintenance of one Custos and four Chaplains, who by ill
management had lost, and wasted most of their Estate, granted his License to
John Howeden Clerk then Custos of this College Essex and Hertfordshire yet
remaining, to Henry Hoddesden Prior of the Hospital of Elsing-Spitell in
London, and to the Convent there, they finding two Canons Regular to celebrate
in this College, and three other Canons Regular to celebrate in the said
Hospital, for the Souls of the Founders of this College.

WYE, in the County of Kent.
KIng Henry VI. in the tenth year of his Reign, granted his License to John
Archbishop of York, who had had the Custody of both the privy Seal, and great
Seal, to found a College at Wye in the Diocese of Canterbury, the place of his
Nativity, for one Master or Provost, and George and St. Martin, whom he
incorporated, and granted to the said Archbishop Power to endow the same with
Lands, and appropriate Churches, and to appropriate the Vicarage of the Parish
Church of Wye thereunto, any Law or Statute to the contrary non obstante. etc.
formerly belonging to Katherine late Abbess of Guynes in the County of Artoys
valued at 14 l. per Annum. to be conferred on this College; with diverse other
Revenues.

[ Valued at 93 l. 2 s. ob. per Annum.]


KING Henry the VI. in the seventeenth year of his Reign, licenced Ralph
Cromwell, Knt. and others to convert the Parish Church of Tateshale, into a
Collegiate Church, or College of seven Chaplains (of which one to be Master or
Custos) six Clerks, and six Choristers, and to erect an Alms^house thereunto
adjoining for thirteen poor People of both Sexes, and incorporated the same by
the name of the Master or Custos, and Chaplains of the College and Almshouse
of the Holy Trinity of Tateshale, with license to the said College, etc. to
purchase, receive, and hold Lands, etc. to the value of 200 l. per Annum over
and beside the Profits of the Advowson and yearly value of the Church of
Tateshale, etc.

[ Valued at 348 l. 5 s. 11 d. ob. q. per Annum.]


FOunded by King Henry the VI. in the nineteenth year of his Reign; for the
carrying on of which work he appointed Robert Kent, William and William Waryn,
to be his Procurators and Agents. It did, in the first Institution, consist of
one Provost, or Praepofit, ten Priests, four Clerks, and six Boys Choristers,
five and twenty poor and indigent Grammar Scholars, and five and twenty poor
and decrepid men, also one Master to teach Grammar learning to the foresaid
poor Scholars and others coming from any parts of England, freely and without
any manner of exaction; of this Foundation he made Henry Sevor Clerk, the first
Provost, and incorporated them by the name of the Provost and Mary of Eton near
Wydesor, he also gave them the Advowson of the Parish Church of Eton, to be
made Collegiate, and entirely united to their own proper use, without endowing
a Vicar, or appointing a competent Sum to be yearly distributed to the Poor of
the Parish out of the same, the Statute non obstante, with License to purchase
Lands to the value of one thousand Marks per Annum, the Statute of Mortmain non
obstante, and discharged them from the Payment of Corrodies, or any Pensions,
or Annuities whatsoever. The said King etc.

NEWPORT, in Shropshire.
KING Henry the VI. in the twentieth year of his Reign Licensed Thomas Draper
to purchase and receive from the Abbot and Convent of St. Peter's at
Shrewsbury, the Parish Church of Newport, and therein to found and erect a
College of one Custos, a Priest, and four Chaplains, whom by the name of the
Custos and Chaplains of Seint-Marie-College of Newport, he incorporated, with
License to endow the same with Lands, etc. of the value of 10 l. per Annum and
appropriated the said Parish Church to the same, provided that the Custos for
the time being takes etc.

St. MARY's at Stafford.
KIng Henry the VI. in the four and twentieth year of his Reign, granted the
Patronage and Advowson of the Deanery of his free Chapel at Stafford, to
Humphrey Duke of Buckingham; and Licensed him to give one hundred marks of
Land, etc. to the Dean and Canons of the said free Chapel.

[ Valued at 35 l. 13 s. 10 d. per Annum.]

WESTBURY, in Gloucestershire.
KIng Edward the IV. in the fourth year of his Reign, gave to Henry Sampson
Clerk, Dean of this College, and the Chapter of the same and their Successors,
the Manor of Aylmynstere, to hold in pure and Frankpledge, etc.

[ Valued at 232 l. 14 s. per Aunum.]

BARNARD-CASTELL, in the County Palatine of Durham.
KIng Edward the IV. in the seventeenth year of his Reign, granted his License
to his most dear Brother Richard Duke of Gloucester to erect a College at
Barnard-Castle, in the Castle there, of one Dean, and twelve Chaplains, ten
Clerks, six Chorists, and one other Clerk, whom he incorporated by the name of
the Dean and Chaplains of the College of Richard Duke of Gloucester of Baynard
Castle, and that the said Dean and Chaplains may purchase Lands, etc. to the
yearly value of four hundred marks, over and above all reprises.


IN the same year, the said King Edward the IV. licensed his said Brother
Richard Duke of Gloucester to erect another College at Middelham of a Dean,
six Chaplains, four Clerks, six Choristers, and one other Clerk, to celebrate
Divine Service in the Parish Church there, whom he incorporated by the name of
the Dean and Chaplains of the College of Richard Duke of Gloucester of
Middelham in the County of York, and that they may purchase Lands, etc. to the
value of two hundred Marks per Annum over and above all Reprises, etc.

ROTHERAM, in Yorkshire.
KIng Edward the IV. in the twentieth year of his Reign, granted his License to
Thomas Rotheram Bishop of Lincoln to erect a Chantry Rotheram, in honor of our
Lord I^^su Christ. Two years after that the same King Licensed the said Thomas,
then Archbishop of York, to found a College in Rotheram to consist of one
Provost, a Preacher of the Word of God, and of two Fellows, one of which to be
a Teacher of Grammar, and the other a Teacher of Song, with such other Fellows
as the Revenues shall admit of, for the Preaching of the word of God in the
Parish of Rotheram, and elsewhere in the Diocese of York, and for the free
teaching of Grammar, and Song, to any Scholars who are desirous to learn, and
come to the said College England; and incorporated the same by the name of the
Provost and Fellows of the College of Jesus at Rotheram, with License to the
said Thomas to give the Soil whereon the said College shall be built to the
same, and other Lands and Possessions, etc. to the value of one per Annum, and
to appropriate the Church of Laxton in the County of Nottingham, thereunto.

[ Valued at 58 l. 5 s. 9 d. ob. per Annum.]

The Kings free Chapels have been of old time, and ought to be exempt from the
ordinary Jurisdiction, and all Payment of Procurations, or any other
impositions or exactions whatsoever.

POpe Paul the IV. confirmed to Sir William Peter, Knt. and a Councellor etc.
formerly belonging to several Monasteries, and by him purchased and obtained
from King Henry the VIII. and others, and absolved him from all
Excommunications, London, etc. not to permit him to be vexed or disturbed in
relation to his foresaid Lands, etc. under pain of the severest Censures of the
Church. Whose Bull bears date at St. Peter's in Rome, An. Dom. 1555. (23 Ph.
and Ma.)

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE OF The Religious Houses, etc. as they were Situated within the
several Counties in England.
BARKSHIRE.
A Bington, Wallingford, Hellenstow, Hurley, Reading, Sandford, Poghele,
Bisham, Donyngton, Windsor, Eaton.
BEDFORDSHIRE.
Beauleiu, Mergate, Wardon, Woburn, Dunstable, Bissemede, Harewold, Newenham,
Caldewell, Todington, Chikesand, North-Yevel.
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
Ankerwik, Snelleshall, Ivingho, Burnham, Missenden, Tikeford, Bittlesden,
Mendham, Nutley, Chet^ode, Asherug, Alesbury, Lavingdene, Newinton-Longville.
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
Ely, Thorney, Chateriz, Romburgh, St. Radegunds, Denny, Waterbecham, Swanesey,
Barnewell, Angleseye, Royston, Spiney.
CHESHIRE.
St. Werburghs, Birkened, Chester Nunery, Cumbermere, Deulaeres, Stanlaw,
Dernhall, Norton, Modberley, Bunbury.
CORNWALL.
St. Petrocus, St. Germains, Sylley Isle, St. Michaels Mount, Tywardreit,
Bodmin, Launceston, Glasenaye.
CUMBERLAND.
Armethwayt, St. Bees, Wetherhall, Seaton, Calder, Holmcultrum, Carlisle,
Lanercost.
DARBYSRHIE.
Darby, Derley, Repindon, Beaucheif, Dale, St. Mary de Pratis, Calc.
DEVONSHIRE.
Tavestock, Exeter, St. Micholas at Exeter, St. Catherines Exeter, Modbury,
Ottery, Stoke Curcy, St. James, Barnestaple, Ford, Buckfast, Dunkewell,
Newenham, Bocland, Totnes, Barnstaple, Plimton, Hertland, Frithelstoke, Torre,
Cloveley.
DORSETSHIRE.
Sherburn, Winburne, Midleton, Shaftesbury, Horton, Cerne, Abbotsbury,
Shirburn, Lodres, Frampton, Tarent, Binedon.
DURHAM.
Durham, Wyrmouth, Finchale, Egleston, Shireburne, Gretham, Oveton, Kypier,
Langecestre, Aukland, Chester, Staynedrope, Barnard-Castle.
ESSEX.
Berking, Colne, Walden, Mersey, Horselegh, Prittlewell, Stannesgate,
Cogeshall, Stratford-Langton, Tiltey, Heningham, Thremhale, Colchester,
Waltham, Dunmow, St. Ofiths, Wykes, Wodham, Illeford, Hornechirche, Havering,
Bocking, Maldone, Snapes, Plecy.
GLOUCESTERSHIRE.
Gloucester, Tukesbury, Winchcumb, Derehurst, Kingswood, Flexley, Hayles, St.
Oswalds, Ciremester, Bristol, Keinsham, Lechelade, Billeswike, Stanley, Ginges,
Westbury.
HANTSHIRE.
Winchester, Hide, Rumsey, Warwell, Winteney, Andever, Apledercomb in the Isle
of Wight, Shireburn, Quarre in the Isle of Wight, Beauleiu, Letley, Suthwike,
Twineham, Motesfont, Seleburn, Southampton, Basingstoke, St. Crosses,
Titchfield, Caresbroke Isle of Wight.
HEREFORDSHIRE.
Hereford, Ewyas, Leominster, Lingebrook, Cresswell, Monkenlen, Clifford, Door,
Wigmore, Wormley, Acornbury, Flanesford, Ledbury.
HERTFORDSHIRE.
St. Albans, Hatfeild, Peverell, Hertford, St. Mary de Prato, Sopewell,
Flamsted, Chesthunt, Rowney, St. Iulians.
HUNTINGTONSHIRE.
Ramsey, St. Ives, St. Neots, Huntington, Saltre, Stoneley by Kimbolton.
KENT.
Canterbury, Rochester, St. Mildred, Folkstone, Liming, Raculfa, Shepey,
Malling, Davinton, Levisham, Patricksburn, Horton, Feversham, Boxley, Dover,
Ledes, St. Radegundis, Tonebrigge, Cumbwell, Lesnes, Bilsington, Badlesmere,
Dertford, St. Gregory's at Canterbury, Romenale, Herbaldown, Strode, Hethe,
Langdone, Mottidon, Wengham, Wye, Bradgare, Maydenstone.
LANCASHIRE.
Penwortham, Lythom, Holand, Lancaster, Furnes, Kirtmele, Burscough,
Conyngeshed, Cokersand, Manchester.
LEICESTER.
Langley, Hinkley, Geroudon, Grace-dieu, Bredon, Laund, Ouston, de Pratis,
Bradley, Kerkby Beler, Burton, Leicester, Stockerson, Croxton, Kerby super,
Wrethek.
LINCOLNSHIRE.
Bardeney, Croyland, Spalding, Belvoir, Santoft and Henes, Frestone,
Stikeswould, Stanford, Fosse, Steinfeild, Covenham, Burwell, Willesford,
Minting, Long-Benington, Hagh, Swineshead, Louthpark, Kirksted, Revesby,
Valledei, Greenfield, Legburne, Nun-Cotun, Epworth, Hyrst, Thornton, Nocton,
Thornholme, Bourn, Kyme, Thorkesey, Grimesby, Ravenston, St. Innocents,
Lincoln, Ellesham, Newstede, Holbeche, Newhus, Tupholm, Newbo, Hagneby,
Barlings, Sempringham, Haverholme, Bolington, Alvingham, Ormesby Sixill,
Maresey, Ancolm, Katteley, St. Catherines, Heynings, Holland-Frig, Wells,
Tateshale.
LONDON.
Minoresses, Abbey of Grace, Carthusians, Trinity Priory, St. Bartlemew, St.
Giles, St. Mary Bethelem, St. Mary Spittle, St. Bartholmews Hospital, St.
Thomas of Acon, Rounceval, Converts, St. Katherines, Elsing-Spittle,
Berking-Chirch, Savoy, St. John's, St. Hellens, Whitingtons College and
Hospital, St. Paul's, Crooked-lane.
MIDDLESEX.
Westminster, Kilburn, Clerkenwell, Halywell, Syon, St. James, St. Stevens
Chapel at Westminster.
NORFOLK.
Dereham, Wymundham, Binham, Norwich, Horsham, Carhow, Blackebxrgh, Waburn,
Wells, Toft, West-Acre, CastleAcre, Mendham, Bromholm, Reinham, Slevesholm,
Thetford, Sibeton, Pentney, Walsingham, Cokesford, Buckenham, Hickling, de
Prato, Linne, Wendlyng, Langley, Shouldham, Ingham, Rushworth, Attilburgh.
NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.
Peterborough, Peykirk, Wyrthorp, Sewardsley, Luffeild, Weden-Pinkney,
Northamp^on, Daventrey, Pipwell, St. Mary de Pratis, Chaucombe, Canons Ashby,
Brackley, Sulby, Catesby, Cotherstoke, Irtlyngburgh, Fodringhey,
Higham-Ferrers.
NOTTINGHAMSHIRE.
Wallingwells, Blithe, Lenton, Rufford, Beau-valle, Wirksop, Felley, Thurgarton,
Newstead, Nottingham, Wellebeck, Brodholm, Shelford, Stoke, Suthwelle, Tuxford.
NORTHUMBERLAND.
Tinemouth, Hallistane, Lambley, Hexam, Brinkeburne, Bolton, New Castle,
Alneweke, Blanland.
OXFORDSHIRE.
Oxford, Eynesham, Stodely, Godstow, Glosterhall, Coges, Tame, Brure, Rewley,
Oseney, Dorchester, Cold-Norton, Bisseter, Wroxton, Ewelme, Burcestre,
RUTLAND.
Broke, Okeham.
SHROPSHIRE.
Shrewsbury Bromfield Chirbury, Abberbury, Wenlock, Bildwas, Haghmon,
Littleshull, Wombrigge, Ratlingcope, St. Giles, Brugenorth, Ludlow, HalesOwen,
Tongue, Battlefield, Newport.
SOMERSETSHIRE.
Glastonbury, Bath, Wells, Atheling, Dunster, Bristol, Clive, Montacute,
Witham, Taunton, Haselberge, Briweton, Berliz, Wospring, Stenerdale,
Brugwalter, St. Laurence, North Cadbury.
STAFFORSHIRE.
Burton, Tutbury, Canewell, Farewell, Blithbury, Sandwell, Dudley, Croxden,
Hilton, Wulverhampton, Lapley, Stone, Ronton, Trentham, Rowcestre, St. Thomas,
Wolverhampton, Litchfield, Stafford.
SUFFOLK.
Hulme, St. Edmundsbury, Eye, Sudbury, Radingfield, Edwardston, Campess,
Kersey, Stoke Clare, Blackeham, Briset, Ixworth, Butley, Ipswich, Bliburg,
Leyston, Begeham, Bruseyard.
SUSSEX.
Selsey, Battel-Abby, Sele, Boxgrave, Levenestre, Jews, Roberts-bridge,
Hastings, Binham, Heryngham, Michelham, Durford, Arundel, Chichester.
SURRY.
Chertsey, Bermundsey, Waverley, Sheen, St. Mary-Overy, Merton, Newsted,
Rigate, Tanregge, Southwarke, Sandone.
WARWICKSHIRE.
Polesworth, Coventry, Aucot, Wroxhall, Pinley, Bretford, Al^ester, Henwood,
Nun-eaton, Wotton-waven, Kirkby, Stonely, Mereval, Cumb, Stodely, Kenilworth,
Erdbury, Maxstoke, Warwick, Thelesford, Asteleye.
WESTMERLAND.
Heppe.
WILTSHIRE.
Malmsbury, Wilton, Ambresbury, Kington, Okeburn, Farley, Stanleigh, Henton,
Brummore, Bradenstroke, Marleburgh, Ivichurch, Merleberge Salisbury, Heitsbury,
Pulton, Leycock, Edindon, MaidenBradley.
WORCESTERSHIRE.
Worcester, Evesham, Pershore, Malverne, Westwood, Bordesley, Dodford.
YORKSHIRE.
Lestingham, Whitby, Beverley, Rippon, Selby York, St. Marys, St. Martins at
Richmond, Midlesburg, Hakenes, Grendale, Nunkelling, Monkton, Marrigg, Kirkley,
Little-Marais, Nunburnham, Arden, Rossedale, St. Clements, Wilberfoss,
Tykehead, Holy Trinity, York, Hedlay, Birstall, Gromond, Alverton, Pontefract,
Monk-Breton, Arthington, Rieval, Fountains, Biland, Meaux, New-Minster,
Sinningthwait, Esseholt, Hampole, Swine, Rupe, Hoton, Basedale, Salley,
Kirkstall, Ierval, Nun-Apleton, Keldeholm, Wickham, Kingston, Mountgrace,
Swine, Byland, Nostell, Woodkirk, Scekirk, Drax, Marton, Bolton, Kirkham,
Gisburne, Scarthe, Bridlington, Wartre, Newburgh, Hode, Helaghe, Haltemprise,
St. Leonards York, Carmans Spittle, Yarum, Scardeburgh, Kynewaldgraves, Hedon,
Sutton, Glanfordbrigge, St. Nicholas, Richmond, Coverham, St. Agatha near
Richmund, Watton, St. Andrews York, Malton, Ellerton, Knaresborough, Newton,
Sivethorpe, Hemmyngburgh, Wenslaw, Middelham, Rotherham, Fossgate in York.
In WALES.
Brecknock, Cadwelli, Tallach, Margan, Abergavenny, Lankywan, Goldclive,
Monmouth, Nethe, Basingwerk, Tintern, Cumhire, Blancland, Clunoc-vaur,
Stratflure, Stratmargell or Strata-Marcella, Aberconway, Grace-dieu, Pilla, St.
Clare, Lanthony, Bethkelert, Kaermerdin, Haverford, Glannauch, Ewenny, Ruthyn,
Landaffe, Lancadant, Abergwylly, St. David's.
A General Table Of all the RELIGIOUS HOUSES Treated of in all the Three VOLUMS.
Note, That the Pages here named relate to the Book at large, and are to be
sought for in the Margin of this Abridgment. Note also, That the Third Volum
consists of Two Parts, and Two Numbers. Vol. 1. Vol. 2. Vol. 3. A. ABerbury.
605 Abbotsbury: 276 Aberconway. 918 Abergevenny. 557 Abergvilly. 2. 100
Abington. 97 Acornbury. 330 St. Albans. 176 376 Alcester. 470 Alesbury. 396
Alien Priories. 547 1035 Alnewick. 591 Aluerton. 599 Aluingham. 802 Ambresbury.
191 Ancolm. 812 Andever. 552 St. Andrews, York. 808 St. Andrews, Northamp. 679
Anglesey. 258 Ankerwike. 482 Apledercom. 571 Arden. 500 Armethwayt. 324
Arthington. 690 Arundel. 1. 98 2. 101 Ashby-Canons, 291 Asherugge. 344 1. 67
Astley 2. 92 Atheling. 202 Attilburgh. 2. 142 Aucot. 367 Aukland. 2. 39 B.
BAdlesme e. 351 Bardney. 142 Barlings. 643 Barnard Castle, 2. 203 Barnstable.
684 Barnstaple. 1024 Barnwell. 28 St. Bartholomew, London. 166 Basedale. 840
Basingstoke: 459 Basingwerk. 720 Bath. 184 Battle Abbey. 310 Battle-feild. 2.
185 Beauchief. 6^7 Beauval. 962 Beauleiu. 925 St. Bees. 395 Begeham. 636 1. 77
Beleieu. 325 Belvoir. 327 Berliz. 249 Berking. 79 Bermonsey. 639 Bethk^lert.
100 Beverly 169 2. 1 Biland. 775 Billeswike. 455 Bilwas. 779 Bilsington: 333
Binedon. 911 Binham. 343 Birstal. 587 Birkney. 484 Bishem. 355 Bissemede. 157
Bisseter. 283 Biclesdon. 783 Blackburgh. 478 Blakenham 573 Blauk^and. 884 611
Bliburgh: 593 Blithe 553 1. 19 Blithbury. 468 Bocking. 477 Bockland. 438
Bockland. 939 Bedwin. 5 Bolington 794 Bolton. 459 2. 137 100 Bordesley. 803
Bourn. 235 Bows. 471 Boxgrave. 592 Boxley. 827 Brackley. 375 1. 83 Bradley. 334
Bradenstoke. 206 Bradsole. 244 1. 69 Bradgare. 2. 117 Brecknock. 319 Bredon. 39
1. 62 Breford. 464 Bridlington. 161 Brinkburn. 203 Briset. 86 Bristol. 513 438
232 Briweton. 205 Brodholm. 646 Bromfeild. 464 Bromhale. 899 Brook, 130
Brudgnorth 433 Bruere. 8^5 Brugwalter. 432 Bruges. 2. 207 Brummore. 201
Brusyard. 2. 98 Buckenham. 274 Buckfast. 792 Bunbury. ^. 107 Bungey. 513
Burcester. 1. 96 Bawnham. 534 327 Burton. 265 Burton-Lazers. 397 Burscough. 303
Burwell. 579 Bury St. Edmunds. 284 Buslesham. 1. 21 Butley. 246 1. 110 Bylegh.
626 C. CAdwelli. 424 Calder. 774 Caldwell. 257 Calke. 1. 97 Campsey. 490
Canterbury. 373 Canterbury Cathedral 18 -- St Augustines. 23 Canwell. 439
Carisbrook, Isle of Wight. 905 Carlisle. 73 Carmans Spittle. 372 Carthusians.
949 Castle acre. 624 Catesby. 896 Cathow. 426 Cern. 253 Chaterige. 251
Chaucumb. 279 Cherbury. 500 Chester. 507 2. 44 ^99 Chertsey. 75 Chesthunt. 512
Chetwode. 339 Chi^h. 182 Chi^h^ster. 1. 1 15 Chickesand. 793 Cirencester. 89
Cistercians. 695 St. Clare. 1026 St. Clements, York. 510 Clerkenwel. 428
Clifford. 6^3 Clive. 530 Clouely. 2. 109 Cluniac's. 611 Clunac-Vaur. 892
Codenham. 910 Coges. 573 Cogeshall. 821 Cokesford 234 Cokersand. 631
Colchester. 44 396 889 Coldnortou. 275 1. 55 Coln. 436 Combermere. 764
Cotherstoke. 2. 96 Covenham. 555 Coverham. 648 Coventry. 302 427 Coventry,
Carthusians. 963 Creswell. 504 1. 17 Crokesden. 1. 40 Crokeston. 1. 73 Croxden.
912 Croxton. 603 Croyland. 163 Cumb. 882 Cumbwell. 270 Cumhile. 825 D. DAle. 1.
72 Darby. 505 897 Daventry. 672 St David's. 2. 112 Davington. 501 St. Dennis,
France. 108 Denny. 492 Deping. 469 Derby. 897 Derham. 176 Derham west. 624
Derehurst. 547 Derly. 230 1. 57 Dernhall. 936 Dertford. 357 479 Deulacres. 890
Dodford. 307 St. Dogmells, 444 Donyngton. 474 Dorchester. 197 Door. 862 Dover.
1 423 Dovore. 1. 86 Drax. 96 Droghedah. 1. 107 Dudley. 614 Dunkewell. 925
Dunmow. 75 Dunstable. 132 Dunster. 477 Durford. 1. 78 Durham. 38 E. EDington.
357 St. Edmunds Bury. 284 Edwardston. 468 Egliston. 196 Ellesham. 421 Ellerton.
821 1. 108 Elsing Spittle, London. 462 Ely. 87 Epworth. 969 Erdbury. 265
Esseholt. 828 Estbrigg. 458 Eton. 2. 195 Evesham. 144 Ewelme. 475 Ewenny. 1. 19
Ewyas. 413 Exeter. 220 461 643 Exeter, St. Nicholas. 352 Eye. 356 Eynesham. 258
F. FArewell. 441 Farley. 620 Felly. 56 Feversham. 687 Finchale. 512 Finsheved.
296 Flanesford. 356 Flamsted. 503 Flexley. 884 Fodringay. 2. 158 Falkston. 85
560 Ford. 785 Fosse. 502 Fountains. 733 Frampton. 571 Freeston. 443
Frithelstoke. 326 Furnes. 704 G. GAroudon. 768 St. Germains, 213 St. Germains,
Cornwall. 5 Ginges. 1. 96 Giseburn. 147 1. 46 Glannaugh. 338 Glasseney. 2. 56
Glastonbury. 1 Gloucester. 108 28 1. 7 456 2. 207 Glocesterhall. 540 Godstow.
525 Goldclive, 590 Grace abbey, Land. 943 Grace Dieu. 927 933 Greenfeild. 881
Grendale. 427 Gretham. 457 Grimesby. 898 316 Gromond. 597 Grossmunt. 1. 15 H.
HAgh. 602 Haghmon. 46 Hagneby. 626 Hakenes. 414 Hales Owen. 655 Haleston. 476
Haliwell. 531 Haltemprise. 347 Hampole. 83^ Harewold. 202 Hasleberge. ^^3
Hastings, 84 Hatfeild-Peverel. 330 Haverholm. 792 Haveford. ^93 Havering. 420
Hayles. 928 Heden. 418 Hedley. 565 Heitbury. 483 Helaghe. ^87 Helenstow. 359
Hemmyngburgh. 2. 97 Henningham. 1020 Henton. 960 Henwood. 479 Heppe. 594
Herbaldown. 418 Hereford. 406 1. 180 Hertfold. 331 Hertland. 285 Heryngham. 181
Heth. 468 Hexham. 90 Heynings. 815 Hide. 208 Hicling. 319 Higham-ferrers. 2.
175 Hilton. 942 Hinkley. 603 Hode. 195 Holbreche. 469 Holland. 544 Holland
Brig. 815 Holmcoltrum. 885 Horkesley. 1. 30 Horsham. 414 Horseley. 604
Hornchurch. 418 Horton. 220 621 Hospitallers, Knights. 489 Hoton. 840 Hulme.
282 Huntington. 530 517 Hurley. 363 H^rst. 42 I. ST. James, Bristol. 513 St.
James, Westminst. 402 Ierval. 869 Illeford. 390 Ingham. 833 Ipswich. 295
Ir^lingburgh. 2. 108 St. Ives. 255 Ivichurch. 273 Ivingho. 490 Ixworth. 184 K.
KAermerden. 282 St. Katherines, Exeter. 503 Katteley. 8^4 Keinsham. 298
Keldeholm. 914 Kenelworth. 114 Kertmele. 300 Kersey. 532 Kilburn. 361 Kime. 245
Kimolton, or Kimbolton. 319 Kinswood. 811 Kingston, Hull. 966 Kinton. 534 Kirby
Beler. 344 2. 49 Kirkby. 562 Kirkham. 105 Kirkley. 487 Kirkstall. 854 Kirksted.
806 Knaresborough. 833 Kynewalgraves. 515 Kypier. 1. 90 L. LAcock. ^41 Lambley.
506 La ^cadanc. 2. 36 Lan^aster. 566 Landaffe. 1. 182 Lanercost. 130 Langley.
481 659 Langdone. 622 Langcester. 2. 38 Langrigh. 454 Lankywan. 580 Lanthony.
58 Lapley. 1022 Lavindene. 613 Launceston. 107 Laund. 90 Lechlade. 451 Ledbury.
453 2. 139 Ledes. 110 Legburn. 894 Leicester. 308 2. 139 454 468 Lenton. 645 1.
648 Leominster. 420 Lestingham: 62 Lestune. 1. 74 Lesnes. 301 Letley. 933
Levenestrey. 6^6 Levisham. 55^ Lewis. 615 Leye. ^04 Leystone. 606 Lillecherch.
528 Lilleshull. 144 Liming. 85 Lincoln. 388 Lincoln, St. Catherines. 814
Lincoln Cathedral. 1. 257 Li^gebrook. 471 Lithom. 499 Little marais. 496 Little
more. 1. 13 Litchseild Cathedral. 1. 216 Loc^ Dei. 931 Lodres. 570 London
Minoresses. 542 Ca^thusians. 961 Trinity. 80 St. Bartholomew. 166 St. Hellens.
894 St. Giles. 381 Bethelem 382 St. Marys without Bishops-Care. 383 St.
Bartholomews Hosp. 386 St. Giles. 4^0 St. Thomas of Acon 411 Converts (Jews.)
450 St. Katherines. 460 Elsing-spittle. 462 Berking Church. 467 The Savoy Hosp.
484 St. John of Jer^s^lalem 505 Cathedral. S. Paul. 1. 298 Whittingtons Hospita
1. 99 St. John of Jerusalem 1. 1^8 St. Martins. 2. 26 Crooked Lane Coll. 2. 104
Elsing Spittle 2. 190 Whittington Coll. 2. 189 Long Bennington. 597 Louth Yark.
805 Ludlow. 449 Lusseild. 520 Lyn. 413 M. Maiden Bradley. 4^8 Ma^dston. 2. 132
Ma^^ing 352 Malmesbury. 49 Malron. 81 Maluern ^65 Manchester, 2. 174 Margon.
477 Mar^am. 9^9 Marleburgh. ^72 Marrig. 484 Mar^sey. 811 Marton. 98 St. Mary de
Pratis. 1011 St. Mary Overy. 84 St. Marys in Dublin. 782 Maxtoke. 351 May in
Scotland. 422 Meaux. 792 Mendham. 926 631 Mereval. 830 Merewell. 2. 55 Mergate.
350 Merlebergh. 437 Mersey. 552 Merton. ^ 135 St. Michaels Mount. 551 Michel.
197 Miche ham. ^34 Middleburg. 413 Middleton. 19^ Midd^^ham. 2. 204 Minting.
59^ M^^^unde. 1. 107 Missenden. 541 1. 18 M^dberley. 320 Modbury. 507 Monkion.
476 Monk^ret^n. 660 Moukenlen. 597 Mon^outh. 6^0 Montac^te. 668 Motesfont. 323
Mottind^n. 3^ Mauntgrace, 96^ N. ST. Neots. 36^ Nethe 7^9 Newbo. 612 Newburgh.
^9 Newcastle. 4^^ Newenham 929 23^ Newh^use, 589 Newmon, 1. 111 Newminster. 800
New Monasteries of H. 8. 1. 21 foundation. 8^ Newport. 2. 201 New^^ed,
Giltford. 247 Newsted, Sherw^od. 3^7 Newsted, Stamford. 444 Mew^on. 898 1. 88
Nocton. 211 Northampton, St. Andr. 679 Northampton, St. Mary 1011 Northampton,
St. James 49 N^rth Cadbury. 2. 173 North Creyke. 325 Norton. 185 5 Norwich. 4^7
4^1 1. ^ ^. 43 Nostel. 3^ Nottingham. 447 448 Nunapleton. 907 Nunburnham. 498
Nun-Cotun. 922 Nun Eaton. 518 Nunkelling. 474 Nutley. 154 O. Okeburn. 581
Okeham. 473 Ormesby. 809 Oseney. 136 St. Osiths, Chiche. 182 St. Oswalds,
Gloucester. 28 Oterey. 549 2. 59 569 Overton. 825 Ouston. 276 Oxford. 173 407
540 443 P. PAtricksburn. 576 Pembroke. 510 Penecriz. 2. 207 Pentney. 19
Penwortham. 360 Pershore. 203 Peterborough. 63 St. Petrocus. 213 Peykirk. 305
Pilla. 1019 Pipwell. 815 Plecy. 2. 120 Plimpton. 6 Poghele. 266 Pollesworth.
197 Pontesract. 648 461 2. 106 Pontrobert. 916 De Prato, St. Albans. 347
Prittlewell. 619 Praemonstratenses. 579 Pulton. 826 Pynham. 143 Pynley. 442 Q
Qvarre. 760 R. RAculf. 86 St. Radegunds. 480 Radingfeild. 417 Ramsey, 231
Ratlingcope. 336 Ravenston. 337 Reading. 417 Reinham. 636 Rependon. 280
Revesby. 822 Rewley. 934 Richmond. 401 479 649 Rieval. 727 Rindelgras. 422
Rippon. 172 380 1. 89 2. 87 Roche. 835 Rochester. 27 1. 1 Romburg. 404
Romenale. 405 Ronton. 143 1. 53 Rossendale. 507 Rotheram. 2. 204 Roucestre. 267
Rounceval. 443 Rowney. 516 Royston. 264 Rudham. 234 Rufford. 848 Rumsey. 219
Rushworth. 2. 110 Ruthyn. 1. 105 2. 57 Rygate. 346 S. SAlesbury. 1. 375 Salley.
841 S^lop. 2. 207 Saltree. 850 Sandone. 441 Sandwell. 475 Sanford. 481 1. 13 1.
66 Santoft and Henes. 403 Sarum. 472 The Savoy. 484 Sautingfeld. 404 Scarthe.
143 Scokirk. 43 Scotch Monasteries. 1051 Selburn. 343 Selby. 371 Sele. 581
Selsey. 153 Sempringham. 791 Seton. 482 Sewardsley. 496 Shaftesbury. 313
Shelford. 1. 65 Shene. 973 Shepey. 152 Shireburn. 62 423 423 476 577 Shouldham.
820 Shrewsbury. 375 Sibeton. 866 1. 32 Silly lsle. 516 Sinningthwait. 827
Sixill. 810 Slevesholm. 638 Snapes. 894 Snelshall. 483 Sopewell. 347
Southampton. 108 439 Southwark. 439 Spiney. 320 Stafford. 316 Stamford. 403 444
Stanesgate. 623 Standford. 488 Stanfield. 506 Stanlaw. 896 Stanleigh. 867
Stanley-Park. 626 1. 64 Stayndrope. 2. 142 Sternshall. 71 Stevendale. 306
Stodeley. 486 89 Stoke. 1. 94 Stoke-Clare. 535 2. 164 Stoke Cursy. 577
Stokefaston. 482 Stone. 119 Stoneley. 820 319 Stratmargel, or Strata Marcella.
895 Stratfleure, or Strata florida. 893 Stratford. 443 Stratford langton. 883
Strode. 434 Stykeswold. 486 809 1. 81 Sudbury. 367 Suthwell. 2. 10 Suthwike.
134 Sutton. 437 Swanesey. 572 Swine. 834 Swineshead. 773 Syon. 360 T. TAllach.
465 Tame. 802 Tanregge. 403 Tarent. 887 Tateshale. 2. 194 Tavestok. 217
Taunton. 83 Temple Knights. 517 1. 62 Thanet, St. Mildreds. 83 Thele. 2. 190
Thelesford. 831 Thetford. 664 574 Thorkesley. 278 Thorney. 242 Thornton. 198
Thornholm. 230 Thremhale. 23 Thurgarton. 92 Tikeford. 685 Tiltrey. 889
Tinemouth. 333 Tintern. 721 Titchfeild. 660 Toddington. 478 Toft. 598
Tonbridge. 258 Tong-Castle. 2. 143 Torre. 652 Totenhall. 2. 207 Totnes. 1023
Trentham 260 Trinitarians. 830 Tukesbury. 153 Tupholme. 596 Tutbury. 354
Tuxford. 2. 90 Twyneham. 177 1. 54 Tykhead. 529 Tywardreit. 586 V. VAle-Royal.
936 Vaudev. 831 W. WAburn. 490 Walden. 445 Wallingford. 326 1. 11 2. 34
Wallingwell. 502 Walsingham. 20 Waltham. 11 Wardon. 784 Wartre 172 Warwell. 256
Warwick. 573 2. 27 Watton. 798 Water. Becham 543 Waverky. 703 Weden-Pinkney.
584 Welbe^k. 597 Well. 461 1. 89 Wells. 186 826 434 Wells, Norsolk. 574
Wengham. 2. 52 Wendling. 613 Wenlock. 613 Wenslaw. 2. 137 Westbury. 2. 202
Westacre. 619 Westminster 55 402 Westminster, St. Stevens Chapel. 2. 61
Westwood. 574 Wethehall 397 Whalley. 896 Wherwell. 1. 9 Whitby. 71 Wi^more. 213
Wikes. 82 Wikham. 916 Wilesford. 584 Wilberfosse. 524 1. 12 Wilton 191
Wimundham. 337 Winchester. 31 480 2. 46 212 2. 106 Winburne. 163 Winchcomb. 187
Windsor. 2. 67 Winteney. 483 St. Wirburghs, Chester. 199 Wirksop. 50 Witham.
959 Woburn. 829 Wodham. 294 Wolverhampton. 988 472 2. 207 Wombrigge. 252
Worcester. 120 Wormley. 261 1. 48 Wospring 271 1. 47 Wotton waven. 558
Wroxhall. 433 Wroxton. 326 Wulverhampton, vid. Wol verhampton. Wudeham. 889
Wye. 2. 191 Wymburn minster. 2. 207 Wyremouth and Gerwy. 96 Wyrthorp. 189 Y
Yarrow. 96 Yarum. 400 Ynes. 718 York. 367 1. 125 392 469 York, St. Marys. 382
York, Trinity. 563 York, St. Andrews. 808

FINIS.

