Dud Dudley's Mettallum Martis OR, IRON Made with Pit-coale, Sea-coale, etc.
And with the same Fuel to Melt and fine Imperfect Metals, and Refine perfect
Metals.

(...) Printed by T. M. for the Author

TO THE KINGS Most Sacred Majesty.
May it Please Your Majesty;
ALl Your Kingdoms, Dominions, and Territories, being the happy Subjects of
Your Cares, are therefore the proper Objects of Your View: Great Britain, O
Great Britain, Your Principal Island, here Humbly Presents her self unto Your
Royal Presence, View and Care; be Pleased, to interpret this her
Obsequiousness, to be her Duty; for since Your Majesty's safe Return, has
already Graciously dayned, to View, and often to review her Shipings, Stores,
Armories, Ordnance, Magazins, and Trade; Vouchsafe, Great Sir, Great Britain
Your Royal Patronage, and once more, at some one hour, or two, to Grace it with
Your Auspicious Aspect, in this Mite, with all Humility Presented, By,

A Faithful Servant, of Your Sacred Fathers; And a Loyal Sufferer, for Your
Sacred Majesty; And by Pattent-Servant, Dud Dudley.

TO THE Honorable, His Majesty's Great Council; The High Court of Parliament.
YOur Predecessors in former Ages, had both serious Consultations, and
Considerations, before they made those many Wholesome and Good Laws, for the
Preservation of Wood, and Timber, of this Kingdom, 1 Eliz. 15. 23 Eliz. 5. 27
Eliz. 19. 28 Eliz. 3. 5. in whose days, and since in King James's Reign, Ships
in most Ports and Rivers of this Kingdom, (Thames Excepted) might have been
built, for forty Shillings per Tunn; but now they can hardly be built for
treble the value, wood and timber is so much decayed; therefore men of War,
Trade of Merchants, of Fishing, of Navigating, unto Plantations will decay, if
not timely prevented, which is hoped will be one of Your Principallest Cares,
seeing our Enemies have carried Timber from England, and the Iron Works have
much exhausted it; For the prevention of so great a Consumption, almost
incureable: First is to put the Wholesome Laws in Execution; Secondly, not to
permit Timber to be Exported. Thirdly, to animate, as King James did, and also
Prince Henry, the making of Iron in England, Scotland, and Wales with Pit-cole,
Sea-cole, and Peate; which if the Author (who had a Pattent for it) had not
been opposed, after he had made much good Iron with Pit-cole, it had long
since, by his Inventions, been fully perfected. The Fourth is, to stop all the
Exportation of Pit-cole, and Sea-cole (paying His Majesty's Duty) if the Cole
be in a fit place, to make Iron therewith. Fifthly, That the Author, or his
Agents may have power to preserve many thousand Tuns of Pit-cole, which are
annually destroyed, for ever in England, Scotland, and Wales which are fit to
make Iron; and the Author in this Treatise has demonstrated it, being moved
with pity, seeing his Native Country decaying, Humbly offers but his
Judgment, and and leaves the grave consideration thereof, to your Learned, and
more serious Consultations and Actings, praying that you may animate good
things, and new inventions, that may bring unto His Sacred Majesty, and all
Loyal Subjects Safety, Strength, Wealth, and Honor by our Ships, and Men of
War, Fishing, Navigation, and Merchandising, unto Foreign Nations; but more
especially, to, and from the Territories of Great Britain, our North Indies
abounding in Mines and Minerals, that they that are of the Honorable
Corporations of Mines Royal, and Batteries, or any others, would lay in a
Common, or Joint Stock, fully to set the Mines at Work, by employing our idle,
and burdensome supernumerary people therein, Iron, Tin, Lead, Copper,
Quicksilver, Silver and Gold, besides many other Minerals, and Marcesit's,
Lapis Calaminaris, Antimonie, Maganes, etc. also many Mineral Earths and
Precious Stones: Did I call Great Britain our North Indies? give me leave to
repeat a passage till further satisfaction, of King Josina of Scotland, a great
Philosopher, Physician, and Herbalist, living before Christ, 161. years, at
which time, two venerable Philosophers and Priests passing from Portugal to
Athens, their Ship and Company, and Mariners, all perished at Ros, they only
saved; after refreshing, and good Entertainment, the King desired of them what
they understood by their Science of the Nature of the Ground of Scotland; after
deliberate advisement, said, There was more Riches and Profit to be gotten
within the Veins of the Earth of Scotland, then above, for the winning of Mines
and Metals; They knew this by the Influence of the Heavens: This you may see in
the Chronicles of Scotland.

My Dear Master, our Sacred Martyr, Charles the First of ever Blessed Memory,
did animate the Author by Granting him a Pattent, Anno 14 of His Reign, for
the making of Iron, and Melting, Smelting, Extracting, Refining, and Reducing
all Mines and Metals with Pit-cole, Sea-cole, Peat and Turf, which was Extinct,
and Obstructed by reason of the War; and had not this unnatural and
unparalled War been, His late Sacred Majesty himself had set at work many of
His Mines, and much good had been produced to Great Britain before this time.

At present the Author is in good hope, and incessantly prays, that the Mines
be set at work in his days, by the Honorable Corporation of the Mines Royal,
for he verily believes the time to be near, when the Omnipotent God, before he
Judge the World in Fire, will show His Omnipotency unto the Nations, by
revealing of the wonderful and incredible things of Nature, of which the
Learned do believe very many to be, in the Mineral Kingdom, by working of
Mines and Fusion of Metals, gotten by honest labor under ground profitable to
Man, and Acceptable with God.

I might here speak somewhat of Superior Planets producing Metal, Saturn,
Lead: Jupiter, Tin: Mars, Iron: but these abound in Great Britain, so do the
Inferior Planets produce Venus, Copper: Mercury, Quicksilver: Luna, Silver:

If God permit me health and leisure from Suits and Troubles, not only to
write of them, but also the manner of the Melting, Extracting, Refining, and
Reducing of them with Pit-cole, Sea-cole, Peat, etc. In the interim to let you
know that Great Britain abounds with Copper Mines, much neglected, yet of
great use for Ordnance, at Land, and also at Seas, and for the making of Brass,
with our Lapis Calaminaris, so much Exported by the Dutch, which does hinder
our manufactories of Brass, and causes the Dutch and Swedes to raise the price
of Copper and Brass ever since our small loss at Sea by the Dutch. Mercury,
Quicksilver is not wanting, but few Artists have made any Experiment of that
Mine in this Kingdom.

Luna, Silver does abound in Great Britain, especially a very Rich Vein, Rake,
or Fibrey thereof was wrought at Binny-Hills near Lithgo in Scotland, in the
Authors days, some part of which he has, is malleable Silver in the Oar or
Mine, yet neglected. And so are many of our richest Mines in England, and
Wales, etc. the cause is conceived to be the want of a general and joynt-stock
for the employing our idle people in getting, and working of the Copper, and
Silver Mines.

Of the Planet Sol, Gold: I may not be silent, whose Golden, Glorious, Pure,
Sulphurious, Percing, Spirit, communicating his virtue Mineral unto all things
in the Mineral Kingdom, as well as to the Animal and Vegetable Kingdom, whose
pure influence producing Gold, caused the poor indigent people of Scotland,
which the Author did see, Anno 37 at Shortlough, six men to dig and carry with
wheele-barrows, the common Earth or Mould unto Rivolets remote, out of which
those men did wash Gold-grains, as good as is in the sand of the Rivers, in
which Rivers many have gotten Gold, and seen Grains of Sol, near one ounce
weight, both in the Low-lands, and in the High-lands; also he has seen Gold
gotten in England, but not so plentiful as in Scotland: For Sir James Hope,
An. 1654. brought from Scotland, Baggs of Gold Grains unto Cromwell, some of
which Grains were very large, and as fine as any Gold in the world, that is in
Mines; thus I came to see the Baggs, taking a view of the Low-lands, and
High-lands of Scotland, Anno 37, in which year, I spent the whole Summer (in
opening of Mines, and making of discoveries) was at Sir James Hopes Lead Hills,
near which I got Gold, and he coming to London, employed Captain David Acheson,
a Refiner, whom I met with in Scotland, Anno 37 to find me out; when I came
unto Sir James Hope, dwelling in White Hall, he produced the Baggs unto me, and
poured the Gold out upon a board, in which was one large piece of Gold, which
had to it adjoining a large piece of white spar very transparent, which Cap.
David Acheson yet living at Edinburgh saw; but I would never Act with Sir James
Hope, hoping of these times to see good things acted, for I believe God is
about to reveal many of his secrets, unto his Israel in this latter Age, which
made me not to Answer the Letter of Sir James Hope, as follows.

Edinburgh 26. June 1654. Sir,
If I had found the opportunity before my parting, I purposed to have been a
suitor to you, and I persuade my self, you are so kind and generously disposed,
that you would have answered my desire, and therefore also even at this
distance adventure to offer it: And it is that you would confer upon me one
breviate of your journey through the North of Scotland; as to the discovery of
Minnerals upon some account, and at first view, this may seem as unreasonable
of me desired, as improbable that you should grant it, but the circumstance of
time and persons and substance of the things considered, I am not altogether
out of hope of it; only, I shall say, if you condescend to me in this, though
it be more in satisfaction, to my curiosity, then for any design I have upon
the matter; yet you shall singularly oblige me to endeavor and be ready as
opportunity shall offer, to express my thankfulness, in what way you will
prescribe, that is in the power of;

your very affectionate brother and Servant, James Hope.

This Sir James Hope, was a Judge at the City of Edinburgh, and by Cromwell made
Lord Marshall of Scotland.

My hope now is, that the Honorable and ingenious Corporation of the Mines
Royal, will set the Mines at work, that my Inventions, in which I have spent
much time and charge, in melting, smelting, extracting, refining and reducing
of Mines and Metals with Pitcoal, Sea-coal and Peats; and have made with the
same Fuel many hundred Tuns of good Merchantable Iron, into cast works and
Bars; may by the Inventioner be enjoyed according to the Act of Parliament, 21.
Jacob. Seeing the Author can make it appear he has been much obstructed by
lawsuits and the Wars hitherto: Desires that his Talent of Undoubted truths
(may not be buried) for the general good, but be brought to light, after all
the sad Sufferings of the Author, whereby he may add unto his new Inventions,
what he conceives fit to be done: That not only this so exhausted Kingdom may
enjoy the benefit thereof, but also Scotland and Wales which abound with Coals,
Iron, Stone and Mines of all sorts, minerals and precious Stones, etc.

Yet from England's Granery, Scotland making no Iron, and other Territories,
have their through supply, not only of Iron, but of Iron manufactories many, so
has Wales; yet might Scotland and Wales not only supply themselves, but
supply His Sacred Majesty's other Territories with Iron and Iron Wares and
Steel also, by Iron and Steel made with Pit-coale, Sea-coale and Peat; and
thereby be helpful unto themselves and England, and all Plantations of his
Majesty's, on this side and beyond the line,

To the Reader, especially of England, Scotland and Wales.
THe injury and prejudice done unto me and to this Island, my native Country
for the making of Iron, in cast works and bars with Pitcoal, Seacoal, Peat and
Turff, and with the like feuell, to melt, extract, refine and reduce all Mines
and metals, moved me in the negligence of better Wits and Pens to apologize
for it; in this ensuing Treatise, and believe me Reader, it was no private, or
politic design in my Invention, but mere zeal, becoming an honest man,
Patriae, parentibus and amicis; that Engaged me (after many others failed) in
these Inventions, for the general good and preservation of Wood and Timber,
which,

Eque pauperibus, locupletibus eque,
Eque neglectis pueris senibusque nocebit;
Therefore it concerns His sacred Majesty, his high Court of Parliament, all
his Counsels, Mariners, Merchants, Royal and Loyal Subjects (the destruction
of Wood and Timber) to lay it to heart, and helping hands, upon fit occasions,
in these so laudable Inventions, of making Iron and melting of mines and
refyning of them with Pitcole, Seacole, Peat and Turf; for the preservation of
Wood and Timber for maintenance of Navigation, men of War, the Fishing and
Merchants Trade, which is the greatest strength of Great Britain, and all
other his Majesty's Kingdoms and Territories, whose defense and offense next
under God, consists by his sacred Majesty's assisting care, and view of his men
of War, Ships, experienced marrinours, merchants, Ordnance of Copper, Bras and
Iron Armories, Steels and Iron, of all sorts; both of bars, squares, and cast
works and which ought and may be suplyed from Scotland and Wales by Iron,
Copper and Brass, and made there, with Pitcole, Seacole and Peat; and which
abound there and in England also; In Cornwall, Devonshire, Sommerset,
Gloucester, Stafford, Darby, York, Lancaster, Westmerland, Cumberland; are many
Copper mines: so is there in Pembrook, Carmarthin, Merionith and Denbyshires,
also there are very many rich Coper mines in very many places in Scotland, at
Sterling, at Dumfad and many other places well known unto the Author,

Dud Dudley
Dud Dudley's Mettallum Martis.
THat Great Britain with her Men of War, Fleets and Shiping, have had in all
Ages, and in these latter Ages, as great Success at Seas as any people
whatsoever in the Universe cannot modestly be denied in 88, overthrowing that
Invincible Armado so long a preparing, and since other Navies also; and whose
Armadoes, Navies, Arms, and Men, have been a Terror to other Nations; nay her
own Grand Magazins, are the very Granary from whence all His Sacred Majesty's
Kingdoms, Dominions, and Territories both in the East and West Indies, on this
side and beyond the Line, they have their whole and through supply of Shiping,
Men, Arms, Food and Raiment, and more then can be, from any Kingdom of the
Christian World.

Now if Wood and Timber should decay still, and fail, the greatest Strength of
Great Britain, her Ships, Mariners, Merchants, Fishings, and His Majesty's
Navies, and Men of War, for our Defense, and Offense would fail us, which
before, and since 88 made his Sacred Majestyes Prodecessors, Queen Elizabeth,
and her Great Council, the then Parliament, to make Laws for the preservation
of Wood and Timber, especially near any Navigable River; 1 Eliz. 15. 27 Eliz.
19. 28 Eliz. 3. 5. 23 Eliz. 5. All which Laws, and others, for the Preservation
of Wood and Timber are still in force, but not duly Executed; also King James
His Sacred Majesty's Grandfather, and Prince Henry, for the Preservation of
Wood and Timber in this Island, did in the 9th Year of His Reign, Grant His
Letters Pattents of Privilege unto Simon Sturtevant Esquire for 31 years, for the
making of Iron with Pit-cole and Sea-cole for the preservation of Wood and
Timber of Great Britain so greatly then consumed by Iron works; This Invention
was by King James's command to be at large put in Print, which Book did contain
near a quire of paper in quarto, called, Simon Sturtevant His Mettallica. Anno
1612. May 22. Printed by George Eld, Cum Privilegio.

After Simon Sturtevant could not perform his making of Iron with Pit-cole or
Sea-cole, according unto his Engagement, King James, and Prince Henry, caused
him to render up his Pattent, and a new Pattent was Granted unto John Rovenson
Esquire who also was Enjoined to write a Book of his Inventions, called, Rovenson's
Mettallica. Printed for Thomas Thorp, Cum Privilegio: May 15. An. 1613.

After John Rovenson Esquire had often failed with his Inventions, and great
undertakings, Gombleton Esquire a Servant of Queen Ann's, undertook (by Pattent) to
perform the Invention of making of Iron with Pit-cole, and Sea-cole; but he
being as confident of his Invention as others, did Erect his works at Lambeth,
which the Author viewed; and Gumbleton failing, the Learned, and Ingenious
Doctor Jorden of Baths, the Authors Acquaintance, and sundry others obtained
pattents for the making of Iron, and melting of Mines with Pit-cole and
Sea-cole, for the preservation of Wood and Timber all which Inventions and
endeavors to Effect and Perfect the said Works, have been by many heretofore
well known, to have worthily attempted the said Invention, though with
fruitless success.

Having seen many of their failings, I held it my Duty to endeavor, if it were
possible to Effect and Perfect so laudable, and beneficial, and also so much
desired Inventions, as the making of Iron into cast Works and Bars; and also
the Melting, Extracting, Refining and Reducing all sorts of Mines, Minerals and
Metals, with Pit-cole, Sea-cole Peat and Turf, for the preservation of wood and
timber, so much exhausted by Iron Works of late.

Having former knowledge and delight in Iron Works of my Fathers, when I was
but a Youth; afterward at 20 years Old, was I fetched from Oxford, then of
Bayliol College, Anno 1619, to look and manage 3 Iron Works of my Fathers, 1
Furnace, and 2 Forges, in the Chase of Pensnet in Worcestershire, but Wood and
Charcole, growing then scant, and Pit-coles, in great quantities abounding near
the Furnace, did induce me to alter my Furnace, and to attempt by my new
Invention, the making of Iron with Pit-cole, assuring my self in my Invention,
the loss to me could not be greater then others, nor so great, although my
success should prove fruitless; But I found such success at first trial
animated me, for at my trial or blast, I made Iron to profit with Pit-cole, and
found Facere est addere Inventioni.

After I had made a second blast and trial, the fesibility of making Iron with
Pit-cole and Sea-cole, I found by my new Invention, the quality to be good and
profitable, but the quantity did not exceed above 3 Tuns per week: After I had
brought my Invention unto some perfection, and profitable, doubted not in the
future to have advanced my Invention, to make quantity also.

Immediately after my second trial, I wrote unto my Father what I had done, and
withal, desired him to obtain a Pattent for it from King James of Blessed
Memory; the Answer to which Letter I shall insert, only to show the forwardness
of King James, in this his much animating the Inventor, as he did both Simon
Sturtevant, John Rovenson, Doctor Iordaine and others; The Letter follows;

Son Dudley,
The Kings Majesty being at New Market, I sent Parkes thither on Saturday to
some Friends of mine, to move the Kings Majesty for my Pattent, which he coming
on Sunday Morning, in the Afternoon His Majesty sent a Warrant to Master
Attorney to dispatch my Pattent, for the which I am infinitely bound unto His
Majesty, that it pleased Him of His Great Grace and Favor to dispatch it so
soon; I have been this night with Master Attorney, who will make have for me;
God Bless you, and Commend me unto all my Friends:

Your Loving Father, Edward Dudley.
March 10. 1629.

This Richard Parkes, a Parks-house Esquire in the Letter before mentioned, was the
Authors Brother in Law, which did about 1 year after the Pattent was granted,
carry for the Author much good Merchantable Iron unto the Tower, by King
James's command to be tried by all Artists, and they did very well approve of
the Iron, and the said Parkshouse had a fowling Gun there made of Pit-cole
Iron, with his name gilt upon the Gun, which Gun was taken from him by Colonel
Levison Governor of Dudley Castle, and never restored.

The said Richard Parkshouse's son my Nephew, Edward Parkshouse, the 5th. of
January 1645. pressed me much to put Pen unto Paper, to show what I have done
in the invention of making of Iron with Pitcoale and Seacoal, not unknown unto
this Country, and to my brother Folliott, Esquire and my Nephew Parkshouse Esquire and
to my Kinsman Master Francis Dingley, to whom I intend to leave the Secrets of
my Inventions, notwithstanding all my sad sufferings from time to time this
forty Years in the inventions, my Sufferings in the War, and my Estate sold for
my Loyalty; and also my sad sufferings and obstructions since his Sacred
Majesty's happy Restoration many ways; and also upon sundry and many
references, at the Authors very great charge, pains, and time spent of Four
years in his aged days, for the general good, by his inventions for the
preservation of Great Brittain's Wood and Timber.

Now let me show some Reasons that induced me to undertake these Inventions,
after the many failings of others, well knowing that within Ten miles of Dudley
Castle there to be near 20000. Smiths of all sorts, and many Iron works at that
time, within that Circle decayed for want of Wood (yet formerly a mighty
Woodland Country.)

Secondly, The Lord Dudley's Woods and Works decayed, but Pitcoal and Iron,
Stone or Mines abounding, upon his Lands, but of little Use.

Thirdly, Because most of the Coale-Mines in these parts, as well as upon the
Lord Dudley's lands, are Coals, Ten, Eleven, and Twelve yards thick; the top or
the uppermost Cole, or vein, gotten upon the superficies of this Globe or
Earth, in open works.

Fourthly, Under this great thickness of Coal, is very many sorts of Iron,
Stone Mines, in the Earth Clay or Stone earth, like bats, in all four yards
thick; also under these Iron mines is several yards thick of Coals, but of
these in an other place more convenient.

Fifthly, Knowing that when the Colliers are forced to sinck Pits for getting
of ten yards thick or more, that be gotten under the ground, being small are of
little or of no use in that inland Country nor is it worth the drawing out of
the Pits, unless it might be made use of by making of Iron therewith into cast
works or Bars.

Sixthly, Then knowing that if there could be any use made of the smal-coale
that are of little Use, then would they be drawn out of the Pits, which coals
produces often times great prejudice unto the Owners of the works and the work
it self, and also unto the Colliers, who casting of the smalcoles together,
which compelling necessity enforcing the Colliers so to do, for two causes; one
is to raise them to cut down the ten yards thickness of coals drawing only
the bigger sort of cole, not regarding the lesser or small cole, which will
bring no money; saying, He that lives longest let him fetch fire further:
Next, These Colliers must cast these coals, and sleck or dross out of their
ways, which sulphurious small cole and crowded moist sleck heat naturally, and
kindles in the middle of those great heaps; often falls the cole-works on Fire,
and flaming out of the Pits, and continue burning like Aetna in Cicily, or
Hecla in the Indies.

Yet when these loose Sulphurious composts of cole and sleck, being consumed in
process of time, the Fire decays, yet notwithstanding the Fire has continued
in some Pits many years; yet colliers have gotten coals again, in those same
Pits, the Fire not penitrating the solid and firm wall of coals, because
Pabulum ignis est Aer, the Air could not penetrate, but pass by it in the
loose cole and sleck; for coming into those pits afterward, I have beheld the
very blows of Pikes or tools that got the coals there formerly. Also from these
Sulphurious heaps, mixed with Iron, Stone (for out of many of the same pits is
gotten much Iron, Stone, or Mines; the Fires heating vast quantities of Water,
passing through these Soughs or Adits, becomes as hot as the Bath at Bathe, and
more healing and sovereign even for old Ulcers and Sores; but because many of
these Baths do proceed not only from common Sulphur and vitriol of Mars, but
also from Solars sulphur in this Iron stone, I hope, Filii Artis, will excuse
my digesion from the making of Iron with Pitcole, Seacole, Peat or Turff, and
the melting of mines and metals and refining of the same, with the like fuel:
the first Pattent being granted by King James for 31. Years in the 19th year of
his Reign upon just and true information, that the Author had the year before
made many Tuns of Iron with Pitcole at a Furnace or Iron-work, in the Chase of
Pensnet, in the County of Worcester, besides cast Iron Works of sundry sorts
with Pitcoles; and also at two Forges or Iron Mills, called, Cradly Forges,
fined the said Iron into Merchantable good Bar Iron: But the year following,
the grant or Pattent for making of Iron with Pitcole or Seacole, There was so
great a Flood, by rain, to this day, called the great May-day-Flood, that it
not only ruinated the Authors Iron works, and inventions, but also many other
men's Iron works and inventions; but also many other men's Iron works: and at a
market Town called Sturbridge in Commitate Wigorae, although the Author sent
with speed to preserve the people from drowning; one resolute man was carried
from the Bridge there in the day time, and the nether part of the Town was so
deep in Water that the people had much ado to preserve their lives in the
uppermost rooms in their Houses.

My Iron works and inventions thus demolished, to the joy of many Iron masters,
whose works escaped the Flood and who had often disparaged the Authors
Inventions, because the Author sold good Iron cheaper then they could afford
it; and which induced many of the Iron masters to complain unto King James,
averring, that the Iron was not Merchantable; As soon as the Author had
repaired his works and inventions (to his no small charge) they so far
prevailed with King James, that the Author was commanded with all speed
possible, to send all sorts of Bar Iron up to the Tower of London, fit for
making of Muskets, Carbines and Iron for great Bolts, fit for Shipping, which
Iron being so tried by Artists and Smiths, that the Iron masters and
Iron-mongers were all silenced until 21th. of King James: At the then
Parliament, all Monopolies were made Null, and diverse of the Iron-masters
endeavoring to bring the invention of making Iron with Pitcole, Seacole, Peat
and Turff, within the compass of a Monopoly; but the Lord Dudley and the
Author did prevail; yet the Pattent was limited to continue but Fourteen
years; after which Act the Author went on with his invention cheerfully, and
made annually great store of Iron, good and merchantable, and sold it unto
diverse men yet living at Twelve pounds per Tun; I also made all sorts of cast
Iron Wares, as Brewing-Cysterns, Pots, Morters, and better and cheaper than any
yet were made in these Nations, with Charcoles; Some of which are extant to be
seen by any man (at the Authors House in the City of Worcester) that desire to
be satisfied of the truth in the Invention.

Afterward, The Author was outed of his works and inventions before mentioned
by the Iron-masters and others wrongfully, over long to relate: yet being
unwilling his Inventions (having undergone much charge and pains therein)
should fall to the ground, and be buried in him, made him to set forward his
Invention again, at a Furnace called, Himly Furnace in the County of Stafford,
where he made much Iron with Pit-cole, but wanting a Forge to make it into
bars, was constrained for want of Stock to sell the Pig-Iron unto the Charcole
Iron-masters, who did him much prejudice, not only in detaining his stock, but
also disparaging the Iron; Himley Furnace being Rented out unto Charcole
Iron-Masters.

The Author Erected a new large Furnace on purpose, 27 foot square, all of
stone for his new invention, at a place called, Hasco Bridge, in the Parish of
Sedgley, and County of Stafford; the Bellows of which Furnace were larger then
ordinary Bellows are, in which work he made 7 Tuns of Iron per week, the
greatest quantity of Pit-cole-Iron that ever yet was made in Great Britain;
near which Furnace, the Author discovered many new Cole-mines 10 yards thick,
and Iron-Mine under it, according to other Cole-works; which Cole-works being
brought unto perfection, the Author was by force thrown out of them, and the
Fellows of his new Furnace and Invention, by riotous persons cut in pieces, to
his no small prejudice, and loss of his Invention, of making of Iron with
Pit-cole, Sea-cole, etc. So that being with Law-Suites, and Riots, wearied and
disabled to prosecute his Art and Invention at present, even until the first
Pattent was extinct: Notwithstanding the Author his sad Sufferings,
Imprisonments wrongfully for several thousand pound in the Counter in London,
yet did obtain a new Pattent, dated the 2d of May, Anno 14. Caroli Primi of
ever Blessed Memory, not only for the making of Iron into cast-works, and bars,
but also for the Melting, Extracting, Refining and Reducing of all Mines,
Minerals and Metals, with Pit-cole, Sea-cole, Peat, and Turf, for the
preservation of Wood and Timber of this Island; into which Pattent, the Author,
for the better support and management of his Invention, so much opposed
formerly at the Court, at the Parliament, and at the Law, took in David Ramsey
Esquire, Resident at the Court; Sir George Horsey at the Parliament; Roger
Foulke Esquire, a Counselor of the Temple, and an Ingenious Man; and also an
Iron Master, my Neighbor, and one who did well know my former Sufferings, and
what I had done in the Invention of making of Iron with Pit-cole, etc.

All which said Patentees Articled the 11th of June following, they Grant not
only to pay the Author all the charges of passing the Pattent laid down by
him, but also to lay in for a common and joyntstock each man of the four, one
hundred pounds, and so from time to time, what more stock any three of the
Pattentees should think fit to be laid in for the making of Iron into cast
works and bars, and likewise for the Melting, Extracting, Refining and Reducing
of all Mines, Minerals, and Metals, with Pit-cole, Sea-cole, Peat and Turf,
which Articles are yet extant.

Now let me without offense insert the opposition we all had, by means of
powerful Iron-Masters, with Sir Philibeard Vernat, a Dutch Man, and Captain
Whitmore, who pretended much unto his late Sacred Majesty, but performed not
their undertaking, which caused the Author, and his Partners thus to Petition.

To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty: The Humble Petition of Sir George Horsey
Knight; David Ramsey, Roger Foulke, and Dud Dudley, Esquires:
Humbly Shows,
That whereas Your Petitioners, being called before the Right Honorable, the
Lord Keeper by Your Majesty's Appointment, touching the making of Iron with
Pit-cole, Sea-cole, Peat and Turf, for which they have Your Majesty's Pattent;
and seeing that Sir Philibeard Vernat, and Captain Whitmore, who are not
Inventors, have obtained a Pattent also for the same; yet before their Pattent
Granted, Sir Philibeard was ordered at Council Board, according to his Great
Undertaking, to perfect his Great Undertaking and Invention within Two Years,
and there has been near Three Years passed, and yet have made little or no
Iron; still he Opposes Your Petitioners, and does neither benefit himself, but
hinders Your Majesty, and the Kingdom.

The reference unto the Petition follows; At the Court at Greenwith, May 20.
1638. His Majesty is pleased to refer this Petition to Master Attorney, and
Master Solicitor General, to call the Petioners before them, and to compose the
differences between them; (if they can) or otherwise, to certify his Majesty
their opinions therein:


Sir Sidney Mountegue was then Master of the Requests.

But Sir Philibeard Vernat, and Captain Whitmore never appeared any more for
their Invention.

Not long after the Wars came on, and caused my partners to desist, since which
they are all dead, but the Author, and his Estate (for his Loyalty unto his
late Sacred Majesty) and Master, as by the Additional Act of Parliament may
appear) was totally sold.

Yet nevertheless, I still endeavored not to bury my Tallent, took in two
Partners into my Inventions, Walter Stevens of Bristow Linen Draper, and John
Ston of the same City Merchant, after the Author had begun to Erect a new work
for the Inventions aforesaid, near Bristow, Anno 51. and there we three
Partners had in stock near 700l. but they not only cunningly drew me into Bond,
entered upon my Stock and Work, unto this day detained it, but also did unjusty
enter Staple Actions in Bristow of great value against me, because I was of the
Kings Party; unto the great prejudice of my Inventions and Proceedings, my
Pattent being then almost extinct; for which, and my Stock, am I forced to Sue
them in Chancery.

In the interim of my proceedings, Cromwell, and the then Parliament, granted a
Pattent, and an Act of Parliament unto Captain Buck of Hampton Road, for the
making of Iron with Pit-cole and Sea-cole; Cromwell, and many of his Officers
were Partners, as Major Wildman and others; many Doctors of Physic, and
Merchants, who set up diverse and sundry Works, and Furnaces at a vast charge,
in the Forest of Dean, and after they had spent much in their Invention and
Experiments, which was done in spacious Wind-Furnaces, and also in Potts of
Glass-house Clay; and failing afterward, got unto them an Ingenious
Glass-Maker, Master Edward Dagney an Italian then living in Bristow, who after
had made many Potts, for that purpose went with them into the Forest of Dean,
and built for the said Captain Buck and his Partners, a new Furnance, and made
therein many and sundry Experiments and Trials for the making of Iron with
Pit-cole and Sea-cole, etc. But he failing, and his Potts being all broken, he
did return to Bristow frusrate of his Expectation; but further promising to
come again, and make more Experiments; at which time Master John Williams,
Master Dagneys, Master of the Glass-House was then drawn in to be a Partner for
300l. deposited, and most of it spent, the said Williams and Dagney hearing
that the Author had knowledge in the making of Iron with Pit-cole, Sea-cole,
etc. they from Cap. Buck, and the other Partners importuned the Author, who was
at that time in great danger by the Parliament, (being a Colonel of the Kings
Party) to go along with them into the Forest of Dean, which at that time durst
not deny; Coming thither, I observed their manner of working, and found it
impossible, that the said Edward Dagney by his Invention should make any Iron
with Pit-cole or Sea-cole, in Pots to profit: I continued with them till all
their Potts and Inventions failed; at every Dinner and Supper, Captain Buck,
Captain Robins, Doctor Ivy, Doctor Fowler and others, would ask the Author
why he was so confident that Iron in quantity could not be made by their new
Inventions? I found it a difficult thing to dissuade the Partners from their
way, so confident were they to perform the making of Iron with Pit-cole or
Sea-cole to profit; that they desired me to come again a second time into the
Forest to see it Effected: But at that time, I saw their failings also.

Yet nevertheless Captain Buck, and his Partners Erected new Works at the City
of Bristow, in which they did fail as much as in their former Inventions; but
Major Wildman, more barbarous to me then a Wildman, (although a Minister bought
the Authors Estate, near 200l. per Annum, intending to compel from the Author
his Inventions of making of Iron with Pit-cole; but afterward passed my Estate
unto two Barbarous Brokers of London, that pulled down the Authors two
Mantion-Houses; sold 500 Timber Trees off his Land, and to this day are his
Houses unrepaired.

Anno 1655. Captain Buck and his Partners wearied of their Invention,
desisting, An. 1656. Captain John Copley from Cromwell obtained another Pattent
for the making of Iron with Pit-cole and Sea-cole; He and his Partners set up
their Works, at the Cole-Works near Bristow, and endeavored by Engeneers
assistance to get his Bellows to be blown, at, or near the Pits of Cole, with
which Engines the Work could not be performed: But the Author coming to see the
said Works, and after many Discourses with Captain Copley, his former
Acquaintance, told him plainly, if his Bellows could have been blown by those
Engines, yet I feared he could not make Iron with Pit-cole or Sea-cole; he
seemed discontented, whereupon, and without those Engines I made his Bellows to
be blown feisibly, as by the Note under his hand appears (the first Note)
follows;

1656. December 30.
Memorandum, The day and year above-written, I John Copley of London, Gent. Do
acknowledge, that after the Expense of diverse Hundred Pounds to Engineers, for
the making of my Bellows to blow, for the making of Iron with Pit-cole or
Sea-cole near Bristow, and near the Forest of Kings-wood; that Dud Dudley Esquire
did perform the blowing of the said Bellows at the Works or Pits abovesaid, a
very feisible and plausible way, that one man may blow them with pleasure the
space of an hour or two; And this I do acknowledge to be performed with a very
small charge, and without any money paid to him for the same Invention:

John Copley.


Captain John Copley thus failing in his Inventions, An. 1657. he went into
Ireland, and all men now desisting from the Inventions of making of Iron with
Pit-cole and Sea-cole: The Author, Anno 1660. being 61. years of Age, and moved
with pity, and seeing no man able to perform the Mastery of making of Iron
with Pit-cole or Sea-cole, immediately upon his Sacred Majesty's happy
Restoration, the same day he Landed, Petitioned that he might be restored to
his place, and his Pattent obstructed, revived for the making of Iron with
Pit-cole, Sea-cole, Peat and Turf, into cast Works and Bars, and for the
Melting, Extracting, Refining and Reducing of all Mines, Metals and Minerals,
with Pit-cole, Sea-cole, Peat and Turf; which said Laudable Invention, the
Author was and is unwilling should fall to the ground and dye with him, neither
is the Mystery, or Mastery of the Invention Effected and Perfected by any man
known unto the Author, as yet, either in England, Scotland or Wales; all which
three abound with Pit-cole or Sea-cole, and do overmuch furnish other Kingdoms
many with Pit-cole and Sea-cole, when they might make far better use of it
themselves, especially Scotland and Wales, both for the making of Iron into
cast Works and Bars; and also for the making of Steel, and Melting, Extracting
and Refining of Lead, Tin, Iron, Gold, Copper, Quicksilver, and Silver, with
Pit-cole and Sea-cole.

I shall not trouble you with the Petition, or my reasons and desires that were
annexed unto it, for the making of Iron, and Melting of Mines, etc. with
Pit-cole, etc. they are over long to relate, only the Reference to them is
thus; (after my first Petition was lost, I Petitioned again.)

At the Court at Whiteh. 22. of June 1663.
His Majesty is graciously pleased to refer the consideration of this Petition
to Master Attorney, and Solicitor General, or to either of them, together with
the Petitioners Reasons and Desires hereunto annexed; and they, or either of
them, are to inform, and certify His Majesty, what they, or either of them in
their Judgments respectively conceive fit for His Majesty to do concerning the
Petitioners Humble Request, and then His Majesty will declare his further
pleasure.

Robert Mason, Master of Requests.

After Master Attorney, and Solicitor General would do nothing upon the
Reference; the Author Petitioned His Sacred Majesty sitting at the
Council Board, for the Renewing of his Pattent, for making of Iron, and
Melting, of Mines with Pit-cole, Sea-cole often obstructed; the reference to
that Petition follows.

At the Court at Whitehall, July 25. 1660.

Upon reading of a Petition this day at the Board, being the same in terminis
with this above-written, which His Majesty was graciously pleased by a
Reference under the hand of Doctor Mason, one of the Masters of the Requests,
to refer to the consideration of Master Attorney, and Master Solicitor General,
together with the Petitioners Reasons and Desires thereunto annexed, to the
Consideration of the Lords, and others Commissioners for the Treasury, who upon
Examination of the particulars, are to give such order thereupon, as they shall
find most proper for His Majesty's Service.

Sir Edward Walker was Clark to the Council, and Garter King at Arms.

The Author, during the Lords Commissioners their time, could get no Order upon
his Reference; But his Petition was left, with the now Right Honorable, the
Lord Treasurer* to take or grant further order therein, but the Author has
gotten hitherto no order.

Therefore compelling necessity does constrain (having prosecuted his Petition
hitherto) him to desist from his Inventions, in which he has taken more pains,
care and charge, then any man, to perfect his new Invention in these Kingdoms.

Although the Author has not as yet so fully perfected or raised his invention
to the quantity of Charcole Iron Furnances, yet the Authors quantity being but
seven Tuns per week at the most, together with the quality of his Iron made
with Pit-cole and Sea-cole, has the most eminent Triplicity of Iron of all
that can be desired in any new Invention.

1. More Sufficient. 2. More Cheap. 3. More Excellent.
Upon which triplicity, the Author might enlarge himself, but shall not be
tedious, only give me leave to mention that there be three sorts of Cast Iron;

1. The first sort is Gray Iron.

2. The second sort is called Motley Iron, of which one part of the Sowes or
Piggs is gray, the other part is white intermixed.

3. The third sort is called white Iron, this is almost as white as
Bell-Mettle, but in the Furnace is least fined, and the most Terrestrial; of
the three, the Motley Iron is somewhat more fined, but the Gray Iron,

1. Is most fined, and more sufficient to make Bar-Iron with, and tough Iron to
make Ordnance, or any Cast-Vessels, being it is more fined in the Furnace, and
more malliable and tough, then the other two sorts before mentioned; and of
this sort, is the Iron made with Pit-cole, Sea-cole for the most part, and
therefore more sufficiently to be preferred.

2. More cheaper Iron there cannot be made, for the Author did fell pigg or
cast Iron made with Pit-cole at four pounds per Tun, many Tuns in the twentieth
year of King James, with good profit; of late, Charcole Pig-iron has been sold
at six pounds per Tun, yea at seven pounds per Tun has much been sold of late
years.

Also the Author did sell Bar-iron, Good and Merchantable, at twelve pounds per
Tun, and under, but since Bar-iron has been sold for the most part ever since
at 15l. 16l. 17l. and 18l. per Tun, by Charcole Iron-Masters.

3. More Excellent for diverse Reasons, and principally, being the means
whereby the Wood and Timber of this Island almost exhausted, may be timely
preserved yet, and vegetate and grow again unto his former wonted cheapness,
for the maintenance of Navigation, which is the greatest Strength of Great
Britain, whose Defense and Offense, for all the Territories that belong unto
it, next under God and his Vicegerent, our Sacred Majesty's Cares, consists
most of Shiping, Men of War, Experienced Mariners, Ordnances, Ammunition, and
Stores, the Ordnance made therewith will be more gray and tough, therefore more
serviceable at Sea and Land, and the Bar-iron will wall, rivet, and hold better
then most commonly Charcole Iron.

2. More Excellent, not only in respect the Invention of making of Iron with
Pit-cole and Sea-cole will preserve Wood and Timber of Great Britain so
greatly consumed by Iron-Works of late.

But also in respect, this my Invention will preserve many Millions of Tuns of
Small-cole in Great Britain, which will be lost in time to come, as formerly
they were, for within ten miles of Dudley Castle, is annually consumed four or
five thousand Tuns at least of small Pit-cole, and have been so consumed time
out of mind under ground, fit to have made Pit-iron with; which coals are and
(unless Iron be made therewith) will be for ever totally and annually lost; if
four or five thousand Tun of Cole be consumed within ten miles compass, what
Coals is thus consumed in all England, Scotland, and Wales? which is no good
Husbandry for Great Britain, hinc ille lacrime, that our Timber is exhausted.

Must I be still opposed, and never enjoy my Inventions, nor Great Britain the
Benefit?

Must my Pattent be obstructed in Peace, as it was extinct by the Wars? And
must not my Pattent be Revived for the making of Iron with Pit-cole, Sea-cole,
Peat, and Turf, but find Enemies still to oppose it? How many thousand Tuns of
Iron might have been made but since my first Invention, An. Jacob. 18th by my
means with Pit-cole, and Sea-cole (lost) if I had not had Enemies; and had not
wood and timber been preserved? But most men will aver, that it does concern
the Author to Demonstrate the great loss mentioned formerly of Pit-cole
annually;

It is thus,

There is at least within ten miles of the Castle of Dudley, twelve or fourteen
Cole-Works, some in Worcester, and some of them in Staffordshire (now in work,
and twice as many in that Circute not in work) each of which Works get two
thousand Tun of Cole yearly, some get three, four or five thousand Tun of Coals
yearly: and the uppermost or top measures of Coals are ten, eleven, and some
twelve yards thick; the Coals Ascending, Basseting, or as the Colliers term it,
Cropping up even unto the superfices of the Earth, and there the Colliers
formerly got the Coals; but where the Coals is deep and but little Earth upon
the measures of Coals, there the Colliers rid off the Earth, and dig the Coals
under their feet; these Works are called Foot-rids.

But of these Works there are now but few, some of these small Coals in these
open Works, the poor people did carry away, but paid nothing for them in former
times, termed the Brain Carriages.

But now the Colliers working more in the deep of these Works, they are
constrained to sink Pits, some of which Pits are from eight unto twenty yards
deep, and some are near twenty fathom deep, which fathom contains two yards.

In these Pits, after you have made or hit the uppermost measures of Cole, and
sink or dug through them, the Colliers getting the nethermost part of the
Coals first, about two yards in height or more, and when they have wrought the
Crutes or Staules, (as some Colliers call them) as broad and as far in under
the ground, as they think fit, they throw the small Coals (fit to make Iron)
out of their way on heaps to raise them up so high, to stand upon, that they
may, with the working of their Picks or Maundrills over their heads, and at the
one end of the Coals so far in as their Tool will permit, and so high as their
working comes unto a parting in the measure of Cole, the which Coals, to the
parting by his self clogging and pondrous weight, fall often many Tuns of
coals, many yards high down at once; with which fall and the Colliers breaking
of the said Cole, many small coals do so abound of no use, and fit for no sale;
that in getting of twenty thousand Tun of Pit-cole, one half near is small
cole, not drawn out of the Pits, but destroyed, left, and lost; which small
cole, with the sleck thrown moist together, (heat the sooner) and by means of
its sulphurousness fire in the Pits, to no small prejudice unto the Owners of
the Works, and the Workmen, besides Great Britains Loss; which Cole might have
made many thousand Tuns of Iron, and also have preserved this Islands Woods and
Timber: I might here give you the names, and partly the nature of every
measure, parting of each cole lying on upon each other; the three uppermost
measures are called the white measures for his white Arcenical, Salsuginos and
Sulphurious substance which is in that Cole; the next measure, is the
shoulder-cole, the toe-cole, the foot-cole, the yard-cole, the sliper-cole, the
sawyer-cole, and the frisly cole, these last three coals are the best for the
making of Iron, yet other coals may be made use of.

I might give you other names of coals, but desire not prolixity, yet must I
tell you of a supernumerary number of Smiths within ten miles of these
Cole-Works near twenty thousand; yet God of his Infinite goodness (if we will
but take notice of his goodness unto this Nation) has made this Country a very
Granaris for the supplying these Men with Iron, Cole, and Lime made with cole,
which has much supplied these men with Corn also of late, and from these men,
a great part not only of this Island, but also of his Majesty's other Kingdoms
and Territories with Iron wares have their supply, and wood in these parts
almost exhausted, although it were of late a mighty wood-land Country.

Now if the Coals and Iron-stone so abounding were made right use of, we need
not want Iron as we do; for very many measures of iron-stone are placed
together under the great ten yards thickness of cole, and upon another
thickness of coals two yards thick, not yet mentioned, called the bottom-cole,
or the heathen cole, as if God had decreed the time when, and how these Smiths
should be supplied, and this Island also with Iron, and most especially, that
this cole and iron-stone, should give the first, and just occasion for the
invention of the making of iron with pit-cole, no place being so fit for the
invention to be perfected in, then this Country, for the general good; whose
Woods did formerly abound in Forests, Chases, Parks and Woods, but exhausted
in these parts.

Now for the names of the iron-stone, the first measure is called the
Black-row-graines, lying in very hard and black Earth.

The second measure is the Dun-row-graines, lying in dun earth or clay.

The third measure is called the white row grains, lying in very white Earth or
Clay, under these three measure are sundry other measures, and are called,
first, the Rider Stone; secondly, the Cloud Stone; thirdly, the bottom Stone;
fourthly, the Cannock or Cannotstone, which last may well be so caled (although
all the other measures be very good) yet this Stone is so Sulphurous and
Terrestrial, not fit to make Iron; because the Iron thereof made is very
Redshare, which is that if a workman should Draw or Forge out a Share mould fit
for a Plough in that red heat, it would crack and not be fit for the Use of the
Husbandmans Plough or Share. I may take occasion here to speak of the Nature of
Coldshare Iron, which is so brittle if made of the grain Oar or Iron stone
would be almost as brittle as some Regulus Antimony made with Iron for which
one small blow over an Anvil you may break the biggest Bar that is, if it be
perfect coldshare Iron; nay the Plough-man often breaks his Share point off if
it be made of coldshare Iron. But perfect tough malliable Iron will not break
feisibly in hot-heat or cold, as coldshare will, or red hot as Sulphurious
veneriated redshare Iron will; but yet tough enough when it is cold: All which
aforesaid qualities of Iron the Author very well knows how to mend their
Natures, by finning or setting the finery, less transhaw more borrow which are
terms of art, and by altering and pitching the works, and plates, the fore
spirit-plat, the tuiron, bottom, back and breast or fore-plate, by the
altering of which much may be done, if the work be set transhaw and transiring
from the blast, the Iron is more coldshare less Fined, more to the Masters
profit; less profitable to him that makes it into manufactorage, and less
profitable to him that uses it; but the Iron made in a Burrow work, becomes
more tough and serviceable; yet the nature of all Iron stone, is to be
considered, both in the Furnace, and in the finery, that the Sulphurious
Arceniall and Veneriating qualities, which are oftentimes in Iron stone be made
to separate, in both the works from the fixed and fixing bodies of Iron, whose
fiery quality is such, that he will sooner self calfine than separate from any
Sulphurious veneriated quality.

No man, I hope, need to be offended at any terms of Art, it has been always
lawful for Authors of new Arts and Inventions, at their own pleasures, to
give name to their new Inventions and Arts, every Tradesman is allowed it in
his mystery.

But the Author has as much as he could avoided the terms of Art that Simon
Sturtenant and others have used, which are very many: only the Author has
given you the common names and terms (for the most part) which are so common
among Forge-men and Founders, as is nothing more common; but kept secret
amongst them and a mystery not yet known, but unto very few Owners of
Iron-works; nay I have not yet troubled your memory with any of the Founder
terms, of but making his harth as the Timpe stones, the Wind-wall stones, the
Fuiron stones, the Botton-stone, the Back-stones and the Boshes, in the making
and picking of which harth, is much of the Mystery.

I must confess, there is given unto some Philosophers, and filii Artis, some
few terms how the Sulphurious Arsenicall, Bituminos, Antimoniall, Venerial, and
other poisonous qualities, either in the Pit-cole, sea-cole, or the Iron-stone,
may be in part at the Furnace separated, and not permitted to incorporate in
the Iron, and if it be incorporated, yet by Fining at the Forge, to fetch it
out; also to melt extract, refine, and reduce all mines metals and minerals,
unto their species with Pit-cole, Sea-cole, Peat, and Turff, by ways not yet
in use, which the Author will make known, hereafter, if God permit him health,
time and space, or leave his knowledge unto his Brother Aylmore Folliott, Esquire
his Nephew Parkshouse, Esquire; and to his Kinsman Master Francis Dingley, to
declare unto this latter Age of the World, in which God is pleased to manifest
many of his Secrets; Qui vult secreta scire, secreta secret sciat custodire.

Having suffered much, ever since the Year 1618. unto this present, for the
general good, as by the preceding discourse appears for the making of Iron with
Pitcole, Seacole, Peat, and Turff; for the preservation of Wood and Timber of
Great Britain so much exhausted, for future prevention of which,

Is first, to permit the Author to enjoy His Pattent, and fully to perfect his
said Inventions (obstructed in the Reign both of King James and in the Reign of
his Sacred Majesty King Charles the First, of ever Blessed Memory; and lately
since his most Sacred Majesty's happy Restoration) who desires nothing but to
be animated with the Patent revived according unto the Statute of 21. Jacob.
for Inventors.

Secondly, to empower the Author or any other Agents to take care that no
Pitcole, or Seacole be any ways wilfully destroyed under ground.

Thirdly, To put all former good Laws in Execution, and to make others for the
preservation of Wood and Timber of these Nations, especially near Navigagable
River or Seas.

Fourthly, Seeing there goes out of England, Scotland and Wales, many thousand
Tuns Annually of Pitcole and Sea-coles to furnish France, and also the Smiths
thereof Spain, Portugal and Flanders, and especially the Smiths thereof; the
Low Countries and the Smiths thereof, besides the Hollanders carries great
quanties of our Coals unto Foreigne parts, without which those Countries cannot
subsist: Now the Authors desire, is, that where there is a convenience of Iron
stone or Ewre, the Coals may not be transported (paying His Sacred Majesty's
Duty) until Order from His Majesty or his Privy Council.

Fifthly, That no Pitcole be Exported, seeing that Wood fuel and Timber is
decayed for Buildings, and instead thereof Brickmaking (formerly spending Wood,
but now coals) is much in use; also is Glass now made with cole, but formerly
were there many Thousand Loads of Wood fuel spent in the making thereof, and
the Glass Invention with Pitcole was first effected near the Authors Dwelling.

Sixthly, Making of Steel, Brewings, making of Coppras, Alum, Salt, casting of
Brass and Copper, Dyings, and many other Works were not many years since done
altogether with the Fuel of Wood and Charcole; instead whereof, Pitcole, and
Seacole is now used as Effectually, and to a far better Use and Purpose;
besides the preservation of Wood and Timber.

Seventhly, That which is somewhat nearer the mark and Invention; the
Blacksmith forged all his Iron with Charcole, and in some places where they are
cheap, they continue this course still, but small Pitcole and Seacole, and also
Peat and Turff has and does serve the turn as well and sufficiently as
Charcole.

Eighthly, That which is nearest, and my perfect Invention, and near the
Authors Dwelling, called Greens-lodge, there are four Forges, namely,
Greens-forge, Swin-forge, Heath-forge, and Cradley-forge.

Which Four Forges have Barred all or most part of their Iron with Pitcole ever
since the Authors first Invention, 1618. which has preserved much Wood: In
these Four, besides many other Forges do the like; yet the Author has had no
benefit thereby to this present.

Yet by this Barring of Iron with Pit-cole 30000 loads of Wood and more have
been preserved for the general good, which otherwise must have been had and
consumed.

Simon Sturtevant, in his Mettallica, in the Epistle to the Reader, says, That
there was then Anno 12. Jacobi in England, Scotland, Ireland and Wales 800
Furnaces Forges, or Iron Mills making Iron with Char-cole: Now we may suppose
at least 300 of these to be Furnaces, and 500 to be Forges; and each Furnace
making fifteen Tun per week of Pig or cast Iron, and work or blow but Forty
weeks per Annum, but some Furnaces make Twenty Tuns of Pig Iron per Week, and
two Loads of Charcole or there about, go to the making of a Tun of Pig Iron:
And two Loads (or two cords) of Wood, at the least, go to the making of a load
of Charcole.

Now what Loads of Wood or Char-cole is spent in great Britain and Ireland
Annually? but in one Furnace, that makes Fifteen Tun per Week of Pig-Iron for
Forty weeks: I shall give you the Table, and leave you to judge of the rest of
the Furnaces.

Charcole, Wood 15. Tun per week spends of 30 loads 60 loads Per Annum 40 weeks
spends 1200 2400 loads

Also for one Forge that make Three Tuns of Bar Iron weekly for Fifty weeks,
but some Forges make double my Proportion, and spend to Fine and Bar out each
Tun three Loads of Coals: To each Tun.

Charcole Wood 3 Tun per week 9 Loads 18 loads Per Annum 450 loads 900 loads

By these Examples, may you see, the vast quanties of Charcole, or Wood, that
the 300 Furnacis spend weekly, or yearly, and the 500. Forges workings all the
year, spend little less then the Furnaces: It being impossible, after this
rate for great Britains or Ireland, to supply these her works with Charcole in
Fining of Iron at the Fineries, may be permitted to use Charcole, and may be
supplied with under Woods.

Let us but look back unto the making of Iron, by our Ancestors, in foot
blasts, or bloomenies, that was by men treading of the Bellows, by which way
they could make but one little lump or bloom of Iron in a day, not 100 weight,
and that not fusible, nor fined, or malliable, until it were long burned and
wrought under Hammers, and whose first slag, sinder or scorius, does contain in
it as much, or more Iron, then in that day the workman or bloomer got out,
which Slag, Scorius, or Sinder is by our Founders at Furnaces wrought again,
and found to contain much Iron and easier of Fusion than any Iron stone or Mine
of Iron whatsoever of which slag and Sinders, there is in many Countries
Millions of Tuns and Oaks growing upon them, very old and rotten.

The next invention, was to set up the Bloomeries that went by water, for the
ease of the men treading the bellows, which being bigger, and the waterwheel
causing a greater blast, did not only make a greater quantity of iron, but
also extracted more iron out of the slag or sinder, and left them more poorer
of iron then the foot-blasts, so that the Founders cannot melt them again, as
they do the foot-blast sinders to profit: Yet these Bloomeries by water (not
altogether out of use) do make in one day but two hundred pound weight of iron,
or there abouts, neither is it feisible, or malliable, but is unfined until it
be much burned, and wrought a second time in fire.

But some of the now going Furnaces with Charcole, do make two or three Tun of
Pigg or cast iron in 24 hours.

Therefore I do not wholly compute the vast quantities of charcoles and wood
spent in these voragious works, which quantity of cast iron, with pit-cole and
Sea-cole, at one Furnace I desire not, but am contented with half the
proportion, which once I attained unto before my Bellows were riotously cut,
that is one Tun in 24 hours; we need not a greater quantity, if the like
quantity were made in Furnaces in Scotland, and Wales, which abounds with
Pit-cole and Sea-cole, as well as England; and our supernumery Smiths,
Founders, and Forgemen, and other Tradesmen might be there employed, thereby to
furnish His Majesty's Plantations, as well, if not better then England, where
Coals are far cheaper then in England.

Although vast quantities of Coals do abound near the Authors dwelling, yet
twenty thousand Smiths or Naylors at the least dwelling near these parts, and
taking of Prentices, have made their Trade so bad, that many of them are ready
to starve and steal; so that it is wished there were some courses taken to mend
their Trade, employ them in other parts, or permit them, not to take so many
Prentices, all which have great occasions to use Pit-cole, and had not these
parts abounded with cole, it would have been a great deal worse with them then
it is; but of the cole there is, nor will be any want, nor of iron-stone.

The manner of the cole-veins, or measures in these parts, and also of the
measures of iron-stone, or mines, how they lie, be, or increase, some veins lie
circuler, some sami-circuler, some ovall, some works almost in a direct line,
and some works parts of a Circle; as by the Circle, it being only for a small
Example to judge the rest of the Mines by may appear.

FINIS.
LL East. L West. LLL North.
Time not permitting me to give you a Larger Mapp, conclude, etc.

A Two Gutters out of which issues Water, as hot as that at Bath. B The way
from Himley to Dudley, and from Dudley to Burmicham. C Dudley Castle. O Coals
ten yards thick. o Iron-stone four yards thick. o Coals two yards thick.
The Scale for Cole, and Stone per yard. Scale for map

By the white innermost Circle, you may conceive the Scale under to be over in
Diameter, a mile and a half. Scale for map diagram and geological map of the
coalfield around Dudley Castle


