TROILUS AND CRESSIDA, OR, TRVTH Found too Late. A TRAGEDY As it is Acted at
the Dukes Theater.

To which is Prefixed, A Preface Containing the Grounds of Criticism in Tragedy.

Written By JOHN DRYDEN Servant to his Majesty.

Rectius, Iliacum carmen deducis in actus,
Quam si proferres ignota indictaque primus,
Hor. London, Printed for Abel Swall at the Unicorn at the Westend of S. Paul's.
and Jacob Tonson at the Judges Head in Chancery lane near Fleet street, 1679.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT EARL OF Sunderland, Principal Secretary of
State, One of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
My Lord,
SInce I cannot promise you much of Poetry in my Play, it is but reasonable that
I should secure you from any part of it in my Dedication. And indeed I cannot
better distinguish the exactness of your taste from that of other men, than by
the plainness and sincerity of my Address. I must keep my Hyperboles in reserve
for men of other understandings: An hungry Appetite after praise: and a strong
digestion of it, will bear the grossnesse of that diet: But one of so critical
a judgment as your Lordship, who can set the bounds of just and proper in
every subject, would give me small encouragement for so bold an undertaking. I
more than suspect, my Lord, that you would not do common Justice to your self:
and therefore, were I to give that Character of you, which I think you truly
merit, I would make my appeal from your Lordship to the Reader, and would
justify my self from flattery by the public voice, whatever protestation you
might enter to the contrary. But ^ find I am to take other measures with your
Lordship; I am to stand upon my guard with you, and to approach you as warily
as Horace did Augustus.

Cui male si palpere, recalcitrat undique tutus. An ill timed, or an
extravagant commendation, would not pass upon you: but you would keep off such
a Dedicator at arms end; and send him back with his Encomiums, to this Lord, or
that Lady, who stood in need of such triffling merchandise. You see, my Lord,
what an awe you have upon me, when I dare not offer you that incense, which
would be acceptable to other Patrons: but am forced to curb my self, from
ascribing to you those honors, which even an Enemy could not deny you. Yet I
must confess I never practiced that virtue of moderation (which is properly
your Character) with so much reluctance as now. For it hinders me from being
true to my own knowledge, in not witnessing your worth; and deprives me of the
only means which I had left to show the world that true honor and uninteressed
respect which I have always paid you. I would say somewhat, if it were
possible, which might distinguish that veneration have for you, from the
flatteries of those who adore your fortune. But the eminence of your condition,
in this particular, is my unhappiness: for it renders whatever I would say
suspected. Professions of Service, submissions, and attendance, are the
practice of all men to the great: and commonly they who have the least
sincerity, perform them best; as they who are least engaged in love, have their
tongues the freest to counterfeit a passion: for my own part, I never could
shake off the rustique bashfulness which hangs upon my nature; but valluing my
self, at as little as I am worth, have been afraid to render even the common
duties of respect to those who are in power. The Ceremonious visits which are
generally paid on such occasions, are not my tallent. They may be real even in
Courtiers; but they appear with such a face of interest, that a modest man
would think himself in danger of having his sincerity mistaken for his design.
My congratulations keep their distance, and pass no farther than my heart.
There it is, that I have all the joy imaginable when I see true worth rewarded;
and virtue uppermost in the world.

If therefore there were one to whom I had the honor to be known; and to know
him so perfectly, that I could say without flattery, he had all the depth of
understanding that was requisite in any able Statesman, and all that honesty
which commonly is wanting; that he was brave without vanity, and knowing
without positiveness: that he was loyal to his Prince, and a lover of his
Country; that his principles were full of moderation, and all his Councils such
as tended to heal and not to widen the breaches of the Nation: that in all his
conversation there appeared a native candor, and a desire of doing good in all
his actions; if such an one whom I have described; were at the helm, if he had
risen by his merits, and were chosen out in the necessity and pressure of
affairs, to remedy our confusions by the seasonableness of his advice, and to
put a stop to our ruin, when we were just rolling downward to the precipice, I
should then congratulate the Age in which I lived, for the common safety; I
should not despair of the Republique though Hannibal were at the gates; I
should send up my vows for the success of such an action as Virgil did on the
like occasion for his Patron, when he was raising up his country from the
desolations of a civil war.

Hunc saltem everso juvenem succurrere seclo,
Ne superi prohibete.
I know not whether I am running, in this ecstasy which is now upon me: I am
almost ready to reassume the ancient rights of Poetry; to point out, and
Prophecy the man, who was born for no less an undertaking* and whom posterity
shall bless for its accomplishment. Methinks I am already taking fire from such
a Character, and making room for him, under a borrowed name amongst the Heroes
of an Epique Poem. Neither could mine, or some more happy Genius, want
encouragement under such a Patron.

Pollio amat nostram, quamvis sit rustica Musam. But these are considerations
afar off my Lord: the former part of the Prophecy must be first accomplished:
the quiet of the ^ation must be secured; and a mutual trust, betwixt Prince
and people be renewed: and then this great and good man will have leisure for
the ornaments of peace: and make our language as much indebted to his care, as
the French is to the memory of their famous Richelieu. You know My Lord, how
low he laid the foundations of so great a work: That he began it with a
Grammar and a Dictionary; without which all those Remarques and Observations,
which have since been made, had been performed to as little purpose as it would
be to consider the furniture of the Rooms before the contrivance of the House.
Propriety must first be stated, ere any measures of elegance can be taken.
Neither is one Vaugelas sufficient for such a work. 'Twas the employment of the
whole Academy for many years, for the perfect knowledge of a Tongue, was never
attained by any single person. The Court, the College, and the Town, must be
joined in it. And as our English is a composition of the dead and living
Tongues, there is required a perfect knowledge, not only of the Greek and
Latin, but of the Old German, the French and the Italian: and to help all
these, a conversation with those Authors of our own, who have written with the
fewest faults in prose and verse. But how barbarously we yet write and speak,
your Lordship knows, and I am sufficiently sensible in my own English. For I am
often put to a stand, in considering whether what I write be the Idiom of the
Tongue, or false Grammar, and nonsense couched beneath that specious Name of
Anglieisme. And have no other way to clear my doubts, but by translating my
English into Latin, and thereby trying what sense the words will bear in a
more stable language. I am desirous if it were possible, that we might all
write with the same certainty of words and purity of phrase, to which the
Italians first arrived, and after them the French: At least that we might
advance so far, as our Tongue is capable of such a standard. It would mortify
an English man to consider, that from the time of Boccace and of Petrarche, the
Italian has varied very little: And that the English of Chaucer their
contemporary is not to be understood without the help of an Old Dictionary. But
their Goth and Vandall had the fortune to be graffed on a Roman stock: Ours has
the disadvantage, to be founded on the Dutch. We are full of Monosyllables, and
those clogged with consonants, and our pronunciation is effeminate. All which
are enemies to a sonnding language: It Is true that to supply our poverty, we
have trafficqued with our Neighbor Nations; by which means we abound as much
in words, as Amsterdam does in Religions; but to order them, and make them
useful after their admission is the difficulty. A greater progress has been
made in this, since his Majesty's return, then perhaps since the conquest to
his time. But the better part of the work remains unfinished: And that which
has been done already, since it has only been in the practice of some few
writers, must be digested into Rules and Method; before it can be profitable to
the General. Will your Lordship give me leave to speak out at last? and to
acquaint the world, that from your encouragement and patronage, we may one day
expect to speak and write a language, worthy of the English wit, and which
foreigners may not disdain to learn. Your birth, your Education, your natural
endowments, the former Employments which you have had abroad, and that which to
the joy of good men you now exercise at home, seem all to conspire to this
design: the Genius of the Nation seems to call you out as it were by name, to
polish and adorn your native language, and to take from it the reproach of its
barbarity. It Is upon this encouragement that I have adventured on the following
Critique, which I humbly present you together with the Play: In which, though I
have not had the leisure, nor indeed the encouragement to proceed to the
Principal Subject of it, which is the words and thoughts that are suitable to
Tragedy; yet the whole discourse has a tendency that way, and is preliminary
to it. In what I have already done, I doubt not but I have contradicted some of
my former opinions, in my loose Essays of the like nature: but of this, I dare
affirm, that it is the fruit of my riper age and experience, and that
self-love, or envy have no part in it. The application to English Authors is
my own, and therein perhaps I may have erred unknowingly: But the foundation of
the rules is reason, and the authority of those living Critiques who have had
the honor to be known to you abroad, as well as of the Ancients, who are not
less of your acquaintance. Whatsoever it be, I submit it to your Lordships
Judgment, from which I never will appeal, unless it be to your good nature,
and your candor. If you can allow an hour of leisure to the perusal of it, I
shall be fortunate that I could so long entertain you; if not, I shall at least
have the satisfaction to know, that your time was more usefully employed upon
the public. I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Obedient Humble Servant, John Dryden.

The PREFACE to the Play.
THe Poet Aeschylus was held in the same veneration by the Athenians of after
Ages as Shakespeare is by us; and Longinus has judged, in favor of him, that he
had a noble boldness of expression, and that his imaginations were lofty and
Heroic: but on the other side Quintilian affirms, that he was daring to
extravagance. It Is certain, that he affected pompous words, and that his sense
too often was obscured by Figures* Notwithstanding these imperfections, the
value of his Writings after his decease was such, that his Countrymen ordained
an equal reward to those Poets who could alter his Plays to be Acted on the
Theater, with those whose productions were wholly new, and of their own. The
case is not the same in England; though the difficulties of altering are
greater, and our reverence for Shakespeare much more just, then that of the
Grecians for Aeschylus. In the Age of that Poet, the Greek tongue was arrived
to its full perfection; they had then amongst them an exact Standard of
Writing, and of Speaking: The English Language is not capable of such a
certainty; and we are at present so far from it, that we are wanting in the
very Foundation of it, a perfect Grammar. Yet it must be allowed to the present
Age, that the tongue in general is so much refined since Shakespeare's time,
that many of his words, and more of his Phrases, are scarce intelligible. And
of those which we understand some are ungrammatical, others course; and his
whole style is so pestered with Figurative expressions, that it is as affected
as it is obscure. It Is true, that in his later Plays he had worn off somewhat
of the rust; but the Tragedy which I have undertaken to correct, was, in all
prrbability, one of his first endeavors on the Stage.

The Original story was Written by one Lollius a Lombard, in Latin verse, and
Translated by Chaucer into English: intended I suppose a Satyr on the
Inconstancy of Women: I find nothing of it among the Ancients; not so much as
the name once Cressida mentioned. Shakespeare, (as I hinted) in the
Aprenticeship of his Writing, modeled it into that Play, which is now called by
the name of Troilus and Cressida; but so lamely is it left to us, that it is
not divided into Acts: which fault I ascribe to the Actors, who printed it
after Shakespeare's death; and that too, so carelessly, that a more uncorrect
Copy I never saw. For the Play it self, the Author seems to have begun it with
some fire; the Characters of Pandarus and Thersites, are promising enough; but
as if he grew weary of his task, after an Entrance or two, he lets 'em fall:
and the later part of the Tragedy is nothing but a confusion of Drums and
Trumpets, Excursions and Alarms. The chief persons, who give name to the
Tragedy, are left alive: Cressida is false, and is not punished. Yet after all,
because the Play was Shakespeare's, and that there appeared in some places of
it, the admirable Genius of the Author; I undertook to remove that heap of
Rubbish, under which many excellent thoughts lay wholly buried. Accordingly, I
new modeled the Plot; threw out many unnecessary persons; improved those
Characters which were begun, and left unfinished: as Hector, Troilus, Pandarus
and Thersites; and added that of Andromache. After this, I made with no small
trouble, an Order and Connection of all the Scenes; removing them from the
places where they were inartificially set: and though it was impossible to keep
'em all unbroken, because the Scene must be sometimes in the City, and
sometimes in the Camp, yet I have so ordered them that there is a coherence of
'em with one another, and a dependence on the main design: no leaping from Troy
to the Grecian Tents, and thence back again in the same Act; but a due
proportion of time allowed for every motion. I need not say that I have refined
his Language, which before was obsolete; but I am willing to acknowledge, that
as I have often drawn his English nearer to our times So I have sometimes
conformed my own to his: and consequently, the Language is not altogether so
pure, as it is significant. The Scenes of Pandarus and Cressida, of Troilus and
Pandarus, of Andromache with Hector and the Trojans, in the second Act, are
wholly New: together with that of Nestor and Ulysses with Thersites; and that
of Thersites, with Ajax and Achilles. I will not weary my Reader with the
Scenes which are added of Pandarus and the Lovers, in the Third; and those of
Thersites, which are wholly altered: but I cannot omit the last Scene in it,
which is almost half the Act, betwixt Troilus and Hector. The occasion of
raising it was hinted to me by Mr. Betterton: the contrivance and working of it
was my own. They who think to do me an injury, by saying that it is an
imitation of the Scene betwixt Brutus and Cassius, do me an honor, by
supposing I could imitate the incomparable Shakespeare: but let me add, that if
Shakespears Scene, or that faulty Copy of it in Amintor and Melantius had never
been, yet Euripides had furnished me with an excellent example in his
Iphigenia, between Agamemnon and Menelaus: and from thence indeed, the last
turn of it is borrowed. The occasion which Shakespeare, Euripides, and Fletcher,
have all taken, is the same; grounded upon Friendship: and the quarrel of two
virtuous men, raised by natural degrees, to the extremity of passion, is
conducted in all three, to the declination of the same passion; and concludes
with a warm renewing of their Friendship. But the particular groundwork which
Shakespeare has taken, is incomparably the best: Because he has not only chosen
two the greatest Heroes of their Age; but has likewise interested the Liberty
of Rome, and their own honors, who were the redeemers of it, in this debate.
And if he has made Brutus who was naturally a patient man, to fly into excess
at first; let it be remembered in his defense, that just before, he has received
the news of Portia's death: whom the Poet on purpose neglecting a little
Chronology, supposes to have died before Brutus, only to give him an occasion
of being more easily exasperated. Add to this, that the injury he had received
from Cassius, had long been brooding in his mind; and that a melancholy man,
upon consideration of an affront, especially from a Friend, would be more eager
in his passion, than he who had given it, though naturally more choleric*
Euripides whom I have followed, has raised the quarrel betwixt two Brothers who
were friends. The foundation of the Scene was this: The Grecians were
wind-bound at the Port of Aulis, and the Oracle had said, that they could not
Sail, unless Agamemnon delivered up his Daughter to be Sacrificed: he refuses;
his Brother Menelaus urges the public safety, the Father defends himself, by
arguments of natural affection, and hereupon they quarrel. Agamemnon is at last
convinced, and promises to deliver up Iphigenia, but so passionately laments
his loss, that Menelaus is grieved to have been the occasion of it, and by a
return of kindness, offers to intercede for him with the Grecians, that his
Daughter might not be sacrificed. But my friend Mr. Rymer has so largly, and
with so much judgment described this Scene, in comparing it with that of
Melantius and Amintor, that it is superfluous to say more of it: I only named
the heads of it, that any reasonable man might judge it was from thence I
modeled my Scene betwixt Troilus and Hector. I will conclude my reflections on
it, with a passage of Longinus, concerning Plato's imitation of Homer: We ought
not to regard a good imitation as a theft; but as a beautiful Idea of him who
undertakes to imitate, by forming himself on the invention and the work of
another man; for he enters into the lists like a new wrestler, to dispute the
prize with the former Champion. This sort of emulation says Hesiod, is
honorable (...) -- When we combat for Victory with a Hero, and are not without
glory even in our overthrow. Those great men whom we propose to our selves as
patterns of our imitation, serve us as a Torch, which is lifted up before us,
to enlighten our passage; and often elevate our thoughts as high, as the
conception we have of our Authors Genius.

I have been so tedious in three Acts, that I shall contract my self in the two
last. The beginning Scenes of the fourth Act are either added, or changed
wholly by me; the middle of it is Shakespeare altered, and mingled with my own,
three or four of the last Scenes are altogether new. And the whole Fifth Act,
both the Plot and the Writing are my own Additions.

But having written so much for imitation of what is excellent, in that part of
the Preface which related only to my self; methinks it would neither be
unprofitable nor unpleasant to enquire how far we ought to imitate our own
Poets, Shakespeare and Fletcher in their Tragedies: And this will occasion
another enquiry, how those two Writers differ between themselves: but since
neither of these questions can be solved unless some measures be first taken,
by which we may be enabled to judge truly of their Writings: I shall endeavor
as briefly as I can, to discover the grounds and reason of all Criticism,
applying them in this place only to Tragedy. Aristotle with his Interpreters,
and Horace, and Longinus, are the Authors to whom I owe my lights; and what
part soever of my own Plays, or of this, which no mending could make regular,
shall fall under the condemnation of such Judges, it would be impudence in me
to defend. I think it no shame to retract my errors, and am well pleased to
suffer in the cause, if the Art may be improved at my expense: I therefore
proceed to,

The Grounds of Criticism in Tragedy.
TRagedy is thus defined by Aristotle, (omiting what I thought unnecessary in
his Definition.) It Is an imitation of one entire, great, and probable action;
not told but represented, which by moving in us fear and pity, is conducive to
the purging of these two passions in our minds. More largly thus, Tragedy
describes or paints (...) Action, which Action must have all the proprieties
above named. First, it must be one or single, that is, it must not be a History
of one Man's life: Suppose of Alexander the Great, or Julius Caesar, but one
single action of theirs. This condemns all Shakespears Historical Plays, which
are rather Chronicles represented, than Tragedies, and all double action of
Plays. As to avoid a Satyr upon others, I will make bold with my own
Marriage-A-la-Mode, where there are manifestly two Actions, not depending on
one another: but in Oedipus there cannot properly be said to be two Actions,
because the love of Adrastus and Euridice has a necessary dependence on the
principal design, into which it is woven. The natural reason of this Rule is
plain, for two different independent actions, distract the attention and
concernment of the Audience, and consequently destroy the intention of the
Poet: If his business be to move terror and pity, and one of his Actions be
Comical, the other Tragical, the former will divert the people, and utterly
make void his greater purpose. Therefore as in Perspective, so in Tragedy,
there must be a point of sight in which all the lines terminate: Otherwise the
eye wanders, and the work is false. This was the practice of the Grecian Stage.
But Terence made an innovation in the Roman: all his Plays have double Actions;
for it was his custom to Translate two Greek Comedies, and to weave them into
one of his, yet so, that both the Actions were Comical; and one was principal,
the other but secondary or subservient. And this has obtained on the English
Stage, to give us the pleasure of variety.

As the Action ought to be one, it ought as such, to have Order in it, that is,
to have a natural beginning, a middle, and an end: A natural beginning says
Aristotle, is that which could not necessarily have been placed after another
thing, and so of the rest. This consideration will arraign all Plays after the
new model of Spanish Plots, where accident is heaped upon accident, and that
which is first might as reasonably be last: an inconvenience not to be
remedyed, but by making one accident naturally produce another, otherwise it is
a Farce, and not a Play. Of this nature, is the Slighted Maid; where there is
no Scene in the first Act, which might not by as good reason be in the fifth.
And if the Action ought to be one, the Tragedy ought likewise to conclude with
the Action of it. Thus in Mustapha, the Play should naturally have ended with
the death of Zanger, and not have given us the grace Cup after Dinner, of
Solyman's divorce from Roxolana.

The following properties of the Action are so easy, that they need not my
explaining. It ought to be great, and to consist of great Persons, to
distinguish it from Comedy; where the Action is trivial, and the persons of
inferior rank. The last quality of the action is, that it ought to be probable,
as well as admirable and great. It Is not necessary that there should be
Historical truth in it; but always necessary that there should be a likeness of
truth, something that is more then barely possible, probable being that which
succeds or happens oftener than it mi^^es. To invent therefore a probability,
and to make it wonderful, is the most difficult undertaking in the Art of
Poetry: for that which is not wonderful, is not great, and that which is not
probable, will not delight a reasonable Audience. This action thus described,
must be represented and not told, to distinguish Dramatic Poetry from Epic: but
I hasten to the end, or scope of Tragedy; which is to rectify or purge our
passions, fear and pity.

To instruct delightfully is the general end of all Poetry: Philosophy
instructs, but it performs its work by precept: which is not delightful, or
not so delightful as Example. To purge the passions by Example, is therefore
the particular instruction which belongs to Tragedy. Rapin a judicious Critic,
has observed from Aristotle, that pride and want of commiseration are the most
predominant vices in Mankind: therefore to cure us of these two, the inventors
of Tragedy, have chosen to work upon two other passions, which are fear and
pity. We are wrought to fear, by their seting before our eyes some terrible
example of misfortune, which happened to persons of the highest Quality; for such
an action demonstrates to us, that no condition is privileged from the turns of
Fortune: this must of necessity cause terror in us, and consequently abate our
pride. But when we see that the most virtuous, as well as the greatest, are not
exempt from such misfortunes, that consideration moves pity in us: and
insensibly works us to be helpful to, and tender over the distressed, which is
the noblest and most God-like of moral virtues. Here it is observable, that it
is absolutely necessary to make a man virtuous, if we desire he should be
pitied: We lament not, but detest a wicked man, we are glad when we behold his
crimes are punished, and that Poetical justice is done upon him. Euripides was
censured by the Critics of his time, for making his chief characters too
wicked: for example, Phaedra though she loved her Son-in-law with reluctance,
and that it was acurse upon her Family for offending Venus; yet was thought too
ill a pattern for the Stage. Shall we therefore banish all characters of
villainy? I confess I am not of that opinion; but it is necessary that the Hero
of the Play be not a Villain: that is, the characters which should move our
pity ought to have virtuous inclinations, and degrees of moral goodness in
them. As for a perfect character of virtue, it never was in Nature; and
therefore there can be no imitation of it: but there are allays of frailty to
be allowed for the chief Persons, yet so that the good which is in them, shall
outweigh the bad; and consequently leave room for punishment on the one side,
and pity on the other.

After all, if any one will ask me, whether a Tragedy cannot be made upon any
other grounds, than those of exciting pity and terror in us* Bossu, the best of
modern Critics, answers thus in general: That all excellent Arts, and
particularly that of Poetry, have been invented and brought to perfection by
men of a transcendent Genius; and that therefore they who practice afterward
the same Arts, are obliged to tread in their footsteps, and to search in their
Writings the foundation of them: for it is not just that new Rules should
destroy the authority of the old. But Rapin writes more particularly thus: That
no passions in a story are so proper to move our concernment as Fear and pity;
and that it is from our concernment we receive our pleasure, is undoubted; when
the Soul becomes agitated with fear for one character, or hope for another;
then it is that we are pleased in Tragedy, by the interest which we take in
their adventures.

Here therefore the general answer may be given to the first question, how far
we ought to imitate Shakespeare and Fletcher in their Plots; namely that we
ought to follow them so far only, as they have Copied the excellencies of those
who invented and brought to perfection Dramatic Poetry: those things only
excepted which Religion, customs of Countries, Idioms of Languages, etc. have
altered in the Superstructures, but not in the foundation of the design.

How defcctive Shakespeare and Fletcher have been in all their Plots, Mr. Rymer
has discovered in his Criticisms: neither can we, who follow them, be excused
from the same or greater errors; which are the more unpardon^^le in us, because
we want their beauties to counterveil our faults. The best of their designs,
the most approaching to Antiquity, and the most conducing to move pity, is the
King and no King; which if the Farce of Bessus were thrown away, is of that
inferior sort of Tragedies, which end with a prosperous event. It Is probably
derived from the story of OEdipus, with the character of Alexander the Great,
in his extravagancies, given to Arbaces. The taking of this Play, amongst many
others, I cannot wholly ascribe to the excellency of the action; for I find it
moving when it is read: it is true, the faults of the Plot are so evidently
proved, that they can no longer be denied. The beauties of it must therefore
lie either in the livel touches of the passions: or we must conclude, as I
think we may, that even in imperfect Plots, there are less degrees of Nature,
by which some faint emotions of pity and terror are raised in us: as a less
Engine will raise a less proportion of weight, though not so much as one of
Archimedes making; for nothing can move our nature, but by some natural reason,
which works upon passions. And since we acknowledge the effect, there must be
something in the cause.

The difference between Shakespeare and Fletcher in their Plotting seems to be
this, that Shakespeare generally moves more terror, and Fletcher more
compassion: For the first had a more Masculine, a bolder and more fiery Genius;
the Second a more soft and Womanish. In the mechanic beauties of the Plot,
which are the Observation of the three Unities, Time, Place, and Action, they
are both deficient; but Shakespeare most. Ben. Johnson reformed those errors in
his Comedies, yet one of Shakespeare's was Regular before him: which is, The
Merry Wives of Windsor. For what remains concerning the design, you are to be
referred to our English Critic. That method which he has prescribed to raise it
from mistake, or ignorance of the crime, is certainly the best though it is not
the only: for amongst all the Tragedies of Sophocles, there* is but one,
OEdipus, which is wholly built after that model.

After the Plot, which is the foundation of the Play, the next thing to which
we ought to apply our Judgment is the manners, for now the Poet comes to work
above ground: the groundwork indeed is that which is most necessary, as that
upon which depends the firmness of the whole Fabric; yet it strikes not the eye
so much, as the beauties or imperfections of the manners, the thoughts and the
expressions.

The first Rule which Bossu, prescribes to the Writer of an Heroic poem, and
which holds too by the same reason in all Dramatic Poetry, is to make the moral
of the work; that is, to lay down to your self what that precept of morality
shall be, which you would insinuate into the people: as namely, Homer's, (which
I have Copied in my Conquest of Granada) was, that Union preserves a
Commonwealth, and discord destroys it. Sophocles, in his OEdipus, that no man
is to be accounted happy before his death. It Is the Moral that directs the
whole action of the Play to one center; and that action or Fable, is the
example built upon the moral, which confirms the truth of it to our experience:
when the Fable is designed, then and not before, the Persons are to be
introduced with their manners, characters and passions.

The manners in a Poem, are understood to be those inclinations, whether
natural or acquired, which move and carry us to actions, good, bad, or
indifferent in a Play; or which incline the persons to such, or such actions: I
have anticipated part of this discourse already, in declaring that a Poet ought
not to make the manners perfectly good in his best persons, but neither are
they to be more wicked in any of his characters, than necessity requires. To
produce a Villain, without other reason than a natural inclination to villainy,
is in Poetry to produce an effect without a cause: and to make him more a
Villain than he has just reason to be, is to make an effect which is stronger
then the cause.

The manners arise from many causes: and are either distinguished by
complexion, as choleric and phlegmatic, or by the differences of Age or Sex, of
Climates, or Quality of the persons, or their present condition: they are
likewise to be gathered from the several Virtues, Vices, or Passions, and many
other common-places which a Poet must be supposed to have learned from natural
Philosophy, Ethics, and History; of all which whosoever is ignorant, does not
deserve the Name of Poet.

But as the manners are useful in this Art, they may be all comprised under
these general heads: First, they must be apparent, that is in every character
of the Play, some inclinations of the Person must appear: and these are shown
in the actions and discourse. Secondly the manners must be suitable or agreeing
to the Persons; that is, to the Age, Sex, dignity, and the other general heads
of Manners: thus when a Poet has given the Dignity of a King to one of his
persons, in all his actions and speeches, that person must discover Majesty,
Magnanimity, and jealousy of power; because these are suitable to the general
manners of a King. The third property of manners is resemblance; and this is
founded upon the particular characters of men, as we have them delivered to us
by relation or History: that is, when a Poet has the known character of this or
that man before him, he is bound to represent him such, at least not contrary
to that which Fame has reported him to have been: thus it is not a Poets choice
to make Ulysses choleric, or Achilles patient, because Homer has described 'em
quite otherwise. Yet this is a Rock, on which ignorant Writers daily split: and
the absurdity is as monstrous, as if a Painter should draw a Coward running
from a Battle, and tell us it was the Picture of Alexander the Great.

The last property of manners is, that they be constant, and equal, that is,
maintained the same through the whole design: thus when Virgil had once given
the name of Pious to Aeneas, he was bound to show him such, in all his words
and actions through the whole Poem. All these properties Horace has hinted to a
judicious observer. 1. Notandi sunt tibi mores, 2. aut famam sequere, 3. aut
sibi convenientia ^inge. 4. Servetur ad imum, qualis ab incaepto processerat,
and sibi constet.

From the manners, the Characters of persons are derived, for indeed the
characters are no other than the inclinations, as they appear in the several
persons of the Poem. A character being thus defined, that which distinguishes
one man from another. Not to repeat the same things over again which have been
said of the manners, I will only add what is necessary here. A character, or
that which distinguishes one man from all others, cannot be supposed to consist
of one particular Virtue, or Vice, or passion only; but it is a composition of
qualities which are not contrary to one another in the same person: thus the
same man may be liberal and valiant, but not liberal and convetous; so in a
Comical character, or humor, (which is an inclination to this, or that
particular folly) Falstaff is a liar, and a coward, a Glutton, and a Buffon,
because all these qualities may agree in the same man; yet it is still to be
observed, that one virtue, vice, and passion, ought to be shown in every man,
as predominant over all the rest: as covetousness in Crassus, love of his
Country in Brutus; and the same in characters which are feigned.

The chief character or Hero in a Tragedy, as I have already shown, ought in
prudence to be such a man, who has so much more in him of Virtue than of Vice,
that he may be left amiable to the Audience, which otherwise cannot have any
concernment for his sufferings: and it is on this one character that the pity
and terror must be principally, if not wholly founded. A Rule which is
extremely necessary, and which none of the Critics that I know, have fully
enough discovered to us. For terror and compassion work but weakly, when they
are divided into many persons. If Creon had been the chief character in
OEdipus, there had neither been terror nor compassion moved; but only
detestation of the man and joy for his punishment; if Adrastus and Euridice had
been made more appearing characters, then the pity had been divided, and
lessened on the part of OEdipus: but making OEdipus the best and bravest
person, and even Jocasta but an underpart to him; his virtues and the
punishment of his fatal crime, drew both the pity, and the terror to himself.

By what had been said of the manners, it will be easy for a reasonable man to
judge, whether the characters be truly or falsely drawn in a Tragedy; for if
there be no manners appearing in the characters, no concernment for the persons
can he raised: no pity or horror can be moved, but by vice or virtue, therefore
without them, no person can have any business in the Play. If the inclinations
be obscure, it is a sign the Poet is in the dark, and knows not what manner of
man be presents to you; and consequently you can have no Idea, or very
imperfect, of that man: nor can judge what resolutions he ought to take; or
what words or actions are proper for him: Most Comedies made up of accidents,
or adventures, are liable to fall into this error: and Tragedies with many
turns are subject to it: for the manners never can be evident, where the
surprises of Fortune take up all the business of the Stage; and where the Poet
is more in pain, to tell you that happened to such a man, than what he was. It Is
one of the excellencies of Shakespeare, that the manners of his persons are
generally apparent; and you see their bent and inclinations. Fletcher comes far
short of him in this, as indeed he does almost in every thing: there are but
glimmerings of manners in most of his Comedies, which run upon adventures: and
in his Tragedies, Rollo, Otto, the King and No King, Melantius, and many others
of his best, are but Pictures shown you in the twilight; you know not whether
they resemble vice, or virtue, and they are either good bad, or indifferent, as
the present Scene requires it. But of all Poets, this commendation is to be
given to Ben. Johnson, that the manners even of the most inconsiderable persons
in his Plays are every where apparent.

By considering the Second quality of manners, which is that they be suitable to
the Age, Quality, Country, Dignity, etc. of the character, we may likewise
judge whether a Poet has followed Nature. In this kind Sophocles and
Euripides, have more excelled among the Greeks than Aeschylus: and Terence,
more then Plautus among the Romans: Thus Sophocles gives to OEdipus the true
qualities of a King, in both those Plays which bear his Name: but in the latter
which is the OEdipus Colonoeus, he lets fall on purpose his Tragic Style, his
Hero speaks not in the Arbitrary tone; but remembers in the softness of his
complaints, that he is an unfortunate blind Old Man, that he is banished from
his Country, and persecuted by his next Relations. The present French Poets are
generally accused, that wheresoever they lay the Scene, or in whatsoever Age,
the manners of their Heroes are wholly French: Racin's Bajazet is bred at
Constantinople; but his civilities are conveyed to him by some secret passage,
from Versailles into the Seraglio. But our Shakespeare, having ascribed to Henry
the Fourth the character of a King, and of a Father, gives him the perfect
manners of each Relation, when either he transacts with his Son, or with his
Subjects. Fletcher, on the other side gives neither to Arbaces, nor to his King
in the Maids Tragedy, the qualities which are suitable to a Monarch: though he
may be excused a little in the latter; for the King there is not uppermost in
the character; it is the Lover of Evadne, who is King only, in a second
consideration; and though he be unjust, and has other faults which shall be
nameless, yet he is not the Hero of the Play: it is true we find him a lawful
Prince, (though I never heard of any King that was in Rhodes) and therefore Mr.
Rymers Criticism stands good; that he should not be shown in so vicious a
character. Sophocles has been more judicious in his Antigona for though he
represent in Creon a bloody Prince, yet he makes him not a lawful King, but an
Usurper, and Antigona her self is the Heroin of the Tragedy: But when Philaster
wounds Arethusa and the Boy; and Perigot his Mistress, in the faithful
Sheperdess, both these are contrary to the character of Manhood: Nor is
Valentinian managed much better, for though Fletcher has taken his Picture
truly, and shown him as he was, an effeminate voluptuous man, yet he has
forgotten that he was an Emperor, and has given him none of those Royal marks,
which ought to appear in a lawful Successor of the Throne. If it be inquired,
what Fletcher should have done on this occasion; ought he not to have
represented Valentinian as he was? Bossu shall answer this question for me, by
an instance of the like nature: Mauritius the Greek Emperor, was a Prince far
surpassing Valentinian, for he was indu^d with many Kingly virtues; he was
Religious, Merciful, and Valiant, but withal he was noted of extreme
covetousness, a vice which is contrary to the character of a Hero, or a Prince:
therefore says the Critic, that Emperor was no fit person to be represented in
a Tragedy, unless his good qualities were only to be shown, and his
covetousness (which sullyed them all) were slur'd over by the artifice of the
Poet. To return once more to Shakespeare; no man ever drew so many characters,
or generally distinguished 'em better from one another, excepting only Johnson:
I will instance but in one, to show the copiousnesls of his Invention; it is
that of Calyban, or the Monster in the Tempest. He seems there to have created
a person which was not in Nature, a boldness which at first sight would appear
intolerable: for he makes him a Species of himself, begotten by an Incubus on a
Witch; but this as I have elsewhere proved, is not wholly beyond the bounds of
credibility, at least the vulgar style believe it. We have the separated
notions of a spirit, and of a Witch; (and Spirits according to Plato, are
vested with a subtle body; according to some of his followers; have different
Sexes) therefore as from the distinct apprehensions of a Horse, and of a Man,
Imagination has formed a Centaur, so from those of an Incubus and a Sorceress,
Shakespeare has produced his Monster. Whether or no his Generation can be
defended, I leave to Philosophy; but of this I am certain, that the Poet has
most judiciously furnished him with a person, a Language, and a character,
which will suit him, both by Fathers and Mothers side: he has all the
discontents, and malice of a Witch, and of a Devil; besides a convenient
proportion of the deadly sins; Gluttony, Sloth, and Lust, are manifest; the
dejectedness of a slave is likewise given him, and the ignorance of one bred up
in a Desert Island. His person is monstrous, as he is the product of unnatural
Lust; and his language is as hobgoblin as his person: in all things he is
distinguished from other mortals. The characters of Fletcher are poor and
narrow, in comparison of Shakespears; I remember not one which is not borrowed
from him; unless you will except that strange mixture of a man in the King and
no King: So that in this part Shakespeare is generally worth our Imitation; and
to imitate Fletcher is but to Copy after him who was a Copyer.

Under this general head of Manners, the passions are naturally included, as
belonging to the Characters. I speak not of pity and of terror, which are to be
moved in the Audience by the Plot; but of Anger, Hatred, Love, Ambition,
Iealousy, Revenge, etc. as they are shown in this or that person of the Play.
To describe these naturally, and to move then artfully, is one of the greatest
commendations which can be given to a Poet: to write pathetically, says
Longinus, cannot proceed but for a lofty Genius. A Poet must be born with this
quality; yet, unless he help himself by an acquired knowledge of the Passions,
what they are in their own nature, and by what springs they are to be moved, he
will be subject either to raise them where they ought not to be raised, or not
to raise them by the just degrees of Nature, or to amplify them beyond the
natural bounds, or not to observe the crisis and turns of them, in their (...)
and decay: all which errors proceed from want of Judgment in the Poet, and from
being unskilled in the Principles of Moral Philosophy. Nothing is more frequent
in a Fanciful Writer, than to foil himself by not managing his strength:
therefore, as in a Wrestler, there is first required some measure of force, a
well-knit body, and active Limbs, without which all instruction would be vain;
yet, these being granted, if he want the skill which is necessary to a
Wrestler, he shall make but small advantage of his natural robustuousness: So
in a Poet, his inborn vehemence and force of spirit, will only run him out of
breath the sooner, if it be not supported by the help of Art. The roar of
passion indeed may please an Audience, three parts of which are ignorant enough
to think all is moving which is noise, and it may stretch the lungs of an
ambitious Actor, who will dye upon the spot for a thundering clap; but it will
move no other passion than indignation and contempt from judicious men.
Longinus, whom I have hitherto followed, continues thus: If the passions be
Artfully employed, the discourse becomes vehement and lofty; if otherwise,
there is nothing more ridiculous than a great passion out of season: And to
this purpose he animadverts severely upon Aeschylus, who writ nothing in cold
blood, but was always in arapture, and in fury with his Audience: the
Inspiration was still upon him, he was ever tearing it upon the Tripos; or (to
run off as madly as he does, from one similitude to another) he was always at
high flood of Passion, even in the dead Ebb, and lowest Watermark of the Scene.
He who would raise the passion of a judicious Audience, says a Learned Critic,
must be sure to take his hearers along with him; if they be in a Calm, it is in
vain for him to be in a huff: he must move them by degrees, and kindle with
'em; otherwise he will be in danger of setting his own heap of Stubble on a
fire, and of burning out by himself without warming the company that stand
about him. They who would justify the madness of Poetry from the Authority of
Aristotle, have mistaken the text, and consequently the Interpretation: I
imagine it to be false read, where he says of Poetry, that it is (...), that it
had always somewhat in it either of a genius, or of a madman. It Is more
probable that the Original ran thus, that Poetry was (...), That it belongs to
a Witty man, but not to a madman. Thus then the Passions, as they are
considered simply and in themselves, suffer violence when they are perpetually
maintained at the same height; for what melody can be made on that Instrument
all whose strings are screwed up at first to their utmost stretch, and to the
same sound? But this is not the worst; for the Characters likewise bear a part
in the general calamity, if you consider the Passions as embodied in them: for
it follows of necessity, that no man can be distinguished from another by his
discourse, when every man is ranting, swaggering, and exclaiming with the same
excess: as if it were the only business of all the Characters to contend with
each other for the prize at Billingsgate; or that the Scene of the Tragedy lay
in Bet'lem. Suppose the Poet should intend this man to be Choleric, and that
man to be patient; yet when they are confounded in the Writing, you cannot
distinguish them from one another: for the man who was called patient and tame,
is only so before he speaks; but let his clack be set a going, and he shall
tongue it as impetuously, and as loudly the errantest Hero in the Play. By this
means, the characters are only distinct in name; but in reality, all the men
and women in the Play are the same person. No man should pretend to write, who
cannot temper his fancy with his Judgment: nothing is more dangerous to a raw
horseman, than a hot-mouth'd Jade without a curb.

It Is necessary therefore for a Poet, who would concern an Audience by
describing of a Passion, first to prepare it, and not to rush upon it all at
once. Ovid has judiciously shown the difference of these two ways, in the
speeches of Ajax and Ulysses: Ajax from the very beginning breaks out into his
exclamations, and is swearing by his Maker. -- Agimus proh Jupiter inquit.
Ulysses on the contrary, prepares his Audience with all the submissiveness he
can practice, and all the calmness of a reasonable man; he found his Judges in
a tranquillity of spirit, and therefore set out leasurely and softly with 'em,
till he had warmed 'em by degrees; and then he began to mend his pace, and to
draw them along with his own impetuousness: yet so managing his breath, that it
might not fail him at his need, and reserving his utmost proofs of ability even
to the last. The success you see was answerable; for the crowd only applauded
the spech of Ajax; -- Vulgique secutum ultima murmur erat: --
But the Judges awarded the prize for which they contended to Ulysses.

Mota manus Procerum est, et quid facundia possit
Tum patuit, fortisque viri and arma Disertus.
The next necessary rule is to put nothing into the discourse which may hinder
your moving of the passions. Too many accidents as I have said, incomber the
Poet, as much as the Arms of Saul did David; for the variety of passions which
they produce, are ever crossing and justling each other out of the way. He who
treats of joy and grief together, is in a fair way of causing neither of those
effects. There is yet another obstacle to be removed, which is pointed Wit, and
Sentences affected out of season; these are nothing of kin to the violence of
passion: no man is at leisure to make sentences and similes, when his soul is
in an Agony. I the rather name this fault, that it may serve to mind me of my
former errors; neither will I spare myself, but give an example of this kind
from my Indian Emperor: Montezuma, pursued by his enemies, and seeking
Sanctuary, stands parlying without the Fort, and describing his danger to
Cydaria, in a simile of six lines; As on the sands the frighted Traveller
Sees the high Seas come rolling from afar, etc.


My Indian Potent ate was well skilled in the Sea for an Inland Prince, and
well improved since the first Act, when he sent his son to discover it. The
Image had not been amiss from another man, at another time: Sed nunc non erat
hisce locus: he destroyed the concernment which the Audience might other wise
have had for him; for they could not think the danger near, when he had the
leisure to invent a Simile.

If Shakespeare be allowed, as I think be must, to have made his Characters
distinct, it will easily be inferred that he understood the nature of the
Passions: because it has been proved already, that confused passions make
undistinguishable Characters: yet I cannot deny that he has his failings; but
they are not so much in the passions themselves, as in his manner of
expression: he often obscures his meaning by his words, and sometimes makes it
unintelligible. I will not say of so great a Poet, that he distinguished not
the blown puffy style, from true sublimity; but I may venture to maintain that
the fury of his fancy often transported him, beyond the bounds of Judgment,
either in coining of new words and phrases, or racking words which were in use,
into the violence of a Catachresis: It Is not that I would explode the use of
Metaphors from passions, for Longinus thinks 'em necessary to raise it; but to
use 'em at every word, to say nothing without a Metaphor, a Simile, an Image,
or description, is I doubt to smell a little too strongly of the Buskin. I must
be forced to give an example of expressing passion figuratively* but that I may
do it with respect to Shakespeare, it shall not be taken from any thing of his:
it is an exclamation against Fortune, quoted in his Hamlet, but written by some
other Poet. Out, out, thou strumpet fortune; all you Gods,
In general Synod, take away her Power,
Break all the spokes and fallyes from her Wheel,
And bowl the round Nave down the hill of Heaven
As low as to the Fiends.
And immediately after, speaking of Hecuba, when Priam was killed before her
eyes: The mobbled Queen ran up and down,
Threatening the flame with bisson rheum: a clout about that head,
Where late the Diadem stood; and for a Robe
About her lank and all or'e-teemed loins,
A blanket in the alarm of fear caught up.
Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steeped
Against Fortune's state would Treason have pronounced;
But if the Gods themselves did see her then,
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
In mincing with his sword her Husband's Limbs,
The instant burst of clamor that she made
(Unless things mortal meant them not at all)
Would have made milch the burning eyes of Heaven,
And passion in the Gods.


What a pudder is here kept in raising the expression of triffling thoughts.
Would not a man have thought that the Poet had been bound Prentice to a
Wheel-wright, for his first Rant? and had followed a Ragman, for the clout and
blanket, in the second? Fortune is painted on a wheet; and therefore the writer
in a rage, will have Poetical Justice done upon every member of that Engine:
after this execution, he bowls the Nave downhill, from Heaven, to the Fiends:
(an unreasonable long mark a man would think;) it is well there are no solid
Orbs to stop it in the way, or no Element of fire to consume it: but when it
came to the earth, it must be monstrous heavy, to break ground as low as to the
Center. His making milch the burning eyes of Heaven* was a pretty tolerable
flight too; and I think no man ever drew milk out of eyes before him: yet to
make the wonder greater, these eyes were burning. Such a sight indeed were
enough to have rais' d passion in the Gods, but to excuse the effects of it, he
tells you perhaps they did not see it. Wise men would be glad to find a little
sense couched under all those pompous words; for Bombast is commonly the
delight of that Audience, which loves Poetry, but under stands it not: and as
commonly has been the practice of those Writers, who not being able to infuse a
natural passion into the mind, have made it their business to ply the ears, and
to st^^ their Judges by the noise. But Shakespeare does not often thus; for the
passions in his Scene between Brutus and Cassius are extremely natural, the
thoughts are such as arise from the matter, and the expression of 'em not
viciously figurative. I cannot leave this Subject before I do justce to that
Divine Poet, by giving you one of his passionate descriptions: it is of Richard
the Second when he was deposed, and led in Triumph through the Streets of
London by Henry of Bullingbrook: the painting of it is so lively, and the words
so moving, that I have scarce read any thing comparable to it, in any other
language, Suppose you have seen already the fortunate Usurper passing through
the crowd, and followed by the shouts and acclamations of the people; and now
behold King Richard entering upon the Scene: consider the wretchedness of his
condition, and his carriage in it; and refrain from pity if you can.

As in a Theater, the eyes of men
After a well-grac'd Actor leaves the Stage,
Are idly bent on him that enters next,
Thinking his prattle to be tedious:
Even so, or with much more contempt, men's eyes*
Did scowl on Richard: no man cried God save him:
No joyful tongue gave him His welcome home,
But dust was thrown upon his Sacred head,
Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off,
His face still combating with tears and smiles
(The badges of his grief and patience)
That had not God (for some strong purpose) (...)
The hearts of men, they must (...)
And Barbarism it self have (...)
To speak justly of this whole matter; (...) that is discommended, (...)
expression in its proper place; but it is a false measure of all these,
something which is like 'em* and is not them: it is the Bristol-stone, which
appears like a Diamond; it is an extravagant thought, instead of a sublime one;
it is roaring madness instead of vehemence; and a sound of words, instead of
sense. If Shakespeare were stripped of all the Bombast in the passions, and
dressed in the most vulgar words, we should find the beauties of his thoughts
remaining; if his embroideries were burnt down, there would still be silver at
the bottom of the melting-pot: but I fear (at least, let me fear it for my
self) that we who Ape his sounding words, have nothing of his thought, but are
all outside; there is not so much as a dwarf within our Giants clothes.
Therefore, let not Shakespeare suffer for our sakes; it is our fault, who succeed
him in an Age which is more refined, if we imitate him so ill, that we copy
his failings only, and make a virtue of that in our Writings, which in his was
an imperfection.

For what remains, the excellency of that Poet was, as I have said, in the more
manly passions; Fletcher's in the softer: Shakespeare writ better betwixt man
and man; Fletcher, betwixt man and woman: consequently, the one described
friendship better; the other love: yet Shakespeare taught Fletcher to write
love; and Juliet, and Desdemona, are Originals. It Is true, the Scholar had the
softer soul; but the Master had the kinder. Friendship is both a virtue, and a
Passion essentially; love is a passion only in its nature, and is not a virtue
but by Accident: good nature makes Friendship; but effeminacy Love. Shakespeare
had an Universal mind, which comprehended all Characters and Passions; Fletcher
a more confined, and limited: for though be treated love in perfection, yet
Honor, Ambition, Revenge, and generally all the stronger Passions, he either
touched not, or not Masterly. To conclude all; he was a Limb of Shakespeare.

I had intended to have proceeded to the last property of manners, which is,
that they must be constant; and the characters maintained the same from the
beginning to the end; and from thence to have proceeded to the thoughts and
expressions suitable to a Tragedy: but I will first see how this will relish
with the Age. It Is I confess but cursorily written; yet the Judgment which is
given here, is generally founded upon Experience: But because many men are
shocked at the name of Rules, as if they were a kind of Magisterial
prescription upon Poets, I will conclude with the words of Rapin, in his
reflections on Arisotles work of Poetry: If the Rules be well considered: we
shall find them to be made only to reduce Nature into Method, to trace her step
by step, and not to suffer the least mark of her to escape us: it is only by
these, that probability in Fiction is maintained, which is the Soul of Poetry:
they are founded upon good Sense, and Sound Reason, rather than on Authority;
for, though Aristotle and Horace are produced, yet no man must argue, that what
they write is true, because they writ it; but it is evident, by the ridiculous
mistakes and gross absurdities, which have been made by those Poets who have
taken their Fancy only for their guide, that if this Fancy be not regulated,
it is a mere caprice, and utterly incapable to produce a reasonable and
judicious Poem.

The Prologue Spoken by Mr. Betterton, Representing the Ghost of Shakespeare.
SEE, my loved Britons, see your Shakespeare rise,
An awful ghost confessed to human eyes!
Unnamed, methinks, distinguished I had been
From other shades, by this eternal green,
About whose wreaths the vulgar Poets strive,
And with a touch, their withered Bays revive.
Untaught, unpracticed, in a barbarous Age,
I found not, but created first the Stage.
And, if I drained no Greek or Latin store,
'Twas, that my own abundance gave me more.
On foreign trade I needed not rely
Like fruitful Britain, rich without supply.
In this my rough-drawn Play, you shall behold
Some Master-strokes, so manly and so bold
That he, who meant to alter, found 'em such
He shook; and thought it Sacrilege to touch.
Now, where are the Successors to my name?
What bring they to fill out a Poets fame?
Weak, short-lived issues of a feeble Age;
Scarce living to be Christened on the Stage!
For Humor farce, for love they rhyme dispense,
That tolls the knell, for their departed sense.
Dullness might thrive in any trade but this:
'T would recommend to some fat Benefice.
Dullness, that in a Playhouse meets disgrace
Might meet with Reverence, in its proper place.
The fulsome clench that nauseats the Town
Would from a Judge or Alderman go down!
Such virtue is there in a Robe and gown!
And that insipid stuff which here you hate
Might somewhere else be called a grave debate:
Dullness is decent in the Church and State.
But I forget that still it is understood
Bad Plays are best decry'd by showing good:
Sit silent then, that my pleased Soul may see
A Judging Audience once, and worthy me:
My faithful Scene from true Records shall tell
How Trojan valor did the Greek excel;
Your great forefathers shall their fame regain,
And Homers angry Ghost repine in vain.
Persons Represented, By
Hector. Mr. Smith. Troilus. Mr. Betterton. Priam. Mr. Percivall. Aeneas. Mr.
Joseph Williams. Pandarus. Mr. Leigh. Calchas. Mr. Percivall. Agamemnon. Mr.
Gillo. Ulysses. Mr. Harris. Achilles. Mr. David Williams. Ajax. Mr. Bright.
Nestor. Mr. Norris. Diomedes. Mr. Crosby. Patroclus. Mr. Boman. Menelaus. Mr.
Richards. Thersites. Mr. Underhill. Cressida, Mrs Mary Lee. Andromache. Mrs
Betterton.
TRVTH found too late. A TRAGEDY.
ACT I. SCENE I. A Camp.
Enter Agamemnon, Menelaus, Ulysses, Diomedes, Nestor. Agam. PRinces, it seems
not strange to us nor new,
That after Nine years Seige Troy makes defense,
Since every Action of Recorded Fame
Has with long difficulties been involved,
Not Answering that Idea of the thought
Which gave it Birth, why then you Grecian Chiefs,
With sickly Eyes do you behold our labors,
And think 'em our dishonor, which indeed,
Are the protractive Trials of the Gods,
To prove heroique Constancy in Men?

Nestor. With due observance of thy Sovereign Seat
Great Agamemnon, Nestor shall apply,
Thy well-weigh'd words: In struggling with misfortunes,
Lies the true proof of Virtue: on smooth Seas,
How many bawble Boats dare set their Sails,
And make an equal way with firmer Vessels!
But let the Tempest once inrage that Sea,
And then behold the strong rib'd Argosie,
Bounding between the Ocean and the Air
Like Perseus mounted on his Pegasus.
Then where are those weak Rivals of the Maine?
Or to avoid the Tempest fled to Port,
Or made a Prey to Neptune: even thus
Do empty show and true prized worth divide
In storms of Fortune.

Ulysses. Mighty Agamemnon!
Heart of our Body, Soul of our designs,
In whom the tempers, and the minds of all
Should be enclosed: hear what Ulysses speaks.

Agam. -- You have free leave.

Ulysses. Troy had been down ere this, and Hectors Sword
Wanted a Master but for our disorders:
The observance due to rule has been neglected;
Observe how many Grecian Tents stand void
Upon this plain; so many hollow factions
For when the General is not like the Hive
To whom the Foragers should all repair,
What Honey can our empty Combs expect?
O when Supremacy of Kings is shaken,
What can succeed: How could communities
Or peaceful traffic from divided shores,
Prerogative of Age, Crowns, Scepters, Lawrells,
But by degree stand on their solid base*
Then every thing resolves to brutal force
And headlong force is led by hoodwinked will,
For wild Ambition, like a ravenous Woolf,
Spurd on by will and seconded by power,
Must make an universal prey of all,
And last devour it self.

Nest. Most prudently Ulysses has discovered
The Malady whereof our state is sick.

Diom. It Is truth he speaks, the General's disdained
By him one step beneath, he by the next:
That next by him below: so each degree
Spurns upward at Superior eminence:
Thus our distempers are their sole support;
Troy in our weakness lives, not in her strength.

Agam. The Nature of this sickness found, inform us
From whence it draws its birth?

Ulysses. The great Achilles whom opinion crowns
The chief of all our Host --
Having his ears buzzed with his noisy Fame
Disdains thy Sovereign charge, and in his Tent,
Lies mocking our designs, with him Patrocius
Upon a lazy Bed, breaks scurvil Jests
And with ridiculous and awkard action,
Which, slanderer, he limitation calls
Mimicks the Greclan chiefs.

Agam. As how Ulysses?

Ulysses. Even thee the King of men he does not spare
(The monkey Author) but thy greatness Pageants
And makes of it Rehearsals: like a Player
Bellowing his Passion till he break the spring
And his racked Voice jar to his Audience;
So represents he Thee, though more unlike
Then Vulcan is to Venus.
And at this fulsome stuff, this wit of Apes,
The large Achilles on his pressed Bed lolling,
From his deep Chest roars out a loud Applause,
Tickling his spleen, and laughing till he wheeze.

Nestor. Nor are you spared Ulysses, but as you speak in Council
He hems ere he begins, then strokes his Beard,
Casts down his looks, and winks with half an Eye;
'Has every action, cadence, motion, tone,
All of you but the sense.

Agam. Fortune was merry
When he was born, and played a trick on Nature
To make a mimick Prince: he never acts ill
But when he would seem wise:
For all he says or does from serious thought
Appears so wretched that he mocks his title
And is his own Buffoo.

Ulysses. In imitation of this scurril fool
Ajax is grown self-willed as broad Achilles,
He keeps a Table too, makes Factious Feasts,
Rails on our State of War, and sets Thirsites
(A slanderous slave of an ore-flowing gall)
To level us with low Comparisons:
They tax our Policy with Cowardice
Count Wisdom of no moment in the War,
In brief, esteem no Act, but that of hand;
The still and thoughtful parts which move those hands
With them are but the tasks cut out by fear
To be performed by Valor.

Agam. Let this be granted, and Achilles horse
Is more of use then he: but you grave pair
Like time and wisdom marching hand in hand
Must put a stop to these incroaching Ills:
To you we leave the ear:
You who could show whence the distemper springs
Must vindicate the Dignity of Kings.

Exeunt. SCENE II. Troy.
Enter Pandarus, and Troilus. Troil. Why should I fight without the Trojan walls
Who, without fighting, am ore 'thrown within:
The Trojan who is Master of a Soul
Let him to battle, Troilus has none.

Pand. Will this never be at an end with you?

Troil. The Greeks are strong and skillful to their strength
Fierce to their skill, and to their feirceness wary;
But I am weaker then a Woman's tear,
Tamer then sleep, fonder then Ignorance:
And Artless as unpractic'd Infancy.

Pand. Well, I have told you enough of this; for my part I Will not meddle nor
make any further in your Love: He that will eat of the Roastmeat, must stay for
the kindling of the fire.


Troil. Have I not stayed?


Pand. I, the kindling: but you must stay the spitting of the meat.


Troil. Have I not stayed?


Pand. I, the spitting: but there is two words to a bargain: you must stay the
roasting too.


Troil. Still have I stayed: and still the farther off.


Pand. That Is but the roasting, but there is more in this word stay; there is the
taking off the Spitt, the making of the sauce, the dishing, the setting on the
Table, and the saying Grace; nay you must stay the cooling too, or you may
chance to burn your chaps.


Troil. At Priams table pensive do I sit, And when fair Cressid comes into my
thoughts (Can she be said to come, who never was absent!)


Pand. Well, she is a most ravishing creature; and she looked Yesterday most
killingly, she had such a stroke with her eyes, she cut to the quick with every
glance of them.


Troil. I was about to tell thee, when my heart
Was ready with a sigh to cleave in two
Lest Hector, or my Father should perceive me,
I have with mighty anguish of my Soul
Just at the Birth stifled this still-born-sigh
And forced my face into a painful smile.

Pand. I measured her with my girdle Yesterday, she is not half a yard about the
waste, but so taper a shape did I never see, but when I had her in my arms,
Lord thought I, and by my troth I could not forbear sighing, if Prince Troilus
had her at this advantage, and I were holding of the door. -- And she were a
thought taller, but as she is, she wants not an Inch of Hellen neither; but
there is no more comparison between the Women -- there was wit, there was a
sweet tongue: How her words melts in her mouth! Mercury would have been glad
to have had such a tongue in his mouth I warrant him.

I would some body had heard her talk Yesterday, as I did:

Troil. Oh Pandarus, when I tell thee I am mad
In Cressid's Love, thou answer'st she is fair;
Praisest her eyes, her stature and her wit;
But praising thus, instead of oil and balm,
Thou lay'st in every wound her Love has given me
The Sword that made it.

Pand. I give her but her due.

Troil. Thou give'st her not so much.

Pand. Faith I Will speak no more of her, let her be as she is:
If she be a beauty it is the better for her, and she be not
She has the mends in her own hands for Pandarus.

Troil. In spite of me thou will mistake my meaning.

Pand. I have had but my labor for my pains,
Ill thought on of her, and ill thought on of you:
Gone between and between, and am ground in the Millstones
For my Labor.

Troil. What art thou angry Pandarus with thy friend?

Pand. Because she is my Niece, therefore she is not so fair as Hellen, and she
were not my Niece, show me such another piece of Woman's flesh; take her limb by
limb, I say no more, but if Paris had seen her first, Menelaus had been no
Cuckold: but what care I if she were a Black-moore, what am I the better for
her face.


Troil. Said I she was not beautiful.


Pand. I care not if you did, she is a fool to stay behind her Father Calchas,
let her to the Greeks; and so I Will tell her: for my part I am resolute, I Will
meddle no more in your affairs.


Troil. But hear me!


Pand. Not I.


Troil. Dear Pandarus --


Pand. Pray speak no more on it, I Will not burn my fingers in another body's
business, I Will leave it as I found it, and there is an end.

[Exit Pandarus.
Troil. O Gods, how do you torture me?
I cannot come to Cressid but by him,
And he is as peevish to be wooed to woo,
As she is to be won.

Enter Aeneas. Aeneas. How now, Prince Troilus; why not in the battle?

Troil. Because not there, this Woman's answer suites me;
For Womannish it is to be from thence*
What news Aeneas from the field to day?

Aen. Paris is hurt.

Troil. By whom?

Aen. By Menelaus. Hark what good sport
Alarm within* Is out of Town to day, when I hear such Music
I cannot hold from dancing.

Troil. I Will make one,
And try to lose an anxious thought or two
In heat of action.
[Aside] Thus Coward-like from love to War I run,
Seek the less dangers, and the greater shun.
[ Exit Troil.
Enter Cressida. Cressid. My Lord Aeneas, who were those went by? I mean the
Ladys!

Aen. Queen Hecuba, and Helien.

Cressi. And whither go they?

Aen. Up to the Western Tower.
Whose height commands as subject, all the vale;
To see the battle, Hector whose patience
Is fixed like that of Heaven, to day was moved:
He chid Andromache, and struck his Armourer,
And as there were good Husbandry in War,
Before the Sun was up he went to field;
Your pardon Lady that is my business too.
Exit Aeneas.
Cressi. Hectors a gallant Wariour.

Enter Pandarus. Pand. What Is that, what is that!

Cressi. Good morrow Uncle Pandarus.

Pand. Good morrow Cousin Cressida: when were you at Court?

Cressi. This morning Uncle!

Pand. What were you a talking when I came? was Hector armed,
And gone ere ye came? Hector was stirring early.

Cressi. That I was talking of; and of his anger!

Pand. Was he angry say you? true he was so, and I know the cause: He was
struck down yesterday in the battle, but he will lay about him; he will cry
quittance with 'em to day I Will answer for him: and there is Troilus will not
come far behind him; let 'em take heed of Troilus, I can tell 'em that too.


Cressi. What was he struck down too?


Pand. Who, Troilus? Troilus is the betterman of the two.


Cressi. Oh jupiter! there is no comparison, Troilus the better man!


Pand. What * no comparison between Hector and Troilus? do you know a man if
you see him?


Cressi. No, for he may look like a man, and not be one.


Pand. Well, I say Troilus is Troilus.


Cressi. That Is what I say, for I am sure he is not Hector.


Pand. No, nor Hector is not Troilus, make your best of that Niece!


Cressi. It Is true, for each of 'em is himself.


Pand. Himself! alas poor Troilus! I would he were himself, welk the Gods are
all sufficient, and time must mend or end: I would he were himself, and would I
were a Lady for his sake. I would not answer for my Maidenhead, -- No, Hector
is not a better man than Troilus.


Cressi. Excuse me.


Pand. Pardon me: Troilus is in the bud; it is early day with him, you shall
tell me another tale when Troilus is come to bearing: and yet he will not bear
neither is some sense. No, Hector shall never have his virtues.


Cressi. No matter.


Pand. Nor his beauty, nor his fashion, nor his wit, he shall have nothing of
him.


Cressi. They would not become him, his own are better.


Pand. How, his own better! you have no judgment Niece, Hellen her self swore
the other day, that Troilus for a manly brown complexion, (for so it is, I must
confess;) not brown neither.


Cressi. No, but very brown.


Phnd. Faith to say truth, brown and not brown: come I swear to you, I think
Hellen loves him better then Paris: Nay I Am sure she does, she comes me to him
the other day, into the bow window, and you know Troilus has not above three or
four hairs on his chin.


Cressi. That Is but a bare commendation.


Pand. But to prove to you that Hellen loves him, she comes, and puts me her
white hand to his cloven chin!


Cressi. Has he been fighting then, how came it cloven?


Pand. Why, you know it is dimpled. I cannot choose but laugh to think how she
tickled his cloven chin: She has a mavelous white hand I must needs confess.

But let that pass, for I know who has a whiter: Well Cousin I told you a thing
yesterday, think on it, think on it.


Cressi. So I do Uncle.


Pand. I Will besworn it is true; he will weep ye, and 'twere a man born in April.
[A Retreat sounded. Hark, they are returning from the field; shall we stay and
see 'em as they come by, sweet Niece do, sweet Niece Cressida.


Cressi. For once you shall command me.


Pand. Here, here, here is an excellent place; we may see 'em here most bravely,
and I Will tell you all their names as they pass by: but mark Troilus above the
rest, mark Troilus, he is worth your marking.


Aeneas passes over the Stage. Cressi. Speak not so loud then.


Pand. That Is Aeneas, Is It not a brave man that, he is a swinger, many a Grecian
he has laid with his face upward; but mark Troilus, you shall see anon.

Enter Anthenor, passing. That Is Anthenor, he has a notable head-peece I can
tell you, and he is the ablest man for judgment in all Troy, you may turn him
loose in faith, and by my troth a proper person: When comes Troilus? I Will show
you Troilus anon, if he see me, you shall see him nod at me.

Hector passes over. That Is Hector, that, that, look you that, there is a
fellow, go thy way Hector, there is a brave man Niece: O brave Hector, look how
he looks! there is a countenance! is it not a brave man Niece?


Cressi. I always told you so.


Pand. Is a not? it does a man's heart good to look on him, look you, look you
there, what hacks are on his Helmet! this was no boys play in faith, he laid it
on with a vengeance, take it off whose who is will as they say! there are hacks
Niece!


Cressi. Were those with Swords.


Pand. Swords, or Bucklers, Faulchions, Darts, and Lances! any thing he cares
not! and the devil come it is all one to him, by Jupiter he looks so terribly
that I am half afraid to praise him.

Enter Paris. Yonder comes Paris, yonder comes Paris, lookye yonder Niece; is it
not a brave young Prince too! He draws the best bow in all Troy, he hits you to
a span twelvescore level; who said he came home hurt to day: why this will do
Hellen's heart good now! Ha! that I could see Troilus now!


Enter Helenus. Cressi. Who Is that black man Uncle?


Pand. That Is Helenus, I marvel where Troilus is all this while? that is
Helenus, I think Troilus went not forth to day; that is Helenus.


Cressi. Can Helenus fight Uncle?


Pand. Helenus! No, yes, he will fight indifferently well, I marvel in my heart
what is become of Troilus? Hark! do you not hear the people cry Troilus? Helenus
is a Priest and keeps a whore; he will fight for's whore, or he is no true Priest
I warrant him.


Enter Troilus passing over. Cressi. What sneaking fellow comes yonder?


Pand. Where, yonder! that is Deiphobus: No I lie, I lie, that is Troilus,
there is a man Niece! hem! O brave Troilus! the Prince of chivalry, and flower
of fidelity!


Cressi. Peace, for shame peace.


Pand. Nay but mark him then! O brave Troilus! there is a man of men Niece! look
you how his Sword is bloody, and his Helmet more hacked then Hectors, and how
he looks, and how he goes! O admirable youth! he nere saw two and twenty. Go
thy way Troilus, go thy way! had I a sister were a grace, and a daughter a
Goddess, he should take his choice of 'em, O admirable man! Paris! Paris is
dirt to him, and I warrant Hellen to change, would give all the shoes in her
shop to boot.


Enter Common Soldiers passing over. Cressi. Here come more.


Pand. Asses, fools dolts, dirt and dung, stuff and lumber: porredg after meat?
but I could live and dye with Troilus. Nere look Niece, nere look, the Lions
are gone; Apes and Monkeys, the fag end of the creation. I had rather be such a
man as Troilus, then Agamemnon and all Greece.


Cressi. There Is Achilles among the Greeks, he is braveman!


Pand. Achilles! a Carman, a beast of burden; a very Camel, have you any eyes
Niece, do you know a man! is he to be compared with Troilus!


Enter Page. Page. Sir, my Lord Troilus would instantly speak with you.


Pand. Where boy, where!


Page. At his own house, if you think convenient.


Pand. Good boy tell him I come instantly, I doubt he is wounded, farewell good
Niece: But I Will be with you by and by.


Cressi. To bring me Uncle!


Pand. I, a token from Prince Troilus.


Cressi. By the same token you are a procurer Uncle.

[Exit Pandarus. Cressida alone. A strange dissembling Sex we Women are,
Well may we men, when we our selves deceive.
Long has my secret Soul loved Troilus.
I drunk his praises from my Uncles mouth,
As if my ears could nere be satisfied;
Why then, why said I not, I love this Prince?
How could my tongue conspire against my heart,
To say I loved him not, O childish love!
It Is like an Infant froward in his play*
And what he most desires, he throws away.
[ Exit Cressida.
ACT II. SCENE I. Troy.
Priam, Hector, Troilus, Aeneas. Priam. AFter the expense of so much time and
blood,
Thus once again the Grecians send to Troy.
Deliver Hellen, and all other loss
Shall be forgotten Hector, what say you to it?

Hect. Though no man less can fear the Greeks then I,
Yet there is no Virgin of more tender heart
More ready to cry out, who knows the consequence,
Then Hector is; for modest doubt is mixed
With manly courage best, let Hellen go.
If we have lost so many lives of ours,
To keep a thing not ours; not worth to us
The vallue of a man, what reason is there
Still to retain the cause of so much ill?

Troil. Fie, fie, my noble Brother!
Weigh you the worth and honor of a King,
So great as Asia's Monarch in a scale
Of common ounces thus?
Are fears and reasons fit to be considered,
When a Kings fame is questioned?

Hect. Brother, she is not worth
What her defense has cost us.

Troil. What Is ought but as it is vallued?

Hect. But vallue dwells not in opinion only:
It holds the dignity and estimation,
As well, wherein it is precious of it self.
As in the prizer, it is Idolatry
To make the Service greater than the God.

Troil. We turn not back the Silks upon the Merchant
When we have worn 'em: the remaining food
Throw not away because we now are full.
If you confess 'twas wisdom Paris went,
As you must needs; for you all cried go, go,
If you will confess he brought home noble prize
As you must needs, for you all clapped your hands,
And cried inestimable: why do you now
So underrate the vallue of your purchase?
For let me tell you it is unmanly theft
When we have taken what we fear to keep!

Aene. There Is not the meanest Spirit in our party
Without a heart to dare, or Sword to draw,
When Hellen is defended: none so noble
Whose life were ill bestowed, or death unfam'd,
When Helleu is the Subject.

Priam. So says Paris.
Like one besotted on e^^eminate joys,
He has the honey still, but these the gall.

Aeneas. He not proposes merely to himself
The pleasures such a beauty brings with it:
But he would have the stain of Hellen's rape
Wiped off in honorable keeping her.

Hect. Troilus and Aeneas you have said:
If saying superficial things be reason.
But if this Hellen be another wife,
The Moral laws of Nature and of Nation's
Speak loud she be restored: thus to persist
In doing wrong, extenuates not wrong,
But makes it much more so: Hectors opinion
Is this, is in way of truth: yet ne'retheless
My sprightly Brother I incline to you
In resolution to defend her still:
For it is cause on which our Trojan honor
And common reputation will depend.

Troil. Why there you touched the life of our design:
Were it not glory that we covet more
Then war and vengeance (beasts and women's pleasure)
I wou^d not wish a drop of Trojan blood
Spent more in her defense: But oh my Brother
She is a subject of renoun and honor,
And I presume brave Hector would not lose
The rich advantage of his future fame
For the wide worlds revenew: -- I have business;
But glad I am to leave you thus resolved.
When such arms strike, never doubt of the success.

Aeneas. May we not guess?

Troil. You may, and be deceived.
[ Exit. Troil.
Hect. A woman on my life: even so it happens,
Religion, state affairs, whater'es the theme
It ends in women still.

Enter Andromache. Priam. See here is your wife
To make that maxim good.

Hect. Welcome Andromache: your looks are cheerful;
You bring some pleasing news.

Andro. Nothing that is serious.
Your little Son Astyanax has employed me
As his Ambassadresse.

Hect. Upon what errand?

Andro. No less then that his Grandfather this day
Would make him, Knight: he longs to kill a Grecian:
For should he stay to be a man, he thinks
Youll kill 'em all; and leave no work for him.

Priam. Your own blood, Hector.

Andro. And therefore he designs to send a challenge
To Agamemnon, Ajax, or Achilles
To prove they do not well to burn our fields;
And keep us cooped like prisner's in a Town:
To lead this lazy life.

Hect. What sparks of honor
Fly from this child! the God's speak in him sure:
-- It shall be so -- I Will do it.

Priam. What means my Son?

Hect. To send a challenge to the boldest Greek;
Is not that Country ours? those fruitful Fields
Washed by yo^ Silver flood, are they not ours?
Those teeming Vines that tempt our longing eyes,
Shall we behold them? shall we call them ours
And date not make them so? by Heavens I Will know
Which of these haughty Grecians, dares to think
He can keep Hector prisner here in Troy.

Priam. If Hector only were a private Man,
This would be courage, but in him it is madness.
The general safety on your life depends;
And sho^'d you perish in this rash attempt

Troy with a groan, would feel her Soul go out:
And breath her last in you.

Aeneas. The task you undertake is hazardous:
Suppose you win, what would the profit be?
If Ajax or Achilles fell beneath
Your thundering Arm, would all the rest depart?
Would Agamemnon, or his injured Brother
Set sail for this? then it were worth your danger:
But, as it is, we throw our utmost stake
Against whole heaps of theirs.

Priam. He tells you true.

Aeneas. Suppose one, Ajax, or Achilles lost.
They can repair with more that single lose:

Troy has but one, one Hector.

Hect. No Aeneas?
What then art thou; and what is Troilus?
What will Astyanax be?

Priam. An Hector one day.
But you must let him live to be a Hector.
And who shall make him such when you are gone?
Who shall inst^nct his tenderness in arms,
Or give his childhood lessons of the war?
Who shall defend the promise of his youth
And make it bear in Manhood? the young Sappling
Is shrouded long beneath the Mother tree
Before it be transplanted from its Earth,
And trust it self for growth.

Hect. Alas, my Father!
You have not drawn one reason from yourself,
But public safety, and my Sons green years:
In this neglecting that main argument
Trust me you chide my filial piety:
As if I could be won from my resolves
By Troy, or by my Son, or any name
More dear to me than yours.

Praim. I did not name my self; because I know
When thou art gone, I need no Grecian Sword,
To help me dye, but only Hectors loss.
Daughter, why speak not you? why stand you silent?
Have you no right in Hector, as a wife?

Andro. I would be worthy to be Hectors wife:
And had I been a Man, as my Soul's one
I had aspired a nobler name, his friend.
How I love Hector, (need I say I love him?)
I am not but in him:
But when I see him arming for his Honor,
His Country and his Gods, that martial fire
That mounts his courage, kindles even to me*
And when the Trojan Matrons wait him out
With prayers, and meet with blessings his return;
The pride of Virtue, beats within my breast,
To wipe away the sweat and dust of War:
And dress my Hero, glorious in his wounds.

Hect. Come to my Arms, thou manlier Virtue come;
Thou better Name than wife! would thou not blush
[Embrace. To hug a coward thus?

Priam. Yet still I fear!

Andro. There spoke a woman, pardon Royal Sir;
Has he not met a thousand lifted Swords,
Of thick ranked Grecians, and shall one affright him?
There Is not a day but he encounters Armles;
And yet as safe, as if the broad brim'd Shield
That Pallas wears, were held 'twixt him and death.

Hect. Thou know me well; and thou shall praise me more,
Gods make me worthy of thee!

Andro. You shall be
My Knight this day, you fhall not wear a cause
So black as Hellens rape upon your breast,
Let Paris fight for Hellen; guilt for guilt,
But when you fight for Honor and for me,
Then let our equal Gods behold an Act,
They may not blush to Crown.

Hect. Aeneas go.
And bear my Challenge to the Grecian Camp,
If there be one amongst the best of Greece,
Who holds his honor higher then his ea^e,
Who knows his valor, and knows not his fear;
Who loves his Mistress more then in confession:
And dares avow her beauty and her worth,
In other Arms then hers; to him this Challenge.
I have a Lady of more truth and beauty,
Then ever Greek did compass in his arms:
And will to morrow, with the Trumpets call,
Midway, between their Tents, and these our Walls,
Maintains what I have said, if any come
My Sword shall honor him, if none shall dare,
Then shall I say at my return to Troy,
The Grecian dames, are Sunburned, and not worth
The splinter of a Lance.

Aeneas. It shall be told 'em,
As boldly as you gave it.

Priam. Heaven protect thee.

[Exeunt Omnes. SCENE II.
Pandarus, Cressida. Pand. YOnder he stands poor wretch! there stands he, with
such a look, and such a face, and such begging eyes; there he stands poor
prisoner.


Cressi. What a deluge of words do you pour out Uncle, to say just nothing?


Pand. Nothing do you call it, is that nothing, do you call it nothing? why he
looks for all the World, like one of your rescally Malefactors, just thrown off
the Gibbet, with his cap down, his arms tied down, his feet sprunting, his body
swinging, nothing do you call it? this is nothing with a vengeance.


Cressi. Or, what think you of a hurt bird, that flutters about with a broken
wing?


Pand. Why go to then, he cannot fly away then, then, that is certain, that is
undoubted: there he lies to be taken up: but if you had seen him, when I said
to him, take a good heart man, and follow me: and fear no colors, and speak,
your mind man: she can never stand you: she will fall, and 'twere a leaf in
Autumn.


Cress. Did you tell him all this without my consent?


Pand. Why you did consent, your eyes consented; they blab'd, they leer'd,
their very corners blabb'd. But you will say your tongue said nothing. No I
warrant it: your tongue was wiser; your tongue was better bred: your tongue
kept its own counsel: Nay, I Will say that for you, your tongue said nothing.
Well such a shamefaced couple did I never see days of my life: so fraid of one
another; such ado to bring you to the business: well if this job were well
over, if ever I lose my pains again wtth an awkard couple, let me be painted in
the signe-post for the Labor in vain: fie upon it, fie upon it; there is no
conscience in it: all honest people will cry shame on it.


Cress. Where is this Monster to be shown? what is to be given for a Sight of
him?


Pand Why ready money, ready money; you carry it about you: give and take is
square-dealing; for in my conscience he is as errant a maid as you are: ^ was
fain to use violence to him, to pull him hither: and he pulled and I pulled:
for you must know he is absolutely the strongest youth in Troy: to'ther day he
took Hellen is one hand, and Paris in to'ther, and danced 'em at one another at
arms-end, and 'twere two Moppets: there was a back, there were bone and
Sinnews: there was a back for you.


Cressi. For these good procuring Offices you will be damned one day Uncle.


Pand. Who I damned? faith I doubt I shall: by my troth I think I shall, nay if
a man be damned for doing good, as thou say, it may go hard with me.


Cressi. Then I Will not see Prince Troilus? ^e not be accessory to your
damnation.


Pand. How, not see Prince Troilus? why I have engaged, I have promised, I have
past my word, I care not for damning, let me alone for damning; I vallue not
damning in comparison with my word. If I am damned it shall be a good damning
to thee girl, thou shall be my heir, come it is a virtuous girl, thou shall help
me t^ keep my word, thou shall see Prince Troilus.


Cressi. The ventures great.


Pand. No venture in the World, thy Mother ventured it for thee, and thou shall
venture it for my little Cousin that must be.


Cressi. Weigh but my fears, Prince Troilus is young. --


Pand. Marry is he, there is no fear in that I hope, the fear were if he were
old and feeble.


Cressi. And I a woman.


Pand. No fear yet, thouart a Woman, and he is a Man, put them two together, put
'em together.


Cressi. And if I should be frail. --


Pand. There Is all my fear that thou art not frail: thou should be frail, all
flesh is frail.


Cressi. Are you my Uncle, and can give this counsel to your own Brothers
daughter.


Pand. If thou were my own daughter a thousand times over, I could do no better
for thee; what would thou have girl, he is a Prince and a young Prince, and a
loving young Prince! an Uncle do thou call me, by Cupid I am a father to
thee; get thee in, get thee in girl, I hear him coming. And do you hear Neice!
I give you leave, [Eeit Cressida. to deny a little 'twill be decent: but take
heed of obstinacy, that is a vice; no obstinacy my dear Niece.


Enter Troylus. Troil. Now Pandarus.


Pand. Now, my sweet Prince! have you seen my Niece? no I know you have not.


Troylus: No Pandarus; I stalk about your doors
Like a strange Soul upon the stygian banks
Staying for waftage: O be thou my Charon,
And give me a swift transportanee to Elysium,
And fly with me to Cressida.

Pand. Walk here a moment more: I Will bring her straight.


Troil. I fear she will not come: most sure she will not.


Pand. How not come, and I her Uncle! why I tell you Prince, she twitters at
you. Ah poor sweet Rogue, ah little Rogue, now does she think, and think, and
think again of what must be betwixt you two. Oh sweet, -- oh sweet -- O -- what
not come, and I her Uncle?


Troil. Still thou flatter'st me; but prithee flatter still; for I would hope;
I would not wake out of my pleasing dream: oh hope how sweet thou art! but to
hope always, and have no effect of what we hope!


Pand. Oh faint heart, faint heart! well there is much good matter in these old
proverbs! No, she will not come I warrant her; she has no blood of mine in her,
not so much as will fill a flea: but if she does not come, and come, and come
with a swing into your arms, I say no more, but she has renounced all grace,
and there is an end.


Troil. I will believe thee: go then, but be sure:


Pand. No, you would not have me go; you are indifferent: shall I go say you:
speak the word then: -- yet I care not: you may stand in your own light; and
lose a sweet young Ladies heart: well, I shall not go then!


Troil. Fly, fly, thou tortur'st me.


Pand. Do I so, do I so! do I torture you indeed! well I will go.


Troil. But yet thou do not go?


Pand. I go immediately, directly, in a twinkling, with a thought. yet you
think a man never does enough for you: I have been laboring in your business
like any Moyle. I was with Prince Paris this morning, to make your excuse at
night for not supping at Court: and I found him, faith how do you think I found
him; it does my heart good to think how I found him: yet you think a man never
does enough for you.


Troil. Will you go then, what is this to Cressida?


Pand. Why you will not hear a Man; what is this to Cressida? why I found him
abed, abed with Hellena by my troth: it is a sweet Queen, a sweet Queen, a very
sweet Queen; -- but she is nothing to my Cousin Cressida; she is a blowse, a
gypsy, a Tawney-moor to my Cousin Cressida: And she lay with one white arm
underneath the whorsons neck: oh such a white, lilly white, round, plump arm it
was -- and you must know it was stripped up to th'elbows: and she did so kiss
him, and so huggle him: -- as who should say --


Troil. But still thou stay'st: what is this to Cressida?


Pand. Why I made your excuse to your Brother Paris; that I think's to
Cressida; but such an arm, such a hand, such taper fingers, the other hand was
under the bed-cloaths, that I saw not, I confess, that hand I saw not.


Troil. Again thou tortur'st me.


Pand. Nay I was tortured too; old as I am, I was tortured too: but for all
that, I could make a shift, to make him, to make your excuse, to make your
father; -- by Jove when I think of that hand, I am so ravished, that I know not
what I say: I was tortured too.

[ Troilus turns away discontented. Well I go, I go; I fetch her, I bring her,
I conduct her: not come quoth a, and I her Uncle!

Exit Pandarus.
Troilus. Im'e giddy; expectation whirls me round:
The imaginary relish is so sweet,
That it enchants my sense; what will it be
When I shall taste that Nectar?
It must be either death, or joy too fine
For the capacity of human powers.
I fear it much: and I do fear beside,
That I shall lose distinction in my joys:
As does a battle, when they charge on heaps
A flying Enemy.

Re-enter Pandarus. Pand. She Is making her ready: she will come straight, you
must be witty now; she does so blush, and fetches her breath so short, as if
she were frighted with a spright: it is the prettiest villain, she fetches her
breath so short, as 'twere a new taken Sparrow.


Troil. Just such a passion, does heave up my breast!
My heart beats thicker than a feavourish pulse:
I know not where I am, nor what I do:
Just like a slave, at unawares encountering
The eye of Majesty: -- Lead on, I Will follow.

Exeunt together. SCENE III. The Camp.
Nestor, Ulysses. Vlyss. I have conceived an embryo in my brain:
Be you my time to bring it to some shape.

Nest. What is it, Ulysses?

Ulyss. The ^eeded pride,
That has to this maturity* blow^ up
In rank Achilles, must or now be ^ropt,
Or shedding, breed a nursery of ^ike ill,
To overtop us all.

Nest. That Is my opinion.

Vlyss. This challenge which (...) as brings from Hector,
However it be spread in general terms,
Relates in purpose only to Achilles.
And will it wake him to the answer think you?

Nest. It ought to do: whom can we else oppose
Who do^'d from Hector bring his honor off,
If not Achilles the Success of this
Although particular, will give an Omen
Of good or bad, even to the general cause.

(...) Pardon me Nestor, if I contradict you.
Therefore it is fit Achilles meet not (...).
Let us like Merchants show our coursest (...),
And think perchance (...)
The luster of our better yet unshown
Will show the better; let us not (...)
Our greatest warrior should be matched with Hector.
For both our honor and our shame in this,
Shall be attended with strange followers.

Nest. I see them not with my old eyes; what are they?

Vlyss. What glory our Achilles gains from Hector.
Were he not proud we all should share with him:
But he already is too insolent:
And we had better parch in A^^rick Sun
Than in his pride, should he escape Hector fair.
But grant he should be foiled
Why then our common reputation suffers,
In that of our best Man: No, make a Lottery;
And by device let blockish Ajax draw
The chance to fight with Hector: among our selves
Give him allowance as the braver Man;
For that will physic the great Myrmidon,
Who swells with loud applause; and make him fall
His Crest, if brainless Ajax come safe off.
If not, we yet preserve a fair opinion,
That we have better men.

Nest. Now I begin to relish thy advice:
Come let us go to Agamemnon straight,
T'inform him of our project.

Vlyss. It Is not ripe.
The skillful Surgeon will not lanch a sore
Till Nature has digested and prepared
The growing humors to his healing purpose.
Else must he often grieve the patients sense,
When one incision once well-time'd woul'd serve:
Are not Achilles, and dull Ajax friends?

Nest. As much as fools can be.

Vlyss. That knot of friendsip first must be untied
Ere we can reach our ends; for while they love each other
Both hating us, will draw too strong a byasse,
And all the Camp will lean that way they draw:
For brutall courage is the Soldiers Idol:
So, if one prove contemptuous, backed by to'ther,
'Twill give the law to cool and sober sense,
And place the power of war in Mad-mens hands.

Nest. Now I conceive you; were they once divided,
And one of them made ours, that one would check
The others towering growth: and keep both low,
As Instruments, and not as Lords of war.
And this must be by secret coals of envy,
Blown in their breast: comparisons of worth;
Great actions weighed of each: and each the best,
As we shall give him voice.

Vlyss. Here comes Thersites.
Enter Thersites. Who feeds on Ajax: yet loves him not, because he cannot love.
But as a Species, differing from mankind,
Hatss all he sees; and rails at all he knows;
But hates them most, from whom he most receives.
Disda^ing that his lot should be so low.
That he should want the kindeness which he takes.

Nest. There Is none so fit an Engine: Save ye Thersites.

Vlyss. Hayl noble Grecian, Thou relief of toyls,
Soul of our mirth, and joy of sullen war.
In whose converse our winter-nights are short,
And Summer-days not tedious.

There Is. Hang you both.

Nest. How hang us both!

There Is. But hang thee first, thou very reverend fool!
Thou sapless Oak, that liv'st by wanting thought.
And now in thy three hundredth year repin'st
Thou should be felled: hanging's a civil death,
The death of men: thou can not hang: thy trunk
Is only fit for gallows to hang others.

Nest. A fine greeting.

There Is. A fine old Dotard, to repine at hanging
At such an Age! what saw the Gods in thee
That a Cock-Sparrow should but live three years,
And thou shoud'st last three Ages! he is thy better;
He uses life: he treads himself to death.
Thou have forgot thy use some hundred years:
Thou stump of Man, thou worn-out broom: thou lumber.

Nest. I Will hear no more of him, his poison works;
What curse me for my age!

Vlyss. Hold, you mistake him, Nestor; it is his custom:
What malice is there in a mirthfull scene!
It Is but a keen-edg'd Sword, spread over with blame
To heal the wound it makes:

There Is. Thou beg'st a curse!
May thou quit scores then, and be hanged on Nestor,
Who hangs on thee: thou lead'st him by the nose:
Thou paly'st him like a puppet; speak within him,
And when thou have contirv'd some dark design
To loose a thousand Greeks; make dogs meat of us,
Thou layst thy Cuckows egg within his nest,
And make him hatch it: teach his remembrance
To lie; and say, the like of it was practiced
Two hundred years ago; thou bring'st the brain;
And he brings only beard to vouch thy plots;

Nest* I Am no man's fool.

There Is. Then be thy own, that is worse.

Nest. He Will rail all day.

Vlyss. Then we shall learn all day.
Who forms the body to a graceful carriage
Must imitate our awkard motions first;
The same prescription does the wise Thersites
Apply to mend our minds. The same he uses
To Ajax, to Achilles; to the rest;
His Satyrs are the phyfick of the Camp.

There Is. Would they were poison to it, Rats-bane and Hemlock:
Nothing else can mend you; and those two brawny fools.

Vlyss. He hits them right:
Are they not such my Nestor?

There Is. Dolt-heads, Asses.
And beasts of burden; Ajax and Achilles!
The pillars, no, the porters of the war.
Hard-headed Rogues! Engines, mere wooden Engines,
Pushed on to do your work.

Nest. They are indeed.

There Is. But what a Rogue art thou
To say they are indeed: Heaven made e,m horses
And thou put'st on their harness: rid'st and spur'st them:
Usurp'st upon heavens fools, and make them thine.

Nest. No: they are headstrong fools to be corrected
By none but by Thersites: thou alone
Can tame, and train them to their proper use;
And doing this may claim a just reward
From Greece, and Royal Agamemnons, hands.

There Is. Ay, when you need a man, you talk of giving;
For wit's a dear commodity among you:
But when you do not want him, then stale porridge,
A starved dog would not lap; and furrow water
Is all the wine we taste, give drabs and pimps:
He have no gifts with hooks at end of them.

Vlyss. Is this a Man, O Nestor to be bought!
Asia's not price enough! bid the world for him.
And shall this man, this Hermes, this Apollo,
Sit lagg of Ajax table? almost minstrell,
And with his presence grace a brainless feast?
Why they con sense from him grow wits by rote,
And yet, by ill repeating, libell hi^^*
Making his wit their nonsense: nay they scorn him;
Call him bought rayler, (...) tongue!
Play him for sport at meals* and kick him off.

There Is. Yes they can kick; my buttocks feel they can:
They have their Asses tricks: but I'Ie eat pebbles,
I Will starve;'it is brave to starve, it is like a Soldier;
Before I'Ie feed those wit-starv'd rogues with sense*
They shall eat dry, and choke for want of wit,
Ere they be moistened with one drop of mine.
Ajax, and Achilles, two mudd-walls of fool,
That only differ in degrees of thickness.

Vlyss. I Would be revenged of both, when wine ^umes high,
Set them to prate, to boast their brutall strength,
To vye their stupid courage, till they quarrel
And play at hard-head with their empty Skulls.

There Is. Yes; they shall but and kick; and all the while
I Will think they kick for me: they shall fell timber
On both sides; and then log-wood will be cheap.

Nest. And Agamemnon --

There Is. Pox of Agamemnon;
Cannot I do a mischief for my self
But he must thank me for it!
Vlyss. to Nestor. Away; our work is done.

Exeunt Ulysses, Nestor. Th^rs. This Agamemnon is a King of clouts:
A chip in porredge.

Enter Ajax. Ajax. Thersites!

There Is. Set up to frighten Daws from Cherry trees.

Ajax. Dog!

There Is. A standard to march under!

Ajax. Thou bitch-woolf! can thou not hear! feel then.

Strikes him. There Is. The plague of Greece, and Hellens Pox light on thee,
Thou mungrill masti^^e; thou beef-witted Lord.

Ajax. Speak then, thou moldy leaven of the Camp.
Speak or I Will beat thee into handsomeness.

Thirs. I shall sooner rail thee into wit: thou can kick, cannot thou?
A red murrayn on thy Jades tricks!

Ajax. Tell me the Proclamation:

There Is. Thou art proclaimed a fool I think.

Ajax. You whoreson Cur take that.

[Strikes him. There Is. Thou Scurvy valiant Ass.

Ajax. Thou slave.

There Is. Thou Lord! -- I, do, do, -- would my buttocks were Iron for thy sake.


Enter Achilles. Patroclus. Achill. Why how now Ajax! wherefore do you this?
How now Thersites, what is the matter man!

There Is. I say this Ajax wears his wit in's belly, and his guts in brains.


Achill. Peace fool.


There Is. I would have peace; but the fool will not.


Prtrocl. But what is the quarrel!


Ajax. I bad him tell me the proclamation, and he rails upon me.


There Is. I serve thee not:


Ajax. I shall cut out your tongue!


There Is. It Is no matter; I shall speak as much sense as thou afterward: I Will see
you hanged ere I come any more to your Tent: I Will keep where there is wit
stirring, and leave the faction of fools. --


[going. Achill. Nay, thou shall not go Thersites, till we have squees'd the
venom out of thee: prithee inform us of this Proclamation.


There Is. Why you empty ^uz-balls, your heads are full of nothing else but
Proclamatio^s.


Ajax. Tell us the news I say.


Thirs. You say! why you never said any thing in all your life! But since you
will know, it is proclaimed through the Army, that Hector is to cudgel you to
morrow.


Achilles. How cudgel him, Thersites!


There Is. Nay, you may take a child's part ont if you have so much courage, for
Hector has challenged the toughest of the Greeks: and ^tis in dispute which of
your two heads is the sonndest timber.

A knotty piece of work he'^l have betwi^t your noddles,

Achill. If Hector be to fight with any Greek^,
He knows his Man.

Ajax. Yes; he may know his man, without Art Magic.


There Is. So he had need: ^or to my certain knowledge neither of you two are
conjurers to inform him.


Achill. to Ajax. You do not mean your self, sure.


Ajax. I mean nothing


There Is. Thou mean so always.


Achill. Umh! mean nothing!


There Is, aside. Jove if it be thy will, let (...) two fools q^arrell about
nothing: it is a cause that is worthy of them.


Ajax. You say^d he knew his Man: is there (...) one?
One Man amongst the Greeks!

Achill. Since you will have it,
but one to fight with (...).

Ajax. Then I am he;

Achill. Weak Ajax.


Ajax. Weak Achilles.


There Is. Weak indeed: God help you both!


Patroc. Come, this must be no quarrel.


There Is* There Is no cause for it.


Patroc. He tells you true; you are both equal


There Is. Fools.


Achill. I can brook no comparisons.


Ajax. Nor I.


Achill. Well Ajax.


Ajax. Well Achilles.


There Is. So now they quarrel in Monosyllables: A word and a blow, and't be thy
will.


Achill. You may hear more.


Ajax. I would.


Achill. Expect,


Ajax. Farewell.


Exeunt severally. There Is. Curse on them, they want wine: your tr^e fool will
never fight without it. Or a drab a drab: Oh for a commodious Drabb betwixt
'em! would Hell^n had been here! then it had come to something.

Dogs, Lions, Bulls, for Females tear and gore:
And the Beast Man, is valiant for his whore.
Exit Thersites.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Thersites. There Is. SHall the Idiot Ajax use me thus! he beats me and I
rail at him: O worthy satisfaction! would I could beat him, and he railed at
me! Then there is Achilles, a rare Engineer: if Troy be not taken till these two
undermine it, the walls will stand till they fall of themselves: Now the Plague
on the whole Camp, or rather the Pox: for that is a curse dependent on those
that sight as we do for a Cuckolds queen. -- What ho, my Lord Achilles.


Enter Patroclus. Patroc. Who Is there, Thersites! Good Thersites come in and
rail.


There Is. aside. If I could have remembered an Ass with gilt trappings, thou
had not slipped out of my contemplation. But it is no matter; thy self upon thy
self: the common curse of manki^d, folly and ignorance be thine in great
abundance: Heavens belsse thee from a Tutor; and discipline come not near thee.

I have said my prayers; and the devil Envy say Amen.
Where Is Achilles!
Enter Achilles. Who Is there Thersites! why my digestion, why have thou not
served thy self to my table, so many meals! come begin what is Agamemnon?


There Is. Thy Commander, Achilles: then tell me Pauroclus, what is Achilles?


Patro. Thy Benefactor Thersites; then tell me prithee what is thy self?


There Is. Thy knower, Patrcolus; then tell me, Patroclus, what art thou?


Patroc. Thou may tell that know.


Achill. O, tell, tell. This must be very foolish: and I dye to have my spleen
tickled.


There Is. I Will decline the whole question. Agamemnon commands Achilles, Achilles
is my Benefactor, I am Patroclus knower; and Patroclus is a fool.


Patroc. You Rascal?


Achill. He Is a priviledge'd man, proceed Thersites. Ha! ha! ha! prithee
proceed while I am in the vein of laughing.


Thersit. And all thses foresaid men are fools: Agamemnon's a fool to offer to
command Achilles: Achilles is a fool to be commanded by him, I am a fool to
serve such a fool, and Patroclus is a fool positive.


Patroc. Why am I a fool?


Thersi. Make that demand to Heaven, it suffices me thou art one.


Achill. Ha, ha, ha! O give me ribs of steel, or I shall split with pleasure:
now play me Nestor at a Night alarm: Mimick him rarely, make him cough and
spet, and fumble with his gorget, and shake the rivits with his palsy hand; in
and out, in and out, gad that is exceeding foolish.


Patroc. Nestor shall not escape so, he has told us what we are; come what is
Nestor?


Thersi. Why he is an old wooden top, set up by father Time three hundred years
ago, that hums to Agamemnon and Ulysses, and sleeps to all the world besides.


Achill. So let him sleep for I Will no more of him: O my Patroclus, I but force
a smile, Ajax has drawn the lot, and all the praise of Hector mu^t be his.


Thersi. I hope to see his praise upon his shoulders, in blows and bruises, his
arms, thighs, and body, all full of fame; such fame as he gave me, and a wide
hole at last full in his bosom, to let in day upon him, and discover the
inside of a fool.


Patroc. How he struts in expectation of honor! he knows not what he does.


Thersi. Nay that is no wonder, for he never did.


Achill. Prithee say how he behaves himself?


Thersi. O you would be learning to practice, against such another time. -- Why
he tosses up his head as he had built Castles in the air; and he treads upward to
'em, stalks into th'Element, he surveys himself, as 'twere to look for Ajax: he
would be cried, for he has lost himself, nay he knows no body; I said good
morrow Ajax, and he replied thanks Agamemnon.


Achill. Thou shall be my Ambassador to him Thersites.


Thersi. No, I Will put on his person, let Patroclus make his demands to me, and
you shall see the pageant of Ajax.


Achill. To him Patroclus, tell him! humbly desire the valiant Ajax to invite
the Noble Hector to my Tent: and to procure safe conduct for him from our
Captain General Agamemnon.


Patroc. Jove bless the mighty Ajax!


Thersi. Humh!


Patroc. I ^ome from the great Achilles.


Thersi. Ha!


Patroc. Who most humbly desires you to invite Hector to his Tent.


Thersi. Humh!


Patroc. And to procure him safe conduct from Agamemnon.


Thersi. Agamemnon?


Patroc. I, my Lord.


Thersi. Ha!


Patro. What say you to it?


Therst. Farewell with all my heart.


Patroc. Your answer Sir!


Thersi. If to morrow be a fair day, by eleven a clock it will go one way or
the other, however he shall buy me dearly, fare you well with all my heart.


Achill. Why but he is not in this tune is he?


Thersi. No, but he is thus out of tune, what Music will be in him when Hector
has knocked out his brains I know not, nor I care not, but if emptiness makes
noise, his head will make melody.


Achill. My mind is troubled like a Fountain stirred:
And I my self see not the bottom on it.

Thersi. Would the Fountain of his mind were clear; that he might see an Ass
in it. [Aside.] I had rather be a tick in a sheep, than such a valiant ignorance.


Enter Agamemnon, Ajax, Diomedes, Menelaus. Patroc. Look who comes here.


Achill. Patroclus, I Will speak with no body, come in after me Thersites.


Agam. Where Is Achilles!


[ Exeunt Achill. Thersites. Patro. Within, but ill disposed my Lord.


Menel. We saw him at the opening of his Tent.


Agam. Let it be known to him that we are here.


Patroc. I shall say so to him.

[Exit Patroclus.
Diom. I know he is not ^ick.


Ajax. Yes, Lion sick, sick of a proud heart, you may call it melancholy; if
yo'll humor him: but on my honour' it is no more than pride: and why should he
be proud?


Menel. Here comes Patroclus; but no Achilles with him.

Enter Patroclus. Patroc. Achilles bids me tell you he is sorry
If any thing more than your sport and pleasure
Did move you to this visit: he is not well,
And begs you would excuse him, as unfit
For present business.

Agam. How! how is this Patroclus?
We are too well acquainted with these answers.
Though he has much desert, yet all his virtues
Do in our eyes begin to lose their gloss.
We came to speak with him; you shall not err
If you return we think him over-proud
And under-honest. Tell him this; and add,
That if he over-hold his price so much
We'll none of him: but let him like an Engine
Not portable, lie lagg of all the Camp.
A stirring Dwarf is of more use to us
Then is a sleeping Giant; tell him so.

Patroc. I shall; and bring his answer presently.

Agam. I Will not be satisfied but by himself.
So tell him, Menelaus.

Exeunt Menelaus. Patroclus. Ajax. What Is he more than another?

Agam. No more than what he thinks himself.

Ajax. ^s he so much! do you not think he thinks himself a better Man than me?


Diom. No doubt he does.


Ajax. Do you think so?


Agam. No, noble Ajax; you are as strong, as valiant; but much more courteous.


Ajax. Why should a man be proud? I know not what pride is: I hate a proud man
as I hate the ingendring of toads.


Diom. Aside. It Is strange he should; and love himself so well.

Re-enter Menel. Men. Achilles will not to the field to morrow.

Agam. What Is his excuse?

Men. Why he relies on none
But his own will; possessed he is with vanity:
What should I say, he is so plaguey proud
That the death tokens of it are upon him;
And bode there is no recovery.

Enter Ulysses, Nector. Agam. Let Ajax go to him.

Vlyss. O Agamemnon, let it not be so.
We'll consecrate the steps that Ajax makes
When they go from Achill^s: shall that proud man
Be worshipped by a greater than himself,
One whom we hold our Idol;
Shall Ajax go to him? No, Jove forbid,
And say in thunder, go to him Achilles.

Nest. [Aside.] O, this is well; he rubbs him where it itches.

Ajax. If I go to him with my Gantlet clench'd,
I Will dash him over the face.

Agam. O no, you shall not go.

Ajax. And'he ^e proud with me I Will cure his pride: a paltry
Insolent fellow!

Nest. How he describes himself?

Vliss. Aside. The crow chides blackness. -- here is a man, but it is before his
face, and therefore I am silent.


Nest. Wherefore are you? He is not envious as Achilles is.

Vlyss. Know all the world he is as valiant.

Ajax. A ^horson dog that shall palter thus with us! would a were a Trojan.


Vlyss. Thank Heaven my Lord, you're of a gentle nature,
Praise him that got you, her that brought you forth;
But he who taught you first the use of Arms,
Let Mars divide Eternity; in two,
And give him half. I will not praise your wisdom.
Nestor shall do it; but pardon father Nestor,
Were you as green as Ajax, and your brain
Tempered like his, you never should excel him;
But be as Ajax is.

Ajax. Shall I call you father?

Vlyss. I, my good Son.

Diom. Be ruled by him Lord Ajax.

Vlyss. There is no staying here; the Heart Achilles
Keeps thicket, please it our great General.
I shall impart a counsel, which observed
May cure this Madmans pride.

Agam. In my own tent our talk will be more private*

Vlyss. But nothing without Ajax:
He is the soul and substance of my councels
And I am but his shadow.

Ajax. You shall see
I am not like Achilles,
Let us confer; and I Will give counsel too.

[Exeunt Omnes. SCENE II.
Pandarus, Troilus, Cressida. Pand. Come, come, what need you blush? shame's a
babie; swear the oaths now to her, that you swore to me: what are you gone
again? you must be watched ere you are made tame must you? why don't you speak
to her first! -- Come draw this Curtain, and lets see your picture: alas a day,
how loath you are to offend daylight! -- (they kiss) that is well, that is well,
nay you shall fight your hearts out ere I part you. -- so so -- so so --


Troil. You have bereft me of all words, fair Cressida.


Pand. Words, pay no debts; give her deeds; -- what billing again! here is in
witness whereof the parties interchangeably -- come in, come in, you lose time
both.


Troil. O Cressida, how often have I wished me here?


Cressi. Wished my Lord! -- the Gods grant! O my Lord. --


Troil. What should they grant? what makes this pretty interr^ption in thy
words?


Cressi. speak I know not what!


Troil. Speak ever so; and if I answer you
I know not what, it shows the more of love.
Love is a child that talks in broken language,
Yet then he speaks most plain.

Cress. I find it true, that to be wise and love
Are inconsistent things.

Pand. what blushing still, have you not done talking vet!

Cress. Well Uncle, what folly I commit, ^ detdcate to you.

Pand. I thank you for that: if my Lord get a boy of you, you will give him me. Be
true to my Lord, if he flinch I Will be hanged for him -- (Now am I in my kingdom!


[aside] Troil. You know your pledges now, your Unkles word and my firm faith.


Pand. Nay I Will give my word for her too: our kindred are constant: they are
burrs I can assure you, they will stick where they are thrown.


Cress. Boldness comes to me now, and I can speak:
Prince Troylus, I have loved you long.

Troil. Why was my Cressida then so hard to win?

Cress. Hard to seem wonn; but I was wonn my Lord.
What have I blabb'd, who will be true to us,
When we are so unfaithful to our selves!
O bid me hold my tongue? for in this rapture.
Sure I shall speak what I should soon repent.
But stop my mouth.

Troil. A sweet command; and willingly obeyed.

[Kisses] Pand. Pretty I faith!

Cress. My Lord I do be^eech you pardon me,
'Twas not my purpose thus to beg a kiss.
I am ashamed: O heavens what have I done!
For thts time let me take my leave, my Lord.

Pand. Leave! and you take leave till to morrow morning, call me Cut.


Cress. Pray let me go.

Troil, Why what offends you, Madam?

Cress. My own company.

Troil. You cannot snun you self.

Cress. Let me go and try:
I have a kind of self resides in you.

Troil. Oh that I thought truth could be in a woman!
(As if it can, I will presume in you)
That my integrity and faith might meet
The same return form her who has my heart.
How should I be exaltted! but alas
I am more plain then dull simplicity!
And art less, as the infancy of truth.

Cress. In that I must not yield to you my Lord.

Troil. All constant Lovers shall, in future Ages,
Approve their truth by Troylus: when their verse
Wants similes as turtles to their mates:
Or true as flowing tides are to the Moon;
Earth to the Center: Iron to Adamant:
At last when truth is tired with repetition;
As true as Troylus shall crown up the verse,
And ^anctify the Numbers.

Cress. Prophet my you be!
If I am false, or swerve from truth of love,
When time is old, and has forgot it self,
In all things else, let it remember me;
And after all comparisons of falsehood
To stabb the heart of perjury in Maids;
Let it be said as false as Cressida.

Pand. Go to, little ones: a bargain made: here I hold your hand, and here my
Cousins: if ever you prove false to one another, after I have taken such pains
to bring you together: let all pitiful goers between, be called to the worlds
end after my name, Pandars.


Cress. And will you promise that the holy Priest
Shall make us one for ever!

Pand. Priests! marry hang 'em! they make you one! go in, go in, and make your
selves one without a priest: I Will have no priests work in my house.


Cress. I Will not consent unless you swear.


Pand. I, do, do, swear; a pretty woman's worth an oath at any time. Keep or
break as time shall try; but it is good to swear, for the saving of her credit:
Hang them sweet Rogues they never expect a Man should keep it. Let him but
swear, and that is all they care for.


Troil. Heavens prosper me as I devoutly swear,
Never to be but yours.

Pand. Whereupon I will lead you into a chamber: and suppose there be a bed
in it; as I fack, I know not: but you will forgive me, if there be: away, away,
you naughty hildings: get ye together, get you together. Ah you wags, do you
l^er indeed at one another! do the neyes twinkle at him! get you together, get
you together.


[Leads them out. Enoter at one door Aeneas with a Torch, at another Hector,
Diomede with Torches, Hect. So ho; who goes there? Aeneas!

Aeneas. Prince Hector!

Diom. Good morrow Lord Aeneas.

Hect. A valiant Greek, Aeneas; take his hand;
Witness the process of your speech within;
You told how Diomede a whole week by days
Did haunt you in the field.

Aeneas. Health to you, valiant Sir,
During all business of the gentle truce;
But when I meet you armed, as black defiance
As heart can think, or courage execute.

Diom. Both one and to there, Diomede embraces.
Our bloods are now in clam; and so, long health;
But when contention, and occasion meets,
By Jove I Will play the hunter for thy life,

Eneas. And thou shall hunt a Lyou that will fly
With his face backward: welcome Diomede
Welcome to Troy: now by Anchises Soul
No man alive can love in such a sort
The thing he means to kill, more excellently.

Diom. We know eath other well.

Aene. We do; and long to know each other worse
To Hect. my Lord, the King has sent for me in haste:
Know you the reason?

Hect. Yes: his purpose meets you,
It was to bring this Greek to Colchas's house.
Where Pandarus his Brother, and his Daughter
Fair Cressida reside: and there to render
For our Anthenor, now redeemed from prison,
The Lady Cressida:

Aene. What! Has the King resolved to gratify
That Traitor Colchos; who forsook his Country,
And turned to them, by giving up this pledge?

Hect. The bitter disposition of the time
Is such, though Colchos as a fugitive
Deserve it not, that we must free Anthenor
On whose wise Counsels, we can most rely:
And therefore Cressida must be returned.

Aene. A word my Lord -- (Your pardon Diomede)
Your Brother Troylus, to my certain knowledge,
Does lodge this night in Paudarus his house:

Hect. Go you before: tell him of our approach
Which will I fear be much
Unwelcome to him.

Aene. I assure you
Troylus had rather Troy were born to Greece
Than Cressida from Troy.

Hect. I know it well: and how he is beside,
Of hasty blood:

Aene. He will not hear me speak:
But I have noted long betwixt you two
A more than Brothers love: an awful homage
The ^iery youth pays to your elder virtue.

Hect. Leave it to me; I Will manage him alone:
Attend you Diomede; My Lord good morrow:
[to Diomed. An urgent business takes me from the pleasure
Your company affords me; but Aeneas
With joy will undertake to serve you here,
And to supply my room.

Aeneas. to Diomed. My Lord I wait you.

Exeunt severally. [Diomede with Aeneas; Hector at another door. Enter
Pandarus: a Servant: Music. Pand. Softly, villain, softly; I would not for
half Troy the Lovers should be disturbed under my roof; listen rogue, listen,
do they breathe?


Serve. Yes, Sir, I hear by some certain signs, the are both awaken.


Pand. That Is as it should be that is well aboth sides. [listens] Yes faith they
are both alive: -- there was a creake! there was a creake: they are both alive
and alive like; there was a creake: a ha boys! -- Is the music ready?


Serve. Shall they ^trike up Sir!


Pand. Art thou sure they do not know the Parties?


Serve. They play to the Man in the Moon for ought they know.


Pand. To the Man in the Moon, ah Rogue! do they so indeed Rogue! I understand,
thee: thou art a wag; thou art a wagg. Come towze rowze! in the name of love,
strike up boys!


Music. and then Song: during which Pandarus listens. Song.
CAn life be a blessing,
Or worth the possessing,
Can life be a blessing if love were away?
Ah no! though our love all night keep us waking,
And though he torment us with cares all the day,
yet he sweetens he sweetens our pains in the taking,
There Is an hour at the last, there is an hour to repay.
2.
In every possessi^g,
The ravishing blessing,
In every possessing the fruit of our pain,
Poor lovers forget long ages of anguish,
Whatever they have suffered and done to obtain;
It Is a pleasure, a pleasure to sigh and to languish,
When we hope, when we hope to be happy again.
Pand. Put up, and vanish; they are coming out; what a ferrup, will you play
when the dance is done? I say vanish.


Exit Music. Peeping. Good In Faith; good ifarth! what hand in hand! -- a fair
quarrel, well ended! do, do, walk him, walk him; A good girl, a discreet girl:
I see she will make the most of him.


Enter Troil. and Cressida. Troil. Farewell, my life! leave me and back to bed:
Sleep ^eal those pretty eyes;
And tie thy senses in as soft a band
As Infants void of thought.

Pandar. showing himself. How now, how now, how go matters! hear you Maid, hear
you; where is my Cousin Cressida?


Cress. Go hang your self you naughty mocking Uncle:
You bring me to do ill and then you jeere me!

Pand. What ill have I brought you to do? say what if you dare now!
My Lord have I brought her to do ill?

Cress. Come, come, beshrew your heart; you will neither be good your self, nor
suffer others.


Pand. Alas poor wench; alas poor Devil; (...)? would anot (a naughty Man) let
it sleep one (...) take him!


Knock. within. Cress. Who Is that at door? good Uncle go and see:
My Lord come you again into my chamber!
You smile and mock as if I meant naughtily!

Troil. Indeed, indeed!

Cress. Come you are deceived; I think of no such thing:
Knock again. How earnestly they knock, pray come in:
I would not for all Troy, you were seen here.

[Exeunt Troil. Cressida. Pand. Who Is there! what is the matter!
Will you beat down the house there!

Enter Hector. Hect. Good morrow my Lord Pandarus; good morrow!

Pand. Who Is there, Prince Hector! what news with you so early?

Hect. Is not my Brother Troilus here?

Pand. Here! what should he do her^?

Hect. Come he is here my Lord, do not deny him:
It does import him much to speak with me.

Pand. Is he here say you? it is more than I know, I Will be sworn!
For my own part I came in late! -- what should he do here?

Hect. Come, come you do him wrong ere you are aware; you will be so true to him,
that you will be false to him: you shall not know he is here; but yet go fetch him
hither: -- go.

[ Exit Pandarus. Enter Troilus. I bring you Brother, most unwelcome news;
But since of force you are to hear it told,
I thought a friend and Brother best might tell it:
Therefore, befroe I speak, arm well your mind
And think you are to be touched dev'n to the quick;
That so, prepared for ill you may be less
Surprised to hear the worst.

Troil. See Hector, what it is to be your Brother,
I stand prepared already.

Hect. Come, you are not,
I know you Troilus, you are hot and fiery:
You kindle at a wrong; and catch it quick
As stubble does the flame.

Troil. It Is heat of blood
And rashness of my youth. I Will mend that error:
Begin and try my temper.

Hect. Can you think
Of that one thing which most could urge your anger
Drive you to madness, plunge you in despair,
And make you hate even me?

Troil. There can be nothing.
I love you Brother, with that awful love
I bear to Heaven, and to superior vert^e,
And when I quit this love you must be that
Which Hector near can be.

Hect. Remember well
What you have said: for when I claim your promise
I shall expect performance.

Troil. I am taught:
I will not rage.

Hect. Nor grieve beyond a man.

Troil. I won not be a woamn.

Hect. Do not Brother:
And I will tell my news, in terms so mild,
So tender, and so fearful to offend
As Mothers use to sooth their froward Babes;
Nay I will swear as you hve sworn to me,
That if some gust of passion swell your soul
To words intemperate, I will bear with you.

Troil. What would this pomp of preparation mean?
Come you to bring me news of Priams death
Or Hecuba's

Hect. The Gods forbid I should:
But what I bring is nearer you, more close,
An ill more yours,

Troil. There is but one that can be.

Hect. Perhaps it is that.

Troil. I Will not suspect my fate
So far, I know I stand possessed of that.

Hect. It Is well: consider at whose house I find you.

Troil. Ha!

Hect. Does it start you! I must wake you more:
Anthenor is exchanged.

Troil. For whom.

Hect. Imagine.

Troil. It comes like thunder grumbling in a cloud,
Before the dreadful break: if here it fall,
The subtle flame will lick up all my blood,
And in a moment turn my heart to ashes.

Hect. That Cressida for (...) is exchanged
Because I knew 'twas harsh I would not tell;
Not all at once; but by degrees and glimpses
I let it in, lest it might rush upon you
And quite orepower your Soul: in this I think
I showed a friend: your part must follow next:
Which is, to curb your choler, tame your grie^,
And bear it like a man.

Troil. I think I do
That I yet live to hear you: but no more:
Hope for no more: for should some Goddess offer
To give her self and all her Heaven in change,
I would not part with Cressida: so return
This answer as my last.

Hect. 'Twill not be taken:
Nor will I bear such news.

Troil. You bore me worse.

Hect. Worse for your self; not for the general state,
And all our common fafety, which depends
On freed Anthenors wisdom.

Troil. You would say
That I Am the Man marked out to be unhappy;
And made the public Sacrifice for Troy.

Hect. I would say so indeed: for can you find
A fate more glorious than to be that victime?
If parting from a Mistress can procure
A Nations happiness, show me that Prince
Who dares to trust his future ^ame so far
To stand the shock of Annals, blotted thus
He sold his Country for a woman's love?

Troil. O, she is my life, my being, and my Soul!

Hect. Suppose she were, which yet I will not grant,
You ought to give her up.

Troil. For whom!

Hect. The public.

Troil. And what are they that I should give up her
To make them happy? let me tell ^ou Brother,
The public, is the Lees of vulgar slaves:
Slaves, with the minds of slaves: so born, so bred:
Yet such as these united in a herd
Are called the public: Millions of such Ciphers
Make up the public sum: an Eagles life
Is worth a world of Crows: are Princes made
For such as these, who, were one Soul extracted
From all their beings, could not raise a Man. --

Hect. And what are we, but for such men as these?
It Is adoration, some say makes a God:
And who should pay it, where would be their Altars
Were no inferior creatures here on Earth?
Even those who serve have their expectances;
Degrees of happiness, which they must share,
Or they will refuse to serve us.

Troil. Let them have it.
Let them eat, drink and sleep; the only use
They have of life:

Hect. You take all these away,
Unless you give up Cressida.

Troil. Forbear;
Let Paris give up Hellen: ^he's the cause,
And root of all this mischief.

Hect. Your own suffrage
Condemns you there: you voted for her stay.

Troil. If one must stay, the other shall not go.

Hect. She shall not?

Troil. Once again, I say she shall not.

Hect. Our Father has decreed it otherwise.

Troil. No matter.

Hect. How! no matter Troylus?
A King, and fathers will!

Troil. When it is unjust.

Hect. Come she shall go.

Troil. She shall? then I am dared.

Hect. If nothing else will do.

Troil. Answer me first;
And then I Will answer that: be sure I will;
Whose hand sealed this exchange?

Hect. My Fathers first;
Then all the Council's after.

Troil. Was yours there?

Hect. Mine was there too.

Troil. Then you are no more my friend:
And for your sake now mark me what I say,
She shall not go.

Hect. Go to, you are a boy,

Troil. A Boy! Im'e glad I am not such a Man,
Not such as thou; a traitor to thy Brother:
Nay more, thy friend: but friend's a Sacred name,
Which none but brave and honest men should wear;
In thee it is vile; it is prostitute: it is Air;
And thus I puff it from me.

Hect. Well, young Man,
Since I Am no friend (and oh that ere I was
To one so far unworthy) bring her out,
Or by our Fathers Soul, of which no part
Did ere descend to thee, I Will force her hence.

Troil. I laugh at thee.

Hect. Thou dare not.

Troil. I dare more,
If urged beyond my temper: prove my daring,
And see which of us has the larger share
Of our great Fathers Soul.

Hect. No more, thou know me.

Troil. I do; and know my self.

Hect. All this ye Gods,
And for the Daughter of a fugitive,
A Traitor to his Country!

Troil. It Is too much.

Hect. By Heaven too little; for I think her common,

Troil. How, Common!

Hect. Common as the tainted shambles,
Or as the dust we tread.

Troil. By Heaven as chaste as thy Andromache.

Hector lays his hand on Troylus his A^m; and Troylus does the same to him.
Hect. What! nam'st thou them together!

Troil. No; I do not:
For Cressida is first: as chaste as she,
But much more fair.

Hect. O patience, patience, Heaven!
Thou tempt'st me strangely: should I kill thee now,
I know not if the Gods can be offended
Or think I slew a Brother; but be gone,
Be gone, or I shall shake thee into Atoms:
Thou know I can.

Troil. I care not if you could.

Hect. walking off. I thank ye Gods for calling to my mind
My promise that no words of thine should urge me,
Beyond the bounds of reason: But in thee
'Twas brutall baseness, so forewa^^'d to fall
Beneath the name of man: to spurn my kindness;
And when I offered thee (thou know how loath!)
The wholesome bitter cup of friendly counsel.
To dash it in my face: farewell, farewell.
Ungrateful as thou art: hereafter use
The name of Brother; but of friend no mo^e.

[goi^g (...). Troil. Will thou not break yet heart? stay Brother, stay*
I promised too, but I have broke my vow,
And you keep yours too well*

Hect. What would thou more?
Take heed, young man how you too (...)
For Heaven can witness'tis with much (...)
That I preserve my faith.

Troil. Else you would kill me;

Hect. By all the Gods I would.

Troil. I Am satisfied.
You have condemned me, and I Will do it my self;
What Is life to him, who has no use of life?
A barren purchase, held upon hard terms!
For I have lost (oh what have I not lost!)
The fairest, dearest, kindest of her Sex,
And lost her even by him, by him, ye Gods,
Who only could, and only should protect me!
And if I had a joy beyond that love,
A friend, have lost him too!

Hect. Speak that again:
(For I could hear it ever:) ^aidst tho^ not
That if thou had a joy beyond that love
It was a friend? O saydst thou not a friend!
That doubting if was kind: then you are divided;
And I have still some part,

Troil. If still you have
You do not care to have it.

Hect. How, not care!

Troil. No, Brother, ca^e not.

Hect. Am I but thy Brother!

Troil. You told me I (...) call you friend no more.

Hect. How far my words were distant from my heart!
Know when I told thee so I loved thee most.
Alas! it is the use of human frailty
To fly to worst extremities with those
To whom we most are kind.

Troil. Is It possible!
Then you are still my friend!

Hect. Heaven knows I am!

Troil. And can forgive the Sallies of my passion?
For I have been too blame: oh much too blame:
Have said such words, nay done such actions too,
(Base as I am) that my awed, conscious Soul
(...) in my breast, nor dare I lift an eye
On him I have offended.

Hect. Peace be to thee
And calmness ever there. I blame thee not:
I know thou love; and what can love not do!
I cast the wild disorderly account
Of all thy words and deeds on that mad passion;
I pity thee, indeed I pity thee:

Troil. Do; for I need it: let me lean my head
Upon thy bosom; all my peace dwells there;
Thou art some God, or much much more then man!

Hect. Alas! to lose the joys of all thy youth,
One who deserved thy love!

Troil. Did she deserve?

Hect. She did.

Troil. Then sure she was no common creature.

Hect. I said it in my rage, I thought not so.

Troil. That thought has bles'd me! but to lose this love.
After long pains, and after short po^^ession.

Hect. I feel it for thee: Let me go to Priam,
I Will break this treaty off; or let me fight;
l'le be thy champion; and secure both her
And thee, and Troy.

Troil. It must not be, my Brother!
For then your error would be more then mine:
l'le bring her forth, and you shall bear her hence;
That you have pitied me is my reward.

Hect. Go then; and the good gods restore her to thee,
And with her all the quiet of thy mind;
The triumph of this kindeness be thy own;
And heaven and earth this testimony yield,
That Friendship never gained a nobler field.

Exeunt severally. ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter Pandarus, Cressida meeting. Pand. Is It possible! no sooner got but lost!
The devil take Antenor: the young Prince will go mad:
A plague upon Anthenor! would they had broke's neck.

Cressi. How now! what is the matter! who was here!

Pand. Oh, oh!

Cressi. Why sigh you so! O where is my Troilus? tell me sweet
Uncle what is the matter?

Pand. Would I were as deep under the earth, as I am above it!

Cressi. Oh the Gods, what is the matter?

Pand. Prithee get thee in, would thou had never been born!
I knew thou would be his death; oh poor Gentleman!
A plague upon Antenor?

Cressi. Good Uncle, I beseech you on my knees, tell me what is the matter?


Pand. Thou must be gone girl; thou must be gone, to the fugitive Rogue Priest
thy father, (and he is my brohter too, but that is all one at this time:) a pox
upon Antenor.?


Cressi. O ye immortal Gods, I will not go.

Pand. Thou must, thou must?

Cressi. I will not: I have quite forgot my father;
I have no touch of birth; no spark of Nature:
No kinn, no blood, no life; nothing so near me
As my dear Troilus?

Enter Troilus. Pand. Here, here, here, he comes sweet Duck!

Cressi. O Troilus, Troilus!

[They both weep over each other, she running into ^is arms. Pand. What a pair
of Spectacles is here! let me embrace too: Oh heart, sings(as the saying is) O
heart, heavy heart, why sighst thou without breaking (where he answers again)
because thou can not ease thy smart, by friendship nor by speaking, there was
never a truer rhyme; let us cast away nothing; for we may live to have need of
such a verse: we see it; we see it, how now lambs?


Troil. Cressida, I love thee with so strange a purity
That the blessed Gods, angry with my devotions
More bright in zeal, than that I pay their Altars,
Will take thee from my sight?

Cressi. Have the Gods envy?

Pa^d* I, I, I, it is too plain a case!

Cressi. And is it true, that I must go from Troy?

Troil. A hastefull truth?

Cressi. What, and from Troilus too?

Troil. From Troy and Troilus: and suddenly.
So suddenly it is counted but by minutes.

Cressi. What not an hour allowed for taking leave?

Troil. Even that is bereft us too: our envious fates
Justle betwixt, and part the dear adieus
Of meeting lips, clasped hands, and locked embraces.
Aeneas within. My Lord, is the Lady ready yet?

Troil. Hark, you are called: some say the Genius so
Cries come, to him who instantly must dye.

Pand. Where are my tears! some rain to'lay this wind:
Or my heart will be blown up by the roots!

Troil. Hear me my Love! be thou but true like me.

Cressi. I true! how now, what wicked thought is this?

Troil. Nay, we must use expostulation kindly,
For it is parting from us:
I spoke not, be thou true, as fearing thee;
But be thou true, I said to introduce
My following protestation: be thou true,
And I will see thee.

Cressi. You Will be exposed to dangers.

Troil. I care not: but be true.

Cressi. Be true again?

Troil. Hear why I speak it love.
The Grecian Youths are full of Grecian Arts:
Alas a kind of holy jealousy
Which I beseech you call a virtuous sin,
Makes me afraid how far you may be tempted.

Cressi. O Heavens, you love me not!

Troil Dye I, a villain then!
In this I do not call your faith in question
But my own merit.

Cressi. Fear not; I Will be true

Troil. Then fate thy worst; for I will see thee love
Not all the Grecian host shall keep me out,
Nor Troy, though walled with fire, should hold me in.
Aeneas within. My Lord, my Lord Troilus: I must call you.

Pand. A mischief call him: nothing but Schreechowls? do, do, call again; you
had best part 'em now in the sweetness of their love! l'le be hanged if this
Aeneas be the Son of (...), sor all his bragging. Honest Venu^ was a Punk:
would she have parted Lovers: no he has not a drop of Venus blood in him:
honest Ve^us was a Punk.


Troil. To Pand. Prithee go out; and gain one minute more.

Pand. Marry and I will: follow you your business; lose no time,'it is very
precious; go, Bill again: I Will tell the Rogue his own I warrant him.

Exit Pandarus.
Cressi. What have we ga^n'd by this one minute more?

Troil. Only to wish another, and another
A longer struggling with the pangs of death.

Cressi. O those who do not know what parting is
Can never learn to dye!

Troil. When I but think this sight may be our last,
If Jove could set me in the palce of A^las
And lay the weight of H^av'n and Gods upon me
He could not press me more.

Cressi. Oh let me go that I may know my grief;
Grief is but guessed, while thou art standing by:
But I too soon shall know what absence is.

Troil. Why it is to be no more: another name for death.
It Is the Sunn parting from the frozen North;
And I, me thinks, stand on some cey cliff,
To watch the last low circles that he makes;
Till he sink down from Heaven! O only Cressida,
If thou depart from me, I cannot live:
I have not soul enough to last for grief,
But thou shall hear what grief has done with me.

Cressi. If I could live to hear it, I were false,
But as a careful traveller who fearing
Assaults of Robbers, leaves his wealth behind,
I trust my heart with thee; and to the Greeks
Bear but an empty Casket.

Troil. Then, I will live; that I may keep that treasure:
And armed with this assurance, let thee go
Loose, yet secure as is the gentle Hawk
When whistled off she mounts into the wind,
Our love's, like Mountains high above the clouds,
Though winds and tempests beat their aged feet,
Their peaceful heads nor storm nor thunder know,
But scorn the threating rack that roles below,

Exeunt Ambo. SCENE II.
Achilles and Patroclus, standing in their Tent. Ulysses, Agamemnon, Menelaus,
Nestor, Ajax, passing over the Stage. Vlyss. AChilles stands in th'entrance of
his Tent:
Please it our General to pass strangely by him,
As if he were forgot, and Princes all
Look on him with neglectful eyes and scorn:
Pride must be cured by pride.

Agam. We'll execute your purpose, and put on
A form of strangness as we pass along
So do each Prince either salute him not
Or else disdainfully, which will shake him more
Then if not looked on: I will lead the way.

Achill. What, comes the General to speak with me!
You know my mind; I Will fight no more with Troy.

Agam. What says Achilles, would he ought with us?

Nest. Would you, my Lord, ought with the General!

Achill. No.

Nest. Nothing my Lord.

Agam. The better.

Menel. How do you, how do you!

Achill. What does the Cuckold scorn me!

Ajax. How now Patroclus!

Achill. Good morrow Ajax*

Ajax. Ha!

Achill. Good morrow.

Ajax. I; and good next day too.

[ Exeunt all but Achilles, and Patroclns. Achill. What mean these fellows!
know they not Achilles?

Patroc. They pass by strangely; they were used to bow;
And send their smiles before 'em to Achilles,
To come as humbly as they used to creep, to holy Altars.

Achill. Am I poor of late!
It Is certain, greatness once fallen out with fortune
Must fall out with men too! what the declind is
He shall as soon read in the eyes of others
As feel in his own fall: for men like butter-flyes,
Show not their mealy wings but to the Summer.

Patroc. It Is known you are in love with Hector's Sister,
And therefore will not fight: and your not fighting
Draws on you this contempt: I often have told you
A woman impudent and mannish grown
Is not more loathed than an effeminate man,
In time of action: I Am condemned for this:
They think my little appetite to war
Deads all the fire in you: but rowse your self,
And love shall from your neck unloose his folds;
Or like a dew drop from a Lions Mane
Be shaken into air.

Achill. Shall Ajax fight with Hector?

Patrocl. Yes, and perhaps shall gain much honor by him.

Achill. I see my reputation is at stake.

Patroc. O then beware, those wounds heal ill that men have given themselves,
because they give them deepest.


Achill. I Will do something:
But what I know not yet, -- No more our Champion.

Re-enter Ajax, Agamemnon, Menelaus, Ulysses, Nest. Diomede, Trumpet Agam. Here
art thou daring combat, valiant Ajax.
Give with thy Trumpet, a loud note to Troy,
Thou Noble Champion, that the sounding air
May pierce the ears of the great challenger,
And call him hither.

Ajax. Trumpet take that purse:
Now crack thy lungs, and split the sounding brass;
Thou blow'st for Hector.

[Trumpet sounds, and is answered from within. Enter Hector, Aeneas, and other
Troj^ns. Agam. Yonder comes the Troop.
Aeneas, coming to the Greeks. Health to the Grecian Lords; what shall be done
To him that shall be vanquished? or do you purpose,
A Victor should be known! will you the Knights,
Shall to the edg of all extremity,
Pursue each other, or shall be divided
By any voice or order of the ^ield;
Hector bad ask.

Agam. Which way won'd Hector have it?

Aene. He cares not, he will obey conditions.

Achill. It Is done like Hector but securely done;
A little proudly, and too much dispising
The Knight opposed, he might have found his match.

Aene. If not Achilles, Sir, what is your name!

Achill. If not Achill^ nothing*

Aene. Therefore Achilles, but who ere know this;
Great Hector knows no pride, weigh him but well,
And that which looks like pride is courtesy.
This Ajax is half made of Hectors blood,
In love whereof half Hector stays at home;

Achill. A Maiden battle! I perceive you then.

Agam. Go Diomede, and stand by valiant Ajax:
As you and Lord Aeneas shall consent,
So let the fight proceed or terminate.

[The Trumpets sound on both sides, while Aeneas and Diomede take their places,
as Judges of the Field: The Trojans and Grecians rank themselves on either
side. Vlyss. They are opposed already.
[Fight equal at first, then Ajax has Hector at disadvantage: at last Hector
closes, Ajax falls on one knee, Hector stands over him but striks not, and Ajax
rises. Aeneas throwing his G^^tlet betwixt them. Princes enough, you both have
shown much valor.

Diomede. And we as Judges of the Field declare;
The combat here shall cease.

Ajax. I am not warm yet, let us fight again.

Aene. Then let it be as Hector shall determine.

Hect. If it be left to me, I will no more.

Ajax, thou art my Aunt Hesion's Son;
The Obligation of our blood forbids us.
But were thy mixture Greek and Trojan so,
That thou could say, this part is Grecian all
And this is Trojan, hence thou should not bear
One Grecian limb, wherein my pointed Sword
Had not impression made, but Heaven forbid
That any drop thou borrowst from my Mother,
Should ere be drained by me, let me embrace thee Cousin:
By him who thunders thou have sinnewy arms,
Hector would have 'em fall upon him thus: --
[Embrace] Thine be the honor, Ajax.

Ajax. I thank thee Hector,
Thou art too gentle, and too free a Man:
I came to kill thee Cousin, and to gain
A great addition from that glorious act:
But thou have quite disarmed me.

Hect. I am glad.
For it is the only way I could (...) thee.

Ajax. If I might in entreaty find success,
I would desire to see thee at my Tent.

Diom. It Is Agamemnons wish, and great Achilles,
Both long to see the valiant Hector there.

Hect. Aeneas, call my Brother Troil^s to me;
And you two sign this friendly enterview.

[ Agamemnon, and the chief of both sides approach. Agam. to Hect. Worthy of
Arms, as welcome as to one
Who would be rid of such an Enemy.
To Troil. My well famed Lord of Troy, no less to you.

Nest. I have, thou gallant Trojan seen thee often
Laboring for destiny, make cruel way,
Through ranks of Grecian youth, and I have seen thee
As swift as lightning spur thy Ph^ygian Steed,
And seen thee scorning many forfeit lives,
When thou have hung thy advanced Sword in the air,
Not leting it decline, on prostrate foes:
That I have said to all the standers by
Lo Jove is yonder, distributing life.

Hect. Let me embrace thee, good old Chroni le,
Who have so long walked hand in hand with time:
Most Reverend Nestor, I am glad to clasp thee.

Vlyss. I wonder now, how yonder City stands,
When we have here, her base and pillar by us.

Hect. I know your countenance, Lord Ulysses well;
Ah Sir, there is many a Greek and Trojan dead,
Since first I saw your self and Di^mede,
In Ilion, on your Greekish Embassy.

Achill. Now Hector, I have fed mine eyes on thee;
I have with exact view perused thee Hector,
And quoted joint by joint.

Hect. Is this Achilles!

Achill. I am Achilles.

Hect. Stand fair, I prithee let me look on thee.

Achill. Behold thy fill.

Hect. Nay, ^ have done already.

Achill. Thou art too brief, I will the second time
As I would buy thee, view thee limb by limb.

Hect. O, like a Book of sport thou read'st me ore;
But there is more in me then thou understand'st.

Achill. Tell me ye Heavens, in which part of his body
Shall ^ destroy him? there, or there, or there!
That I may give th'imagin'd wound a name,
And make di^tinct the very breach, whereout*
Hectors great spirit flew! answer me Heavens!

Hect. Were thou an Oracle to tell me this!
I Would not believe thee, henceforth guard thee well,
I Will kill the every where:
Ye Noble Grecians pardon me this boast,
His insolence draws folly from my lips,
But I Will endeavor deeds to match these words;
Else may ^ never. --

Ajax. Do not cha^e thee Cousin,
And you Achilles let these threats alone:
You may have every day enough of Hector,
If you have stomach, the General State I fear
Can scarce entreat you to perform your boast.

Hect. I pray you let us see you in the field;
We have had paltry Wars, since you refused
The Grecian cause.

Ach^ll. Do thou entreat me Hector!
To morrow will ^ meet thee fierce as death;
To Night all peace.

Hect. Thy hand upon that match.

Agam. First all you Grecian Princes go with me,
And entertain great Hector, afterward,
As his own leisure, shall concur with yours,
You may invite him to your several Tents.

[ Exeunt Agam. Hect. Menel. Nestor, Diomede, together. Troil. My Lord Ulysses.

Tell me I beseech you;
In what part of the field does Calehas lodge!
Vlyss. At Menelaus Tent;
There Diomede does feast with him to Night:
Who neither looks on Heaven or on Earth,
But gives all gaze and bent of amorous view,
On C^essi^a alone.

Troil. Shall I, brave Lord be bound to you so much
After we part from Agamemnons Tent.
To bring me thither!

Vlyss. I shall want on you.
As freely tell me, of what honor was
This Cressida in Troy? had she no Lovers there
Who mourn her absence?

Troil. O Sir, to such as boasting show their scars,
Reproof is due, she loved and was beloved:
That Is all I must impart. Lead on my Lord.

Exeunt Ulysses Troilus. Achill. to Patro. I Will heat his blood with Greckish
wine to Night,
Which with my Sword I mean to cool to morrow.
Patroclus, let us feast him to the height.

Enter Thersites. Patro. Here comes Thersites.

Achill. How now thou core of envy,
Thou crusty batch of Nature, what is the news?

There Is. Why thou picture of what thou seemst, thou Idol of
Idiot worshippers, there is a Letter for thee.

Achill. From whence fragment?

There Is. Why thou full dish of fool, from Troy.

Patroc. Well said adversity! what makes thee so keen to day?

There Is. Because a fool's my whetstone.

Patro. Meaning me?

There Is. Yes meaning thy no meaning; prithee be silent, boy, I profit not by thy
talk: Now the rotten diseases of the South, gut gripings, ruptures, Catarrhs;
loads of gravel in the back, Lethargies, cold palsies, and the like, take
thee, and take thee again; thou green Sarcenet flap for a sore eye, thou
tassell of a prodigals purse, thou: Ah how the poor world is pestered with such
water-flys: such diminitives of nature.


Achill. My dear Patroclus, I am quite prevented
From my great purpose, bent on Hector's life:
Here is a Letter from my love Polixena,
Both taxing, and engaging me to keep
An Oath that ^ have sworn: and will not break it
To save all Greece: let honor go or stay,
There Is more Religion in my love than fame:

Exeunt Achilles, Patroclus. There Is. With too much blood, and too little brain,
these two are running mad before the dog days. There Is Agamemnon too, an honest
fellow enough, and loves a brimmer heartily; but he has not so much brains as
an old gander. But his brother Menelaus, there is a fellow: the goodly
transformation of Jupiter when he loved Europa: the primitive Cuckold: A vile
Monkey tied eternally to his brothers table. To be a Dog, a Mule, a Cat, a
toad, an Owl, a Lizard, a Herring without a roe, I would not care: but to be
Menelaus I would conspire against destiny -- Hey day! will with a wispe, and
Jack a lanthorn!


Hector, Ajax, Agamemnon, Diomede, Ulisses, Troilus, going with torches over
the stage. Agam. We go wrong; we go wrong.

Ajax. No, yonder it is; there where see the light.

Hect. I touble you.

Ajax. Not at all Cousin: Here comes Achilles himself to guide us.

Enter Achilles. Achill. Welcome brave Hector, welcome princes all:

Agam. So now, brave Prince of Tray, I take my leave;
Ajax commands the guard, to wait on you.

Men. Good night my Lord!

Hect. Good night Sweet Lord Menelaus*

There Is. aside. Sweet quoth a! sweet Sink, sweet shore, sweet Jakes!


Achill. Nestor will stay; and you Lord Diomede.
Keep Hector company an hour or two.

Diom. I cannot Sir: I have important business.

Achill. Enter my Lords.

Vliss. to Troil. Follow his torch: he goes to Calchas's tent.

[ Exeunt Achill. Hect. Ajax at one way, Diomede, another; and after him Ulyss,
Troylus. There Is. This Diomede's a most false-hearted rogue, an unjust Knave: I
will no more trust him when he winks with one eye, then I will a Serpent when
he hisses. He will spend his mouth and promise, like Brabbler the Hound: but
when he performs, Astronomers set it down for a prodigy; Though I long to see
Hector, I cannot forbear dogging him. They say a keeps a Trojan Drabb: and uses
Calchas tent, that fugitive Priest of Troy; that Canonical Rogue of our side.
I Will after him: nothing but whoring in this Age: all incontinent Rascals!

Exit Thersites.
Entere Calchas, Cressida. Calch. O, what a blessing is a virtuous child!
Thou have reclam'd my mind, and calmed my passions
Of anger and revenge: my love to Troy
Revives within me, and my lost Tyara
No more disturbs my mind:

Cress. A virtuous conquest.

Calch. I have a woman's longing to return
But yet which way without your aid I know not.

Cress. Time must instruct us how.

Calch. You must dissemble love to Diomede still
False Diomede, bred in Ulysses School
Can never be deceived,
But by strong Arts and blandishments of love:
Put 'em in practice all: seem lost and won,
And draw him on, and give him line again.
This Argus then may close his hundred eyes
And leave our flight more easy.

Cress. How can I answer this to love and Troilus?

Calch. Why it is for him you do it: promise largely*
That Ring he saw you wear, he much s^spects*
Was given you by a Lover; let him have it.

Diom. within. Hoa; Calchas, Calchas!

Calch. Hark! I hear his voice.
Pursue your project: doubt not the success.

Cress. Heaven knows against my will: and yet my hopes
This night to meet my Triolus, while it is truce
Afford my mind some ease.

Calch. No more: retire.

Exit Cressida. Enter Diomede; Troilus and Ulysses appear listening at one
door, and Thersites watching at another. Diom. I came to see your Daughter,
worthy Calchas.

Calch. My Lord I Will call her to you.
Exit Calchas.
Ulysses to Troil. Stand where the torch may not discover us.

Enter Cressida. Troil. Cressida comes forth to him!

Diom. How now my charge?

Cress. Now my sweet Guardian: hark a word with you.

Whisper. Troil. I, so familiar!

Diom. Will you remember?

Cress. Remember: yes.

Troil. Heavens! what should she remember! plague and madness!

Ulysses. Prince, you are moved: let us depart in time
Lest your displeasure should enlarge it self
To wrathful terms: this place is dangerous;
The time unfit: 'beseech you let us go.

Troil. I pray you stay; by Hell, and by Hell torments
I will not speak a word.

Diom. I Will hear no more: good night.

Cress. Nay, but you part in anger!

Troil. Does that grieve thee! O withered truth!

Diom. Farewell Cousner.

Cress. Indeed I am not: pray come back again.

Vlyss. You shake my Lord, at something: will you go?
You will break out.

Troil. By all the Gods I will not.
There is between my will and all my actions,
A guard of patience! stay a little while.

There Is. aside. How the devil luxury with his fat rump, and potato finger,
tickles these together! put him off a little, you foolish Harlot! 'twill
sharpen him the more.


D^om. But will you then?

Cressi. I will as soon as ere the War's concluded.

Diom. Give me some token, for the surety of it:
The Ring I saw you wear.

Cressi. Giving it. If you must have it.

Troil. The Ring! nay then it is plain! O beauty where is thy faith!

Vlyss. You have sworn patience.

Thersi. That Is well, that is well, the pledge is given, hold her to her word
good Devil and her soul's thine I warrant thee.


Diom. Who Is wast?

Cressi. By all Diana's waiting train of stars,
And by her self, I will not tell you whose.

Diom. Why then thou love him still, farewell for ever:
Thou never shall mock Diomede again.

Cressi. You shall not go, one cannot speak a word
But straight it starts you.

Diom. I do not like this fooling.

Thersi. Nor I by ^luto: but that which likes not me, pleases me best.

Diom. I shall expect your promise.

Cressi. I Will perform it.
Not a word more, good night -- -I hope for ever:
[aside. Thus to deceive deceivers is no fraud.

Exeunt Diomede Cressida severally. Vlyss. All Is done my Lord.

Troil. Is it?

vlyss. Pray let us go.

Troil. Was Cressida here?

Vlyss. I cannot conjure Trojan.

Troil. She was not sure! she was not.
Let it not be believed for womanhood:
Think we had Mothers, do not give advantage,
To biting Satyr, apt without a theme,
For defamation, to square a^l the sex
By Cressid's rule rather think this not Cressida.

Thersi. Will he swagger himself out on^s own eyes!

Troil. This she! no this was Diomedes Cessida.
If beauty have a Soul, this is not she:
I cannot speak for rage, that Ring was mine,
By Heaven I gave it, in that point of time
When both our joys were fullest! -- if he keeps it
Let dogs eat Troilus.

Thersi. He Will tickle it for his Concupy: this will be sport to see!

Patroclus will give me any thing for the intelligence of this whore; a parrot
will not do more for an almond, than he will for a commodious drab: I would I
could meet with this Rogue Diomede too; I would croke like a Raven to him; I
would bode: it shall go hard but ^'le ^^nd him out.

Exit Thesites
Enter Aeneas. Aen. I have been seeking you this hour, my Lord:
Hector by this is arming him in Troy.

Vlyss. Commend me gallant Troilus to your Brother:
Tell him I hope he shall not need to arm:
The fair Polixena has by a letter
Disarmed our great Achilles of his rage.

Troil. This I shall say to Hector.

Vlyss. So I hope!
Pray Heaven Thersites have informed me true, --

[aside. Troil. Good night, my Lord; accept distracted thanks.

[ Exit Ulisses. Enter Pandarus. Pand. Hear ye, my Lord, hear ye; I have been
seeing yon poor girl.
There have been old doings there in faith.

Troil. aside. Hold yet, my Spirits; let him power it in:
The poyson's kind: the more I drink of it
The sooner 'twill dispatch me.

Aene. to Pand. Peace you babbler!

Pand. She has been mightily made on by the Greeks: she takes most wonderfully
among em: Achilles kissed her, and Patroclus Kissed her: Nay and old Nestor put
aside his gray beard and brushed her with his whiskers. Then comes me Agamemnon
with his Generals Staff, diving with a low bow even to the ground, and rising
again, just at her lips: And after him came Ulysses, and Ajax, and Menelaus:
and they so pelted her in faith: pitter patter, pitter patter, as thick as
hayl-stones. And after that a whole rout of 'em: Never was woman in Phrygia
better kissed.


Troil. aside. Hector said true: I find, I find it now!


Pand. And last of all comes me Diomede so demurely: that is a notable sly Rogue
I warrant him! mercy upon us, how he laid her on upon the lips! for as I told
you, she is most mightily made on among the Greeks. What, cheer up I say Man!
she has every ones good word. I think in my conscience, she was born with a
caull upon her head.


Troil. aside. Hell, death, confusion, how he tortures me!

Pand. And that Rogue-Priest my Brother, is so courted and treated for her
sake: the young Sparks do so pull him about, and hall him by the Cassock:
nothing but invitations to his Tent, and his Tent, and this Tent. Nay and one
of them was so bold, as to ask him if she were a Virgin, and with that the Rogue
my Brother, takes me up a little God in his hand, and kisses it; and swears
devoutly that she was, then was I ready to burst my sides with laughing, to
think what had passed betwixt you two.


Troil. O I can bear no more: she is falsehood all:
False by both kinds; for with her mothers milk
She ^uck'd th'infusion of her Fathers Soul.
She only wants an opportunity,
Her Soul's a whore already.

Pand. What would you make a Monopoly of a woman's lips: a little consolation or
so, might be allowed one would think in a lovers absence!


Troil. Hence from my sight: let ignominy brand thy hated name:
Let Modest Matrons at thy mention start;
And blushing Virgins, when they read our Annals,
Skipo're the guilty page that holds thy Legend,
And blots the noble work.

Pand. O world, world; thou art an ungrateful patch of Earth!

Thus the poor Agent is despised! he labors painfully in his calling, and
trudges between parties: but when their turns are served, come out's too good
for him. I am mighty melancholy: I Will even go home, and shut up my doors; and
dye o'th sullens like an old bird in a Cage!

Exit Pandarus.
Enter Diomede and Thersites. There Is. aside. There; there he is: now let it
work: now play thy part jealousy, and twinge them: put 'em between thy
milstones, and grind the Rogues together.


Diom. My Lord I am by Ajax sent to infrom you
This hour muft end the truce.

Aeneas to Troil. Contain your self;
Think where we are.

Diom. Your stay will be unsafe.

Troil. It may for those I hate.

There Is. aside. Well said Trojan: there is the frrst hit.

Diom. Beseech you Sir make haste, my own affairs
Call me another way.

There Is. aside. What affairs; what affairs; demand that, Dolthead! the Rogue
will lose a quarrel for want of wit to ask that question.


Troil. May I enquire where your affairs conduct you?

There Is. aside. Well said again; I beg thy pardon.

Diom. Oh, it concerns you not.

Troil. Perhaps it does.

Diom. You are too inquisi^ive: nor am I bound
To satisfy and Enemies request.

Troil. You have a Ring upon your finger Diomede,
And given you by a Lady,

Diom. If it were; 'Twas given to one who can defend her gift.

There Is. aside. So, so; the boars begin to gruntle at one another: set up your
bristles now a'both sides: whet and foam Rogues.


Troil. You must restore it Greek, by Heaven you must:
No spoil of mine shall grace a Traitors hand.
And, with it, give me back the broken vows
Of my false fair; which, perjured as she is,
I never will resign, but with my Soul.

Diom. Then thou it seems art that for saken fool
Who wanting merit to preserve her heart,
Repines in vain to see it better placed;
But know, (for now I take a pride to grieve thee)
Thou art so lost a thing in her esteem
I never heard thee named; but some scorn followed:
Thou were our table take for laughing meals:
Thy name our sportful theme for Evening walks:
And intermissive hours of cooler Love:
When hand in hand we went. [ Troil.] Hell and furies!

Thersi. Aside. O well stung Scorpion!
Now Menclaus his Greek horns are out of doors, there is a new Cuckold start up
on the Trojan side.


Troil. Yet this was she, ye Gods that very she,
Who in my arms lay melting all the Night;
Who kissed and sighed, and sighed, and kissed again,
As if her Soul flew upward to her lips,
To meet mine there, and panted at the passage.
Who loath to find the breaking day, looked out,
And shrunk into my bosom, there to make
A little longer darkness.

Diom. Plagues and tortures!

Thersi. Good, good, by Pluto! their fool's mad to lose his harlot; and our
fools mad, that the other fool had her first: if I sought peace now, I could tell
'em there is punk enough to satisfy 'em both: whore sufficient! but let 'em
worry one another, the foolish currs; they think they can never have enough of
carrion.


Aeneas. My Lords, this sury is not proper here,
In time of truce; if either side be injured
To morrow's Sun will rise apace, and then --

Troil. And then! but why should I defer till then?
My blood calls now, there is no truce for Traitors.
My vengeance rowls within my breast, it must
It will have vent* --

[Draws. Diom Hinder us not Aeneas,
My blood rides high as his, I trust thy honor;
And know thou art too brave a foe to break it. --

[Draws. Thersi. Now Moon! now snine sweet Moon! let 'em have just light enough
to make their passes: and not light enough to ward 'em


Aene. Drawing too. By Heaven he comes on this who strikes the first,
You both are mad, is this like gallant men
To fight at midnight; at the Murderers hour?
When only guilt and rapine draws a Sword?
Let night enjoy her dues of soft repose;
But let the Sun behold the brave man's courage.
And this I dare engage for Diomede
Foe though I am, he shall not hide his head,
But meet you in the very face of danger.

Diom. putting up. Be It so: and were it on some precipice
High as Olympus, and a Sea beneath
Call when thou dare, just on the sharpest point
I Will meet, and tumble with thee to destruction.

Troil. A gnawing conscience haunts not guilty men
As I Will haunt thee, to summon thee to this,
Nay, should thou take the Stygian lake for refuge
I Will plunge in after, through the boiling flames
To push thee hissing down the vast Abyss.

Diom. Where shall we meet?

Troil. Before the Tent of Calchas:
Thither, through all your Troops, I Will fight my way;
And in the sight of perjured Cressida
Give death to her through thee.

Diom. It Is largely promised.
But I disdain to answer with a boast;
Be sure thou shall be met.

Troil. And thou be found.

[ Exeunt Troilus Aeneas, one way: Diomede the other. There Is. Now the furies
take Aeneas, for letting 'em sleep upon their quarrel: who knows but rest may
cool their brains, and make 'em rise maukish to mischief upon consideration?
May each of 'em dream he sees his Cockatrice in to' there is arms: and be stabbing
one another in their sleep, to remember 'em of their business when they wake:
let 'em be punctual to the point of honor; and if it were possible let both be
first at the place of Execution. Let neither of 'em have cogitation enough, to
consider it is a whore they fight for: and let 'em vallue their lives at as
little as they are worth. And lastly let no succeeding fools take warning by
'em; but in imitation of them when a Strumpet is in question,

Let 'em beneath their feet all reason trample;
And think it great to perish by Example.
Exit.
ACT V. SCENE I.
Hector, Trojans, Andromache. Hect. THe blew mists rise from off the nether
grounds,
And the Sun mounts apace: to arms, to arms;
I am resolved to put to the utmost proof
The fate of Troy this day.

Andro. aside. Oh, wretched woman, oh!

Hect. Methought heard you sigh, Andromache!

Andro. Did you my Lord?

Hect. Did you my Lord? You answer indirectly,
Just when I said that I would put our fate
Upon the extremest proof, you fetched a groan;
And, as you checked your self, for what you did
You stifled it, and stopped. Come you are sad.

Andro. The Gods forbid.

Hect. What should the Gods forbid?

Andro. That I should give you cause of just offense.

Hect. You say well: but you look not cheerfully.
I mean this day to waste the stock of war,
And lay it prodigally out in blows:
Come gird my sword, and smile upon me, love;
Like victory come flying to my arms;
And give me earnest of desired success.

Andro. The Gods protect you; and restore you to me.

Hect. What, grown a Coward! thou were used Andromache,
To give my courage, courage: thou woudst cry
Go Hector; day grow's old; and part of Fame
Is ravished from thee, by thy sloathfull stay.

Andro. aside. What shall I do, to seem the same I was!
Come let me gird thy fortune to thy side:
And conquest sit as close, and sure as this.
[She goes to gird his Sword; and it falls.] Now mercy, Heaven! the Gods avert
this omen!

Hect. A foolish omen! take it up again;
And mend thy error.

Andro. I cannot: for my hand obeys me not.
But as in slumbers, when we fain would run
From our imagined fears, our idle feet
Grow to the ground, our struggling voice dies inward,
So now, when would force my self to cheer you
My faltring tongue can give no glad presage;
Alas, I am no more Andromache.

Hect. Why then thy former Soul is flown to me:
For I, me thinks, am lifted into air:
As if my mind, mastring my mortal part
Would bear my exalted body to the Gods.
Last night I dreamt Jove sat on Ida's top
And beckning with his hand divine from far,
He pointed to a quire of Demi- gods,
Bacch^s, and Hercules, and all the rest
Who free from humane toils had gained the pitch
Of blessed eternity: lo there he said;
Lo there is a place for Hector.

Andro. Be to thy Enemies this boding dream!

Hect. Why it portends me honor and renoun.

Andro. Such honor, as the Brave gain after death.
For I have dreamt all night of horrid slaughters,
Of trampling horses, and of Chariot wheels
Wading in blood up to their Axeltrees.
Of fiery Demons gliding down the Skies,
And Ilium brightened with a midnight blaze;
O therefore, if thou love me, go not forth.

Hect. Go to thy bed again; and there dream better.
Ho bid my Trumpet Sound.

Andro. No notes of sally for the Heaven's sweet sake.
It Is not for nothing when my Spirits droop:
This is a day when thy ill Stars are strong
When they have driven thy helpless genius down
The steep of Heaven to some obscure retreat.

Hect. No more; even as thou lov st my fame no more:
My honor stands engaged to meet Achilles:
What will the Grecians think; or what will he,
Or what will Troy; or what will thou thy self
When once this ague fit of fear is ore;
If I should lose my honor for* a dream.

Andro. Your Enemies too well your courage know,
And Heaven abhorrs the forfiet of rash vows
Like spotted livers in a Sacrifice.
I cannot; O I dare not let you go:
For when you leave me, my presaging mind
Says, I shall never, never see you more.

Hect. Thou excellently good, but oh too soft,
Let me not escape the danger of this day,
But I have struggling in my manly Soul
To see those modest tears, ashamed to fall,
And witness any part of woman in thee!
And now I fear, lest thou should think it fear,
If thus dissuaded, I refuse to fight,
And stay inglorious in thy arms at home.

Andro. Oh could I have that thought I should not love thee;
Thy soul is proof to all things but to kindness.
And therefore it was that I forebore to tell thee
How mad Cassandra, full of prophecy
Ran round the streets, and like a Bacchanal
Cried hold him Priam, it is an ominous day,
Let him not go; for Hector is no more.

Hect. Our life is short but to extend that span
To vast Eternity is virtues work.
Therefore to thee, aad not to fear of fate
Which once must come to all, give I this day
But see thou move no more the like request:
For rest assured that to regain this hour
To morrow will I tempt a double danger:
Mean time, let Destiny attend thy leisure.
I reckon this one day a blank of of life.

Enter Troilus. Troil. Where are you Brother? now in honor's name,
What do you mean to be thus long nnarm'd?
The imbattel'd Soldiers throug about the gates:
The Matrous to the turrets tops ascend
Holding their helpless children in their arms,
To make you early known to their young eyes,
And Hector is the universal shout.

Hect. Bid all unarm, I will not fight to day.

Troil. Employ some coward to bear back this news,
And let the children hoot him for his pains;
By all the gods and by my just revenge,
This sun shall shine the last for them or us:
These noisy streets or yonder ecchoing plains
Shall be to morrow silent as the grave.

Andro. O Brother do not urge a brother's fate,
But let this rack of heaven* and earth roll over,
And when the storm is past put out to sea.

Troil. Oh now I know from whence his change proceeds,
Some frantic Augur has observed the skies;
Some victim wants a heart, or crow flys wrong;
By heaven 'twas never well since saucy Priests
Grew to be Masters of the listening herd;
And into Miters cleft the Regal Crown.
Then as the Earth were scanty for their power,
They drew the pomp of Heaven to wait on them;
Shall I go publish Hector dares not sight
Because a madman dreamt he talked with Jove?
What could the God see in a brainsick Priest
That he should sooner talk to him then me?

Hect. You know my name's not liable to fear.

Troil. Yes, to the worst of fear, to superstition.
But whether that or fondness of a wife,
(The more unpardonabl^ ill) has seized you,
Know this, the Grecians think you fear Achilles,
And that Polixena has begged your life.

Hect. How! that my life is begged, and by my sister?

Troil. Ulysses so informed me at our parting,
With a malicious and disdainful smile:
It Is true, he said not in broad words you feared,
But in well-manner'd terms 'twas so agreed
Achilles should avoid to meet with Hector.

Hect. He thinks my Sisters treason, my petition,
That largely vaunting in my heat of blood
More then I could, it seems, or durst perform,
I sought evasion.

Troil. And in private prayed.

Hect. O yes, Polixena, to beg my life.

Andro. He cannot think so, do not urge him thus.

Hect. Not urge me! then thou think I need his urging.
By all the Gods should Jove himself descend,
And tell me Hector thou deserve not life
But take it as a boon; I would not live.
But that a Mortal man, and he of all men
Should think my life were in his power to give,
I will not rest, till prostrate on the ground
I make him Athiest- like, implore his breath
Of me and not of Heaven.

Troil. Then you'I refuse no more to fight.

Hect. Refuse! I Will not be hindered, Brother.
I Will through and through 'em, even their hindmost ranks.
Till I have found that large sized boasting fool
Who dare presume my life is in his gift.

Andro. Farewell, farewell: it is vain to strive with fate:
Cassandra's raging God inspires my breast,
With truths that must be told and not believed.
Look how he dies! look how his eye turns pale!
Look how his blood bursts out at many vents!
Hark how Troy roars, how Hecuba cries out
And widowed fill all the streets with screams!
Behold distraction, frenzy and amazement,
Like Antiques meet, and tumble upon heaps!
And all cry Hector; Hectors dead! oh Hector!
[ Exit Andromache.]
Hect. What sport will be when we return at Evening,
To laugh her out of countenance for her dreams!

Troil. I have not quenched my eyes with dewy sleep this Night;
But fiery fumes mount upward to my brains,
And when I breathe, methinks my nostrills hiss!
I shall turn Basilisk! and with my sight
Do my hands work, on Diomede this day.

Hect. To Arms, to Arms, the vantguards are engaged:
Let us not leave one Man to guard the Walls,
Both Old and young, the coward and the brave,
Be Summond all, our utmost fate to try;
And as one body move, whose Soul am I.

[Exeunt. SCENE II. The Camp.
Alarm within. Enter Agamemnon, Ulysses, Menelaus, Soldiers. Agam. THus far
the promise of the day is fair:
Aeneas rather loses ground than gains,
I saw him overlabour'd, taking breath;
And leaning on his spear, behold our Trenches
Like a fierce Lion looking up to toyls,
Which yet he durst not leap.

Vlyss. And therefore distant death does all the work:
The flights of whistling darts make brown the sky,
Whose clashing points strike fire, and guild the dusk:
Those that reach home, from neither host are vain,
So thick the prease; so lusty are their arms,
That death seemed never sent with better will!
Nor was with less concernment entertained.

Enter Nestor. Agam. Now Nestor, what is the news?

Nestor. I have descried,
A clow'd of dust that mounts in pillars upwards;
Expanding as it travells to our Camp,
And from the midst ^ heard a bursting showt,
That rent the Heavens! as if all Troy were swarmed,
And on the wing this way.

Menel. Let 'em come, let 'em come.

Agam. Where Is great Achilles!

Vlyss. Think not on Achilles:
Till Hector drag him from his Tent to fight,
(Which sure he will, for I have laid the train.)

Nest. But young Patroclus leads his Myrmydo^s;
And in their front, even in the face of Hector,
Resolves to dare the Trojans.

Agam. Haste Ulysses, bid Ajax issue forth, and second hi^.

Vlyss. Oh Noble General, let it not be so.
Oppose not rage, while rage is in its force;
But give it way awhile; and let it waste:
The rising deluge is not stopped with dams,
Those it orebears, and drowns the hopes of harvest.
But wisely managed its divided strength
Is sluc'd in channels, and securely drained:
First, let small parties da^^y with their fury.
But when their force is spent and unsupply'd
The residue with mounds may be restrained,
And dry-shod, we may pass the naked ford.

Enter Thersites. There Is. Ho, ho, ho!


Menel. Why do thou laugh, unseasonable fool!


There Is. Why thou fool in season, cannot a man laugh, but thou think he makes
horns at thee! Thou Prince of the Herd, what have thou to do with laughing! It Is
the prerogative of man to laugh! Thou Risibility without Reason: thou subject
of laughter; Thou fool Royal:


Vlyss. But tell us the occasion of thy mirth?


There Is. Now a man asks me, I care not if I answer to my own kind: why the
Enemies are broken into our Trenches: Fools like Menelaus fall by thousands;
yet not a humane Soul departs on either side. Troilus and Ajax have almost
beaten one another heads off; but are both immortal for want of brains.
Patroclus has killed Sarpedon; and Hector Patroclus: So there is a towardly
springing fop gone off: He might have made a Prince one day: But now he is nipt
in the very budd and promise of a most prodigious Coxcomb.


Agam. Bear off Patroclus body to Achilles:
Revenge will arm him now, and bring us aid.
The alarm Sounds near; an shouts are driven upon us,
As of a crowd confused in their retreat.

Vlyss. Open your Ranks, and make these mad men way:
Then close again, to charge upon their backs:
And quite consume the Relics of the war.

[Exeunt all but Thersites. There Is. What shoales of fools one battle sweeps away!

How it purges families of younger Brothers! Highways of Robbers, and Cities of
Cuckold-makers! There Is nothing like a pitched Battle, for these brisk
Addle-heads! Your Physician is a pretty fellow; but his fees make him tedious;
he rids not fast enough; the fools grow upon him, and their horse bodies are
poison proof. Your pestilence is a quicker Remedy; but it has not the grace to
make distinction; it huddles up honest men and Rogues together. But your battle
has discretion; it picks out all the forward fools. And sowses 'em together
into Immortality. [Shouts and alarm within. Plague upon these drums and
trumpets! these sharp sawces of the War, to get fools^an Appetite to fighting!
what do I among 'em? I shall be miscaken for some valiant Ass, and dye a
Martyr, in a wrong Religion!


Here Grecians fly over the stage, pursued by Trojans: One Trojan turns back
upon Thersites who is flying too. Trojan. Turn slave and fight.


There Is. turning. What art thou!


Troj. A Bastard Son of Priam's.


There Is. I am a Bastard too: I love Bastards: I am Bastard in body, Bastard in
mind, Bastard in valor; in every thing illegitimate. A Bear will not fasten
upon a Bear; why should one Bastard offend another! let us part fair, like true
Sons of Whores; and have the fear of our Mothers before our eyes.


Troj. The Devil take thee Coward.

Exit Trojan
There Is. Now would I were either invisible, or invulnerable? these Gods have a
fine time on it; they can see and make mischief, and never feel it. [Clattring
of swords at both doors; he runs each way, and meets the noise. A pox clatter
you; I am compassed in! Now would I were that blockhead Ajax for a minute: some
sturdy Trojan will poach me up with a long pole! and then the Rogues may kill
one another upon free cost, and have no body lest to laugh at 'em:

Now Destruction! now Destruction!

Enter Hector and Troilus driving in the Greeks. Hect. to There. Speak what part
thou ^ightst on!

There Is. I fight not at all: I am for neither side.

Hect. Thou art a Greek: art thou a match for Hector.
Art thou of blood and honor?

There Is. No, I am a rescall: a scurvy railing knave; a very filthy Rogue.


Hect. I do believe thee; live.


There Is. God a mercy, that thou will believe me: but the Devil break thy neck
for frighting me:


[aside. Troilus. returning. What Prisoner have you there?


Hect. A gleaning of the war: a Rogue he says.


Troil. Despatch him and away.


[going to kill him. There Is. Hold, hold: what is it no more but dispatch a man
and away! I am in no such have: I will not dye for Greece; I hate Greece, and
by my good will would nere have been born there; I was mistaken into that
Country, and betrayed my parents to be born there. And besides I have a mortal
Enemy amongst the Grecians, one Diomede a damned villain, and cannot dye with a
safe conscience till I have first murdered him.


Troil. Show me thrt Diomede and thou shall live.


There Is. Come along with me and I Will conduct thee to Calchas his Tent, where I
believe he is now making were with the Priests daughter.


Hect. Here we must part, our destinies devide us;
Brother and friend, farewell.

Troil. When shall we meet?

Hect. When the Gods please: if not, we once must part.
Look; on you hill their squandered Troops unite;

Troil. If I mistake not, it is their last Reserve:
The storm's blown ore; and those but after drops.

Hect. I wish our Men be not too far engaged:
^or few we are and spent; as having born
The burden of the Day: but hap what can
They shall be charged: Achilles must be there;
And him I seek, or death.
Devide (...) Troops; and take the fresher half.

Troil. O Brother,

Hect. No dispute of Ceremony!
These are enough for me; in faith enough:
There bodies shall not flag while I can lead;
Not wearied limbs confess mortality,
Before those Ants that blacken all you hill
Are crept into their Earth: Farewell.
Exit Hector.
Troil. Farewell; come Greek:

There Is. Now these Rival-rogues will clapperclaw one another, and I shall have
the sport on it.

Exit Troil. with Thersites.
Enter Achilles and Myrmidons. Achil. Which way went Hector?

Myrmyd. Up you sandy hill:
You may discern 'em by their smoking track;
A wavering body working with bent hams
Against the rising, spent with painful march,
And by loose-footing cast on heaps together.

Achill. O thou art gone! thou sweetest, both of friends*
Why did I let thee tempt the shock of war
Ere yet thy tender nerves had strung thy limbs,
And knotted into strength. Yet, though too late,
I will, I will revenge the, my Patroclus!
Nor shall thy Ghost thy Murtherer's long attend,
But thou shall hear him calling Charon back,
Ere thou art wa^ted to the farther shore.
Make have, my Soldiers: give me this days pains.
For my dead friend: strike every hand with mine,
Till Hector breathless, on the ground we lay!
Revenge is honor, the securest way.

Exit with Myrmidons. [ Enter Thersites, Troilus, Trojans.] There Is. That Is
Calcha's tent.

Troil. Then that one spot of Earth contains more falsehood
Than all the Sun sees in his race beside.
That I should trust the Daughter of Priest!
Priesthood, that makes a merchandise of Heaven!
Priesthood that sells eve'n to their prayr's and blessings!
And forces us to pay for our own cousnage!

There Is. Nay cheats Heaven too with entrails and with offals;
Gives it the gar^idge of a Sacrifice
And keeps the best of private Luxury.

Troil. Thou have deserved thy life, for cursing Priests:
That back, that nose; those eyes are beautiful:
Live thou, art honest; for thou hat'st a Priest.

There Is. aside. Farewell Trojan; if I escape with life, as I hope; and thou art
knocked o'th head, as I hope too; I shall be the first that ever escaped the
revenge of a Priest, after cursing him; and thou will not be the ^ast, I
prophecy that a Priest will bring to ruin.

[ Exit There.
Troil. Me thinks my soul is rowz'd to her last work:
Has much to do, and little time to spare.
She starts within me, like a Traveller
Who sluggishly out-slept his morning hour
And mends his pace, to reach his Inn betimes.
Noise within, ^ollow, follow. A Noise of Arms! the Traitor may be there:
Or else, perhaps, that conscious scene of Love,
The Tent may hold him, yet I dare not search
For Oh I fear to find him in that place.
[ Exit. Troilus.
Enter Calchas, Cressida. Ceess. Where is he? I Will be justified or dye.

Calch. So quickly vanished! he was here but now:
He must be gone to search for Diomede,
For Diomede told me, here they were to fight.

Cress. Alas! ( Calch.) you must prevent, and not complain.

Cress. If Troilus dye, I have no share in life.

Calch. If Diomede sink beneath the sword of Troilus,
We lose not only a Protector here,
But are debard all future means of flight.

Cressi. What then remains!

Calch. To interpose betimes
Betwixt their swords; or if that cannot be
To intercede for him, who shall be vanquished,
Fate leaves no middle course. --
Exit. Calchas.
Clashing within. Cressi. Ah me I hear them;
And fear it is past prevention.

Enter Diomede, retiring before Troilus, and falling as he enters. Troil. Now
beg thy life, or dye.

Diom. No: use thy fortune:
I loath the life, which thou can give, or take.

Troil. Scornst thou my mercy villain! -- take thy wish. --

Cressi. Hold, hold your hand my Lord, and hear me speak.

Troilus turns back: in which time Diomede rises; Trojans and Greeks enter, and
rank themselves on both sides of their Captains. Troil. Did I not hear the
voice of perjured Cressida?
Come thou to give the last stab to my heart?
As if the proofs of all thy former falsehood
Were not enough convincing, come thou now
to beg my Rivals life!
Whom, Oh, if any spark of truth remained,
Thou coud'st not thus, even to my face prefer!

Cressi. What shall I say! that you suspect me false
Has struck me dumb! but let him live my Troilus,
By all our loves, by all our past endearments
I do adjure thee spare him.

Troil. Hell, and death!

Cressi. If ever I had power to bend your mind,
Believe me still your faithful Cressida:
And though my innocence appear like guilt,
Because I make his forfeit life my suit,
It Is but for this, that my return to you
Would be cut off for ever by his death.
My father, treated like a slave and scorned,
My self in hated bonds a Captive held.

Troil Could I believe thee, could I think thee true
In triumph would I bear thee back to Troy,
Though Greece could rally all her shattered troops,
And stand embatteld to oppose my way.
But, Oh, thou Siren, I will stop my ears
To thy enchanting notes; the winds shall bear
Upon their wings, thy words more light then they.

Cressi. Alas I but dissembled love to him;
If ever he had any proof beyond
What modesty might give. --

Diom. No! witness this --
(the Ring shown.) There, take her Trojan; thou deserve her best,
You good, kind-natur'd, well-believing fools
Are treasures to a woman.
I was a jealous, hard vexatious Lover
And doubted even this pledge till full possession:
But she was honorable to her word;
And I have no just reason to complain.

Cressi. O, unexampled, frontlesse impudence!

Troil. Hell show me such another tortured wretch, as Troilus!

Diom. Nay, dare grieve not: I resign her freely up:
I Am satisfied: and dare engage for Cressida,
That if you have a promise of her person,
She shall be willing to come out of debt.

Cressi. [kneeling.] My only Lord: by all those holy vows
Which if there be a power above are binding,
Or, if there be a Hell below, are fearful,
May every imprecation, which your rage
Can wish on me, take place, if I am false.

Diom. Nay, since you're so concerned to be believed,
I Am sorry I have pressed my charge so far;
Be what you would be thought: I can be grateful.

Troil. Grateful! Oh torment! now hells blewest flames
Receive her quick; with all her crimes upon her.
Let her sink spotted down. Let the dark host
Make room; and point: and hiss her, as she goes.
Let the most branded Ghosts of all her Sex
Rejoice, and cry, here comes a blacker fiend.
Let her --

Cressi. Enough my Lord; you have said enough:
This faithless, perjured, hated Cressida,
Shall be no more, the subject of your Curses:
Some few hours hence, and grief had done your work;
But the your eyes had missed the satisfaction
Which thus I give you -- thus --

[She stabs her self they both run to her. Diom. Help; save her, help.

Cressi. Stand off; and touch me not, thou Traitor, Diomede:
But you, my only Troilus come near:
Trust me the wound which I have given this breast
Is far less painful, then the wound you gave it.
Oh, can you yet believe, that I am true!

Troil. This were too much, even if thou had been false!
But, Oh, thou purest, whitest innocence,
(For such I know thee now) too late I know it!
May all my curses, and ten thousand more
Heavier than they, fall back upon my head,
Pelion and Ossa from the Giants graves,
Be torn by some avenging Deity,
And hurld at me, a bolder wretch then they,
Who durst invade the Skys!

Cressi. Hear him not Heavens!
But hear me bless him with my latest breath:
And since I question not your hard decree,
That doomed my days unfortunate and few,
Add all to him, you take away from me;
And I dye happy that he thinks me true.

[Dyes. Troil. She Is gone for ever, and she blessed me dying!
Could she have cursed me worse! she died for me;
And like a woman, I lament for her:
Distraction pulls me several ways at once,
Here pity calls me to weep out my eyes;
Despair then turns me back upon my self,
And bids me seek no more, but finish here:
[Sword to his breast. Ha, smilst thou Traitor, thou instruct'st me best,
And turn'st my just revenge to punish thee.

Diom. Thy worst, for mine has been before hand with thee,
I triumph in thy vain credulity,
Which levels thy despairing state to mine:
But yet thy folly to believe a foe;
Makes thine the sharper, and more shameful loss.

Troil. By my few moments of remaining life;
I did not hope for any future joy,
But thou have given me pleasure ere I dye:
To punish such a Villain. -- Fight a part.
[To his Soldiers. For Heaven and hell have marked him out for me,
And I should grudg even his least drop of blood,
To any other hand. --

[ Troilus and Diomede fight, and both parties engage at the same time: The
Trojans make the Greeks retire, and Troilus makes Diomede give ground and hurts
him, Trumpets sound, Achilles Enters with his Myrmidons, on the backs of the
Trojans, who fight in a Ring encompassed round: Troilus singling Diomede gets
him down and kills him: and Achilles kills Troilus upon him. All the Trojans
dye upon the place, Troilus last. Enter Agamemnon, Menelaus, Ulisses, Nestor,
Ajax, and Attendants. Achill. Our toyls are done, and those aspiring Walls
(The work of Gods, and almost mateing Heaven,)
Must crumble into rubbish on the plain.

Agam. When mighty Hector fell beneath thy Sword,
Their Old foundations shook, their nodding Towers
Threatened from high, the amazed Inhabitants:
And Guardian Gods for fear forsook their fanes.

Achill. Patroclus, now be quiet: Hectors dead:
And as a second offering to thy Ghost,
Lies Troilus high upon a heap of slain:
And noble Diomede beneath; whose death
This hand of mine revenged.

Ajax. Revenged it basely.
For Troilus fell by multitudes oppressed;
And so fell Hector, but it is vain to talk.

Vlyss. Hayl Agamemnon! truly Victor now!
While secret envy, and while open pride,
Among thy factious Nobles discord threw;
While public good was urged for private ends,
And those thought Patriots, who disturbed it most;
Then like the headstrong horses of the Sun,
That light which should have cheered the World, consumed it:
Now peaceful order has resumed the reins,
Old time looks young, and Nature seems renewed:
Then, since from homebred Factions ruin springs,
Let Subjects learn obedience to their Kings.

[Exeunt Omnes. The Epilogue.
Spoken by Thersites.
THese cruel Critiques put me into passion;
For in their lowering looks I read damnation:
Ye expect a Satyr, and I seldom fail,
When I Am first beaten, it is my part to rail.
You British fools, of the Old Trojan stock,
That stand so thick one cannot miss the flock,
Poets have cause to dread a keeping Pit,
When Women's Cullyes come to judge of Wit.
As we strew Rats-bane when we vermin fear,
'Twere worth our cost to scatter fool-bane here.
And after all our judging Fops were served,
Dull Poets too should have a dose reserved,
Such Reprobates, as past all sense of shaming
Write on, and nere are satisfied with damming,
Next, those, to whom the Stage does not belong
Such whose Vocation only is to Song;
At most to Prologue, when for want of time
Poets take in for Iournywork in Rhyme.
But I want curses for those mighty shoales,
Of scribbling Chlorisses, and Phillis fools,
Those Ophs should be restraind, during their lives,
From Pen and Ink, as Madmen are from knives:
I could rayl on, but 'twere a task as vain
As preaching truth at Rome, or wit in Spain,
Yet to huff out our Play was worth my trying,
John Lilbourn escaped his Judges by defying:
If guilty, yet I Am sure oth' Churches blessing,
By suffering for the Plot, without confessing.
FINIS.
Books Lately Printed.
COntemplations upon the remarkable Passages in the New Testament, Consisting
in Divine Meditations upon; the Life of the Holy Jesus. Written by the Bishop of
Exeter.

Ten Tragical Histories, Containing Gods Revenge against the Sin of Adultery,
Illustrated with Cuts.

Plays.
The Feigned Curtezans, Or, A Nights Intrigue.

Sir Patient Fancy.

The Counterfeits.

Brutus of Alba, a Tragedy, By M. Tate. Acted at the Dukes Theater.

All These Printed for Jacob Tonson at the Judges Head at Chancery-Lane-End
next Fleetstreet.
Medulla Historiae Anglicanae, Being a comprehensive History; of the Lives and
Reigns of the Monarchs of England, From the time of the Conquest thereof by
Julius Caesar to this present Year, 1679. With an Abstract of the Lives of the
Roman Emperors Commanding in Britain. To which is added, A List of the Names of
the Present Members of Parliament.

Printed for Abel Swall at the Unicorn at the West End of S. Pnuls.

