The SECOND and THIRD EMBASSY to ye. EMPIRE of TAYSING or CHINA. with
Previledge Ao. 1672.


ATLAS CHINENSIS:

Being a Second Part of A RELATION OF Remarkable Passages IN TWO EMBASSIES FROM
THE East India Company OF THE UNITED PROVINCES, TO THE VICEROY SINGLAMONG AND
GENERAL TAISING LIPOVI, AND TO KONCHI, EMPEROR OF China and East-Tartary.

WITH A Relation of the Netherlanders Assisting the Tartar against Coxinga, and
the Chinese Fleet, who till then were Masters of the Sea.

AND A more exact Geographical Description than formerly, both of the whole
Empire of China in general, and in particular of every of the fifteen Provinces.

Collected out of their several Writings and Journals, By ARNOLDUS MONTANUS.

Englished, and Adorned with above a hundred several Sculptures, By JOHN
OGILBY, Esquire

Master of His MAJESTY'S REVELS in the Kingdom of IRELAND.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Johnson for the Author, and are to be had at his House
in White Friars. M. DC. LXXI.

TO THE Supreme, Most High and Mighty Prince HARLES II.

By the Grace of God, OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE, and IRELAND KING, DEFENDER of
the FAITH, etc.

THIS ATLAS CHINENSIS, CONTAINING Remarkable Passages IN TWO EMBASSIES FROM NEW
BATAVIA TO KONCHI, EMPEROR OF China and East-Tartary.

WITH A MORE EXACT GEOGRAPHICAL DESCRIPTION THAN FORMERLY, DEDICATED with all
HUMILITY, LIES PROSTRATE AT THE SACRED FEET OF YOUR MOST SERENE MAJESTY, BY THE
HUMBLEST OF YOUR SERVANTS, AND MOST LOYAL SUBJECT, JOHN OGILBY.

DIRECTIONS FOR PLACING The Whole-Sheet Prints IN THIS SECOND CHINA.
TItle. The City and Castle Zelandia in the Island Taywan Fol. 39 Matzou 42 The
Idol Sekia 43 Quantekong, a Half sheet 44 Castrum a Meinjaceen 77 The City
Quemoey 134 The City Aimuy 138 Hocsieu with its Suburbs 192 The Royal Presents
given to King Singlamon 232 The Departure of the Emperor from Hocksieu to the
Imperial Court at Peking 259 The City Kinningfoe 264 The City Jemping 262
Pouching 265 Hitsiu 277 Hanchieu 278 Lankin, or Nanking 284 Paolinxie Pagod 286
Pecking 319 The Imperial Palace where the Presents were received, Marked A. B.
C. D. 223 The Royal Banquet 334 The Station of Ceremonies used at the Funerals
of great Persons 388 The Station used by the great Mandarins 414 The Marks of
the Mandarins, Figure 1. a Half-sheet 417 Idem Figure 2. a Half-sheet 418
Diverse sorts of Bonnets, Figure 1. a Halfsheet 419 Diverse sorts of Caps or
Bonnets, Figure 2. a Half-sheet. 420 Gods and Goddesses, Number 1. 569 Idem
Numb. 2. 570 Idem Numb. 3. 571 Idem Numb. 4. 572 The Idol Sechia 574 The Idol
Vitech, or Ninifoe 582 Directions for building of Pagod-Temples in two
Divisions 600
PLANTS.
RHabarbarum Witsoniarum, a Half-sheet. 680 Li-Ci, Kia-Giu, Arbor Papaya 681
Su-Pim, Po-Lo-Mie, Cieu-Ko 685 Cinamonium, Ya-Ta, Du-Liam 686 Pi-Pa* Man-Ko,
Giam-Bo 687
A SECOND EMBASSY OR APPLICATION TO THE Emperor of China.
MAny Years are past since several Europeans, especially the English,
Spaniards, Portuguese, and Hollanders, have with indefatigable Endeavors
persever'd toward the acquiring a free and unmolested Trade in CHINA: Yet
though they have variously attempted what might seem probable to this Effect,
their whole Undertakings have proved little better than a Labor in vain; for
the Chinese priding in the Subsistence of their own Product, and too strictly
observing an Ancient Law, prohibiting the Admission of any Strangers into their
Country, excepting such only as bringing Tributes from the adjacent Borders,
paid Homage to their Emperor, as Supreme Lord of the World; or else Foreign
Ambassadors, under which pretense many drove there a subtle Trade, have shut
out and abhorred all Correspondency abroad; which Trigaut affirms, saying, The
Chinese have a Law that forbids Strangers to come amongst them; but if any
such be found, the only Penalty is, That he must dwell there, and never
return: Yet these are not suffered to go where they please, but limited in the
Entries and Out-skirts of the Empire, moved by a Superstitious Fear, from a
Prophecy, That they shall be supplanted by Strangers.

But the Interpretation or Suspicion extends not only to remote and unknown
People, but their Neighbors, with whom they have some Converse, and use the
like Customs, Habits, and Religion; for the Coreans, the nearest of their
Neighbors, were never seen in China but in the condition of Slaves.

Father Martinius also, in his Chinese Atlas, relates, That China is locked up
so Histor. Sinic. 65.
close and cunningly to keep out all Strangers, that scarce any, unless by way
of Embassy, are once suffered to come in. The Turks, Tartars, Moguls, and other
adjacent People, address themselves as Ambassadors, when indeed are disguised
Merchants, and so drive there a profitable Trade; for feigning fantastic
Names, for several Princes that never were, nor are, present Gifts to the
Emperor, which they buy at low Rates; cheap, but fit Common ties to be
transported thither: Nor can they be Losers; for they receive atleast twice the
Value as a grateful Return; the Emperor counting it a high dishonor to do
otherwise.

Besides this, all Ambassadors, during their stay, going, and coming through
the Country, are with their whole Retinue maintained at the Public Charge,
and their other Goods, whatever, that are not Presents, in stead of Customs and
Taxes, are brought on several Carriages, at the Emperors Expense, to the
Palace, where they are permitted to expose them to Sale, or Barter: But
although this care be taken concerning their Expenses, and that they shall no
way be Losers in making their Addresses to the Court; yet whatever Ambassadors
they be, though the Negotiation be never so serious, and of greatest import;
nay, though they come laden with Treasure, to be poured into the Emperors
Exchequer, and be ancient Friends and Allies, yet they are entertained like
Spies and Enemies, not suffered in their Journeys to see the Countries, but
hood-winked, have no more Prospect than the Road they tread upon; and in like
manner are as close Prisoners, locked up in their Inns, and Places of purpose
for such Reception; and when come to Court, not only secured, but never
permitted to Public Audience, or to see the Emperor, but manage all their
Business by the Mandarins, or Officers of State.

Besides, Trigaut also tells us, That they severely punish their own People,
that hold any Commerce or Intelligence with Strangers, without especial License
from the Emperor. And what is of more remark, If there be occasion to send any
Person of Quality forth by way of Envoy or Embassy beyond the Limits of the
Empire, it is a Work of difficulty to procure them; but when prevailed upon by
Persuasions, at his departure all his Acquaintance, Kindred, and Relations
lament, as if going to suffer Execution; but at his return he is received with
as much joy, and specially advanced by the Emperor; which is no wonder, the
Chinese having such a reluctance to whatever seems strange, nay, scorning to
learn out of any Books but their own, believing, that all Humane Knowledge is
within the Sphere of their Activity, and looking upon all Outlandish as
ignorant Animals, and when they mention them in their Writings, take notice of
them no otherwise; for their Characters that spell Beast, anagrammatiz'd,
signify a Stranger, also stigmatizing them with some Mark or Accent, that may
interpret them worse than Devil.

These Orders were more than strictly observed toward Strangers, while the
Chinese were Governed by their own Native Princes; but the Oriental Tartars,
which so lately by Conquest are become Masters of the Empire, let loose the
Reins of that part of their Ancient Policy, and less scrupulous, are more
indifferent, leaving opener Doors to the admittance of Trade and Commerce.

The Chief Council of New Batavia still watching all Opportunities for
Improvement of Traffic, being informed by Father Martinius, That the
Conquering Tartars, now settled in China, would more readily receive Addresses
concerning Trade, than the former Chinese Princes, resolved to make Trial
thereof, by sending a Vessel laden with several Merchandises from the Island
Tayowan; to which purpose Frederick Schedell, being ordered with a Ship called
the Brown-Fish, from Tayowan, came within nine days after his departure from
thence, to an Anchor in the Mouth of the River Canton, near the Island Haytomon.

His Business at first was so well resented, that the Viceroys of Canton
granted him under their Hands License to sell and barter the Contents of his
Cargo, and also to build a Storehouse in Canton, for their better
Accommodation; although they were advised and persuaded to the contrary by the
Portuguese Staple at Macao, who in their Letters to the Viceroys gave but a
sad Account of the Hollanders, saying, That they were Traitors and Rebels
against their true Prince, scarce having any Country of their own, or
Religion, but lived by Pyracy, robbing and plundering whatever they light upon,
either by Sea or Land; hoping by thus decrying their Reputation, to set a stop
to their begun Proceedings, and new Factory. In like manner the Chinese
Philosophers, great Students of their Countries Antiquities, by the
Instigations of the Portuguese Jesuits, informed also the Viceroys, that the
Hollanders were a Nation odious, and through all Ages detested by the Chinese,
and never upon any account had the least admittance into their Empire.

But though this Intelligence did something, yet it had not the expected
efficacy, and the Hollanders had gone on, and carried the Business, when
accidentally a great Person coming from the Imperial City Peking to Canton,
first dissuaded the Viceroys from what they intended therein, saying, It was
quite another thing to permit any one free Egress and Regress into their
Dominions, than to give them a Place of Residence on the Shore, without the
knowledge of the Supreme Authority; but that he ought to acquaint the Emperor
therewith, if he intended not to incur his displeasure: Upon which the old
Viceroy, changing his Determination, civilly sent to Schedell, desiring him
for that time to depart with all his Company, lest his abiding there so long,
might be misconstru'd by his King Matsuyker, as a deterring, or some restraint
upon them; although Schedell urged much, that there could be no such cause of
mistrust there, using many Arguments. The Viceroys presenting him at his
departure, gave him also two Letters to Nicholas Verburgh Governor of Tayowan,
first complementing, and then advising him, that the best and only way for the
Hollanders to obtain liberty for setting up a Factory at Canton, and license to
Trade in China, was by Address to the Emperor, by way of Embassy, carrying rich
Presents to the Emperor at Peking.

The Council at Batavia, observing the Advice they received, would not of
themselves undertake so great a business, unless so ordered from their Masters
of the East India Company; which asking some time to bring about, they in the
mean time resolved to venture out another Ship, to try her Fortune at Canton:
To which purpose they chose Zacharias Wagenaer a Merchant, and the same
Frederick Schedell, who with two Ships, the Brown-Fish, and Whiting, laden with
Merchandise, arrived a Month after they left Batavia, in the Mouth of the River
Canton, and from thence went to Wangsoe, a Village three Leagues from the City.

Wagenaer at last arriving at Canton, delivered his Letters from the Council in
Batavia, by the old Viceroys Secretary (having no admission to the Viceroy)
and received for Answer, That since the Hollanders had neither brought Letters
nor Presents for the Emperor in Peking, of which they were expressly advised,
the more to facilitate their business; therefore lest he should be questioned,
he neither would nor could see or speak with them. So that Wagenaer and
Schedell returned, having made a fruitless Voyage, without any success, to
Batavia.

Soon after they having received Expresses from the Governors of the East India
Company in Holland, to set forth an Embassy, according to the Advice of the
Vice Roys of Canton, sent Peter de Goyer, and Jacob de Keyzer Ambassadors
Peking, to the Emperor of China, with Letters of Credence and Presents, to
obtain his Imperial License that they might Trade in China.

These Ambassadors arrived Anno 1656. in the Chief City Peking. The next day
some of the Council, and the Prime Secretary Thouglauja, with two other Tartar
Mandarins, Quanlauja, and Hoolauja, came to complement the Ambassadors in the
Emperors Name, to inquire after their Health, the number of their Attendants,
concerning what their Presents were, and from whom, and whence they came? To
all which Questions, the Mandarins receiving particular Answers, listed all
those Persons that attended the Embassy (which according to the Information
sent from Canton were in all twenty four) which they set down one after another
by their several Names; nor did they leave out those Hangers on which were not
included in the List.

After that, they turned and looked over several Presents; then inquired,
whence they came, how and who made them, for what use, and in what part of the
World? And lastly, How far, or how many Months Sail Holland lay distant from
Peking? To which the Ambassadors having returned fitting Answers, the Mandarins
inquired further, Whether they were a People that dwelt only upon the Seas, and
had no Land-Habitations (which the Portuguese Jesuits put into their Heads) or
if they inhabited any Country, what they called it, and where it lay? From
whence, and to what purpose they were sent? What was their Kings Name, and of
what Age? All which the Ambassadors answered. Yet they were not so satisfied;
but interrogating, forced them to recount the same Answers again. But after
they grew more curious, and began to inquire concerning their manner of
Government, and if the Ambassadors were not of the Blood Royal, and of Kin to
their Prince: For no Foreign Ambassadors (said they) if they be not of
Consanguinity with their King, are admitted to appear, bowing their Heads with
all humility, before the Imperial Majesty.

Whereupon the Ambassadors replied, That they were not of the Blood Royal; for
the manner of their Country was not to send Princes of the Blood on such
remote Embassies, but employed other Men of good Quality, and well esteemed at
home, upon such Foreign Negotiations.

The Mandarins further inquisitive, came at last to ask, What Offices they bore
in their Princes Court? What their Names and Titles of Honor were? How many Men
they had under their Command? All which the Ambassadors answered very
punctually.

Then they inquired again, If they came directly from Holland, or Batavia? If
from Batavia, What kind of Place it was, and what manner of Person the General?
Which being resolved, the Mandarins went away satisfied.

The next day the Ambassadors, with the Presents, appeared by order of the
Chancellor before the Council, without which they were not to be admitted;
where the Chancellor sat uppermost, on a high Bed, cross-legg'd: Next him, on
the right Hand, sat two Tartar Lords; and on the left, a Jesuit called Adam
Schal, an ancient and venerable Person, and being close shaven, looked like a
Tartar: he had dwelt above forty six years, in the several Reigns of Chinesy
Princes, in the Court at Peking.

The rest of the Council sat promiscuously, without any Order or State, one
among another, upon Benches only covered with old white Linen.

The Chancellor welcoming the Ambassadors in few words, Commanded them to sit;
then laying the Presents on a Table, he asked upon the matter all the Questions
which the Mandarines had formerly; whereto the Ambassadors, by the help of
Father Adam their Interpreter there, gave ready Answers.

Mean while Order came from the Emperor to the Council, wherein the Jesuit was
desired to write down, and to deliver to his Imperial Majesty that night, if
the Hollanders possessed any Land; and also where, and how far it lay distant
from his; and also how their Prince was called, and what kind of Government
they maintained? All which Schal delivered in Writing to the Chancellor:
Adding, that their Country did formerly belong to the King of Spain, from whom
they keep it unjustly, etc.

But the Chancellor perceiving that the Jesuit had no kindness for them,
scrupling, made him put in, and put out, and write the whole matter twice over;
then ordering him to Transcribe it fair, he refused, excusing himself by age,
and weakness of sight; Upon* which, he commanded one of his Under-Clerks to
write it over; which done, it was immediately with some small Presents carried
to the Emperor. Who soon after having received this advice, sent a Mandatory
Letter to the Council, signifying, That he received the Hollanders as
Ambassadors, and permitted that they might be brought into his presence, so
soon as he should sit upon the Throne in his new Court. The Letter to the
Council was written in these words:

Most Honorable, and our great Lords, the Holland Ambassadors are come hither
with their Presents to Complement the Emperor, and show their obedience to Us,
which no Record shows, nor any remembers, that they ever did to this Crown in
thousands of years before: Therefore, since this is their first Address, We
receive them as Ambassadors, and permit, that they, when We shall sit on Our
Imperial Throne, in Our New Palace, may be brought into Our presence, to show
their obedience to Us, that afterward they may be well entertained, and dealt
withal according to their own requests, and also be speedily dispatched for
their better departure; and the rather, because out of respect to Our Fame,
they are come an unimaginable vast way by Sea, and also by Land; nay, as if
they came out of a shadow from high Mountains, to rest their Feet at Peking;
there with open Eyes, to behold the clear Sun in the Firmament; therefore how
can We withstand and deny the Requests of such Persons, after their long and
tedious Voyages?

But after, when the Ambassadors Letters of Credence, Translated by Schal, were
read to the Emperor, he sent to the Chancellor a second Order in these words:

Having on the sixteenth day of the sixth Moon read over the Hollanders Stilo
vet. 6. Aug. Stilo novo 16. Aug.
Letters a second time, and gotten a right understanding thereof, We find that
their Embassy which they have undertaken is freely out of their own kindness
and inclination toward Us, and that from a Country lying beyond the great
Sea; just like a Bird that takes a voluntary flight through the Air, and cannot
be forced to come down: And since We esteem this Embassy higher than ought
else, and would befriend as Our self, therefore We charge you, Our Chancellor,
and the rest of Our Council of State, upon their Requests which they shall make
by way of this Embassy, to permit them egress and regress through Our Empire;
and what other Agreements you drive with them, you acquaint Us therewith.


This Letter being read, the Chancellor asked the Ambassadors if they could in
like manner make annual Addresses, if not, every three year; whereupon the
Ambassadors answered, That they could with more certainty and Ceremony wait on
the Emperor with their due obeisance in Peking every fifth year, so that they
might be Licensed yearly with four Ships to come and Traffic at Canton: Which
Proposal the Chancellor put to the Vote, and the Tartars with one voice judged,
their Designs were fit, just, and reasonable: But the Chinese thought it
sufficient, if they made their Addresses to the Emperor but every ninth year,
to save the trouble and danger of so long a Journey, supposing what the
Tartarians did not observe, that it was not fit the Hollanders should Trade all
that while at Canton.

Moreover, they urged that these that called themselves Hollanders, might be
English, neither they nor their Shipping being much unlike, which would be a
high scandal upon their Government, to suffer that Nation that had done them
such prejudice within memory, when they came but with four Ships into the Haven
Heytamon, and ruffled their Fleet there, sinking some, and taking others, and
so battered the Castle, that they took the Mandarine himself Prisoner, fighting
more like Furies than Men, for which they were ever since declared Enemies,
nay, according to an Edict made at that time, never after to be permitted to
Trade in China; so that they ought to have greater proofs, whether the
Hollanders were not English, before they should be suffered to Traffic upon
their Coasts.

And also (besides that, it was contrary to their ancient Laws and Customs to
grant to any Nation a free Trade in the Empire) they could not perceive any
thing concerning this Request in their Lettrrs of Credence; therefore,
according to their opinion, the Ambassadors went beyond their Orders.

This stop of the Council so unexpected, seemed very strange to the
Ambassadors, who thought of nothing more, but that all things had been done,
and a free Trade granted, and that they were only to return him their humble
Thanks.

All which was brought thus about by the influence of Father Adam Schall, and
some other Portuguese at Peking, foreseeing the undoing of their Factory at
Macao, if the Dutch set up at Canton, and also there wanted not a less Sum than
300 Tail of Silver, which was to be disposed to Bribe the Council, with
promises of more: The Tartars also now adding, that the Hollanders under
pretense of Trade, sought to get footing in the Empire, and then to Ransack the
Country, and Pillage, and make Prize of what e're they could lay hold on.

All which was more confirmed as a positive truth, by the Allegation of a
Commissioner that had dwelt at Canton three years before; and also by the
Tutang's Letters, which at that time was at Canton, and Bribed for that purpose
by the Portuguese at Macao, had wrought such an opinion in the Hearts of the
People, that they looked upon the Hollanders no otherwise than a company of
Outlaws and Exiles, which had no home or abodes, but dwelt on the Sea, their
whole subsistence drawn from Spoil and Piracy.

Lastly, The Ambassadors found that the Chancellor and other Counselors could
not without Bribes understand, that these words in their Letters of Credence,
To have leave to go and come, could signify nothing but a free Trade: which
seemed very strange to them, since they knew no otherwise but that the five and
thirty hundred Tail of Silver, which they had obliged themselves to pay to the
Viceroy at Canton, was to be distributed amongst the Council. Therefore being
thus deceived by the Viceroy, they were forced to fall to new Consultations to
obtain their desire.

First, They Declared to the Chancellor and Council more at large, what was
intended by that Point concerning their Annual Trade in Canton, and desired
earnestly to obtain it.

Next they offered by the old Viceroy of Cantons Mandarin, to the Chancellor,
that they would stay in Peking, till his Majesty was fully assured, that they
were Hollanders and not English. They also requested, that the Emperor would be
pleased to give them a Seal, with some peculiar Mark Engraved in Brass,
therewith they might Seal Passes for all Ships that either Sailed by, or put
into the Harbors of China, thereby to distinguish them from others of their
neighboring Nations.

At last they exhibited a Proposal, drawn by one of the Clerks of the Council;
wherein they urged, that they might as Loyal Subjects Trade in China, upon the
Grant whereof, they would undertake to pay all Taxes and Customs whatsoever,
like those of Licukieu, Ainan, and Siam; and when those three Nations made
their Addresses, being every third year, they would in like manner attend the
Emperor with peculiar Presents.

But all their Proposals were to no effect, wanting at least ten thousand Tail
of Silver, there being no other means in that Court to make their way, for what
party Bribed most, abnubilated their understandings, and gave them a sense of
their Cause, which Sum they being then not able to raise, for none could be
took up upon any Security whatsoever, under ten, or eight at least per cent. a
Month Interest: Which exaction the Ambassadors judged no way fit or
reasonable, because if they were at this Expense, it lay still doubtful,
whether their business should be effected.

The Emperor at last informed of all the Proceedings by his Council, and how
the Hollanders were inclined to come in an Embassy to his Majesty, every fifth
year; and that they had made it appear, that in less time they could not go and
come: Therefore his Majesty, out of a respect to the Hollanders, and for their
better accommodation, ordered them to come but every eighth year, For, said he,
otherwise they would not be able to hold out; and why should We lay an
unnecessary Obligation on a People which We neither need, nor fear? and who of
their own inclination come to tender their. Obedience to Us with Presents? No,
We have resolved to Treat them so tenderly, that after they have ended their
great Journey, they may have two or three years rest at home.

By this Declaration of the Emperor, they saw plainly nothing more was to be
done, but to apply themselves only to patience, and to put off the Design till
another more fit opportunity; for the Councils chief Secretary had told them,
that too much pressing, and eager solicitation, would rather hurt than help
the Business.

Amongst others, having made their Addresses concerning this matter, by the
Viceroys of Cantons Mandarins, they received this Answer:

Is it not enough, that at this first time they are admitted as Ambassadors to
tender their Presents to the Emperor, and notwithstanding the bad fame which
has rendered them odious in the Eyes of the most eminent Persons in China, they
were now accepted as Friends, and had leave to dispose of their Goods which
they had brought; let them not urge too much for a free Trade, lest perhaps for
the future they be denied all.

They must not think nor imagine that We are obliged to grant them all things
at first; if they come the next year, or so soon as they can, and with Presents
return the Emperor thanks for his kind accepting of them; then perhaps there
will be better Conveniences to effect their desires.

At last the Ambassadors having showed due reverence to the Emperor's Seal,
appeared before the Throne, and been at three of the Emperors Feasts, where
they were very nobly Entertained, received their Dispatch, together with his
Imperial Majesty's Letter to his Excellency John Maetzuiker, in New-Batavia.

The Emperor sends this Letter to the Netherlanders, Batavia, and to their King
John Maetzuiker.
Ur Countries are as far distant as the East from the West, so that We cannot
easily visit each other; Many Ages are past since the Hollanders have been seen
amongst us, but you have done very prudently, in that you sent to Us Peter de
Goeyer, and Jacob de Keyser, which in your Name have brought Us Presents. You
have showed your good inclination, by remembering Us; wherefore Our heart is
also much inclined to you; and as a testimony therethereof, We send you two
Rowls of Satin, four Rowls of Flowered Satin, four Rowls of blew Satin
without Flowers, four Rowls of Kin, four Rowls of Camlet, ten Pieces of
Peelings, ten Pieces of Parsu, ten Pieces of light Colored Stuffs, and three
hundred Tail of Silver* You have desired to come and Trade in Our Country, to
bring Commodities thither, and carry others out, by which a private Man might
reap good profit: But because your Country is so many thousand Leagues
distant, and here blow very hard Winds, so that the Ships run great danger
which come hither, and for that also it is very cold here ashore, by very great
Hails and Snows; it would be no small trouble to Us, if any of your People
should come hither and miscarry; but if this satisfy not, unless they have
permission to visit these parts, then let them come every eighth year once,
with a hundred in their Train, of which twenty may come to the Palace, where we
keep our Imperial Residence; and you may lay your Merchandise ashore in your
Storehouse, without disposing of them at Sea before Canton. This We have
thought good out of Our inclination for your benefit, and believe that it will
likewise be to your satisfaction. This is that which we intended to advise you.

In the thirteenth Year, the eighth Month, the nine and twentieth Day of the
Reign Xunchi. Somewhat lower stood Hongtee Thoepe.

The Hollanders thus frustrated of their expectation, having obtained nothing
else than to come every eighth year once, with Merchandise to Trade in the
Country, left off prosecuting the Design with so much eagerness for a
considerable time.

But since the loss of the Islands Tayowan, and Formosa, taken from the
Hollanders by Koxinga, or Iquon, and his Associates, Anno 1661. they renewed
their Suit to the Tartar for a free Trade, on promise and assurance, that if
they should meet with Coxinga, either at Sea or Land, they would endeavor to
destroy him, as a common Enemy both to the Tartars and Hollanders.

Therefore since the Isles of Tayowan, Formosa, and Coxinga will be often made
mention of in this our Relation; and that from the loss of those places, the
Hollanders renewed their old Request, under pretense of help to ruin the
enemy; it will be necessary, and this our Business seems indeed to require a
brief Description of them in the first, and withal, a Relation how Coxinga took
them from the Hollanders.

Of Formosa.
THe Formosan Isle, formerly called by the Chinese, Paccande, extends it self
Description of the Island Formosa.
in length from the South to the North, and in breadth East and West, being an
hundred and thirty Leagues in Circuit: the Prospect shows you much rising
Ground, and a Hilly Country, which abounds with Deer, great store of Wild
Goats, Hares, Coneys, Swine, Tigers, and the Luvasey, whose flesh has a
delightful and excellent relish. The Woods also have no want of Pheasants and
Pigeons. The Ground being fruitful, produces store of Sugar, Ginger, Cinnamon,
Coco-Nuts, and several other Necessaries fit for humane sustenance; besides,
full of populous Villages. They are Governed by several Lords, not depending
on, nor acknowledging any Superior, so that each Town being a Republic, they
still have Wars, and are at difference one with another, Town against Town,
Village against Village, insomuch that Peace never set Foot in that Isle.

Of their many Villages, the prime and of chiefest note, are Sinkan, Mandauw,
Soulang, Backeloang, Taffacan, Tifulucan, Teopan, and Tefurang; the last in a
Valley near the High-lands, where Fort Zelandia stands, formerly called Tayovan.

The Inhabitants of this Village are rude and salvage, robust, and almost of a
The Inhabitants of Tefurang are very salvage.
Gigantick size, not black like the Caffers, and count it no immodesty to go
stark Their Customs.
naked. Their Women, well built for Stowage, short, and inclining to grossness,
wearing Apparel; yet twice a day they strip themselves, and are not ashamed to
bathe and wash in public.

These, though a barbarous People, are kind to the Netherlanders, heartily
entertaining them with their own, though mean, yet wholesome Fare.

Soulang breeds a needy, spiteful, inhospitable, and bloody People.
Notwithstanding Inhabitants of Soulang.
the fruitfulness of the Soil they commonly live in want, being extreme lazy,
Tilling no more than they suppose will supply their necessity; which often
falling short, they are so hardly put to it, that when they perceive Provision
growing scant, they live sparingly many days, or else they might be utterly
famished; for in such exigencies they never help one another: nay, they are so
supinely slothful, that the Women do all the business of the Field, Plough,
Sow, and Reap, having neither Horses, nor any other Cattle to help them; the
Drudgery being the more, because they make it Gardners work, for only with
Spades they dig and turn the Glebe; and where their Corn grows thickest,
especially Rice, they pluck it out with their Hands, and set it where they find
the Blades come up thinner; and in Harvest knowing neither Scythe nor Sickle,
which tries their patience, crop with a Tool like a Pruning Knife, Stalk by
Stalk, a Span below the Ear; which without Threshing, they store up in their
Houses, hanging it in the Evening in small Bundles over the Fire; and early in
the Morning the Women rise and How they order their Rice.
Pound so much as will serve them that day for their lazy Lord and Family
Besides Rice and other Grain, they Sow Carrots, Set Water-Melons, Pinang,
Quach, Taraum, and Pting.

This Isle is not stored with such Wines as other places in India have, which
their Trees produce; but they have another sort of Liquor, that inebriates no
less than the Indian, or Juice of the Spanish Grape; which they prepare in this
manner: They take a quantity of Rice, which they put in a Vessel made for that
purpose, and boil it; which turning out, they knead into little Balls, or
Pellets; when they are well chewed, they put them into another Pot, there
letting it stand till grown sour; to this they pour a good quantity of
Spring Water, which being so put together, works a Month or two, for so long
it will ferment; then it becomes a clear, pleasant, wholesome, and strong Liquor:
which the longer kept, the better grows, for it will hold good thirty Strange
Liquor in Eormesa.
years. The top of this Drink is thin and clear, the bottom or sediment thick
like our Pap: the thin makes their Drink, with which they often Fuddle; the
thick makes their Cawdle to recover them, which Crop-sick, they eat with
Spoons. This they carry with them to the Field, and take a Dose thereof when
they think fit: and thus yearly they spend most part of their Rice.

The Women when their Cultivation or Land-work is done, then they betake The
Women Fish and Till.
themselves to the Sea, and Launch out their Boats, which they call Champans,
and fall to Fishing, where they catch great store of Crabs, Oysters, and
Gurnets, which they Salt without Gutting, and therefore, though Pickled, keep
not long, but are apt to putrify and breed Worms; yet they like it never the
worse, but look upon their Dish as the greater Dainty, the rancker the Hogooe.

Their Youths, though strong and of able Bodies, spend their time in idleness
and sloth; and when forty years old, then they settle themselves to Laziness,
as if it were a Trade or Handicraft, spending twenty years in a methodical
doing of nothing, in a small Hut or Hovel, dandling their Children, or
Dalliance with their Wives, seldom or never stirring out of their own Limits,
or Patch of Ground, unless invited either to a private or public Feast, or
Hunting-Matches, in which pleasure they take some pains, using several, and
Several ways of Hunting.
indeed ingenious ways to catch the Game, sometimes practicing deceit, laying
Snares and Traps of complicated Rushes and Reeds so artificially, that they
look fresh, as if growing and ungather'd, setting them in the Haunts of wild
Boars, Lays of Deers, and the like, and so catch them, wondering who made their
new Lodges and Beds so soft, and lay Meshes in other inviting places, which if
they take not willingly, nor observe such Allurements, they drive them in,
where they also make them their Prey; and they trapan them into Pits, dug
and spread over with a light Swarth, or Turf of Grass, supported with brittle
Twigs laid athwart the Holes: here to make them sure from getting out, they
place a Snare, which suddenly arrests them, taking them Prisoners by the Neck
or Legs, and then they with a shout fall upon the so taken Quarry.

Besides this, they use Hostility and open Arms, whole Villages march out
Strange manner of Hunting in Firando.
together, nay, two or three Townships, joining their Forces, taking the Field;
where drawn out in a single File, they stretch a Ring, which extends four or
five English Miles in compass, every one brandishing in each Hand a Javelin,
some carrying three or four: thus all prepared, with a rally of Hounds they
rouse the Prey, then contracting their wide Circumference by degrees into a
narrower* Circuit, closing up at last Man to Man, Shoulder to Shoulder; this
done, if any one of their thrown Spears hit and fasten into the Body of the
Game, they never lose him, for their Lances being short, not above six Foot
long, and Pointed with Iron, having three retorted Hooks, stick so fast, that
though flying to shelter amongst the Bushes and Shrubs, will not, when impeded
by intangling Branches, drop out, and also having tied at the But*end of the
Staff a long String with a Bell, so that if by chance the Beast thus impark'd
break the Pale, yet they never lose him, for they follow not only by the scent,
but by the sound, both which seldom fail. Venison how*eaten.


They use also Arrows, especially when they hunt wild Deer. The remainder of
the slain Venison, when they have Feasted themselves, they barter for Clothing
and Raiment with the Chinese, seasoning with Salt the Humbles, to keep for
their own private Store; but if by chance they kill a pregnant Do, they unlace
her, and Feasting upon the Slinck, eat up Skin and all. The Formosan Men's
Exercises, and their manner of Fighting.


To this their Manly Divertisements, and Exercises of Saiha, pleasing Labor, as
pursuing their Game, they have also rougher work, and serious engagements,
which, when successful, brings no less delight to such a barbarous People, that
is, a Civil War, ancient Feuds, or fresh Animosities, still upon new occasions
fermenting, so that Town against Town, and Village against Village all the
Country over, are in open Hostility, either public Slaughter, or private
Murder being their Sports, which thus they carry on: First one Town begins,
sending the other a bold Defiance; this is followed by twenty or thirty in a
Party, which Row in their Boats, or Champans, to their Enemies Village, near
which they lie as if in Ambuscade till Night, then growing dark, they Landing,
march up and down and explore the Fields, culling out private Huts, and such
like Houses, where the Graver sort, the Married People, as we said before, at
their ease and pleasure dwell: Those that be thus supinely careless they
suddenly surprise, and off goes their Heads, Hands, and Feet; sometimes more
cruelly they slice out their whole Bodies, each one carrying a Collup in
triumph home, as an evidence that he had no small share in that bloody
Slaughter, but, as they suppose, honorable Action: But finding no small Game,
or such single Adventures, then they attempt secretly the next Village, where
silently breaking into a House or two, they spare none, but salvagely kill Men,
Women, and Children, carrying their Heads, Hands, and Feet home, as Trophies of
their Victory: But sometimes falling short of their Design, are glad to escape
to save themselves; and often, the whole Town so suddenly taking the alarm,
they with as little mercy are all cut off: at other times in their flight so
few appearing, that the Enemies in hopes of revenge, are trepanned to their
Boats, where in greater and unexpected numbers they Fight so valiantly, that
they put them to the Rout; yet these though seeming Furioso's, receiving the
least Wound, basely Retreat and quit the Battle.

Their Defensive Arms are Shields, so large, that they cover their whole
Bodies; Their Arms.
their Offensive, Darts and Faulchions.

It often happens, that two or three Villages join against one or more
associated Towns: these have no Commission-Officer, or Commander, but whosoever
shows most Men, they make their General, and has the prime Authority to rule
over the others according to their numbers. Neither are their Warlike
Stratagems common, for when they intend to Attaque some Village by a sudden
surprisal, for they have no Works to storm, opposite to the way that they
appear upon, and ready to enter the Village; on the contrary side they lie in
Ambush, which when they Charge in, giving a smart alarm, the* People struck
with a sudden fear, in a confused manner, betake themselves to their Heels, and
flying from, fall just into the Mouth of the same Enemy, who suddenly starting
up, are not sparing, but oftentimes make a general slaughter, whilst the others
ransack and pillage the Houses. Sometimes in the Night they break into a House
or two, which leaving, their business being done, two of the Parties stick fast
in their likeliest way to return, so to stop the Pursuer, sharp-pointed Reeds,
about half a Yard long, they making their Retreat by another improbable way.
Each Conqueror that shares for his own part a Head, carries it through his
Village upon a Spear, insulting and singing in praise and glory of his God, to
whom he solely ascribes his Victory; thus proudly vaporing, they are joyfully
received every where, and entertained with the best Liquor the Town affords.

Every sixteen Houses have their own Chapel, to which they carry this
Formosans have great Churches.
their bloody Spoil, which afterward he boyls till the Flesh comes from the
Bone, then drying it in the Sun, they pour strong Liquor (a Custom which they
never omit) upon the bare Scalp: fourteen days they keep Holy, Feasting Keep
great Feasts when they are Conquerors.
and Sacrificing to their gods, who gave them so great and glorious a Victory.

Of these Heads, who e're enjoys one, looks upon it as his greatest Treasure,
prizing them beyond Gold or Silver, or the most precious Jewel, and when any
sudden accident of Fire, or the like happen, this they take most care of, how
to carry it with them, or leave in safety.

This Isle, as we said before, has no King, nor Supreme Governor, but every
Have no supreme Governor.
petty Village is a small Republic, Ruling it self under twelve Magistrates,
chosen every second year; whose chief Qualification is to be fifty years old:
Strange Counselors.
these when going out, in Honor and Commemoration that they were once prime
Rulers, have all their Hair picked off from their Temples, and each side of
their Heads with Tweasers; which baldness is the well-known Badge of their
former Authority. But these Governors Power has but small Limits, Their
Authority.
for in every Exigence all the Villages meet in the Temple there, having no
Representatives, every Man speaks to the purpose according to his abilities, or
as he is biased; which done, the Twelve take into their consideration, and
from the general result of their various opinions, give their special Verdicts,
which the People as they like or dislike, ratify or refuse. But they have
absolute Power to seize the Clothes of whomsoever wears Apparel in that three
Months, when by their Laws they are commanded to go naked, and Pray to their
Idols for Rain, being about that time always a dry Season. This also in part
they inflict upon the Women that go too gorgeously in that Quarter. This their
Court of twelve Aldermen suffer great hardship or Penance, not being allowed by
their Laws to taste any strong Drink, as Pietang, use Sugar, or eat any Fat of
their Meat, till such time as their Rice is half ripe, believing that only
preserves the sprouting Blade from the harrase of wild Beasts, as Deer, Swine,
and such like.

Their chief Practice, and special Virtues, are Theft, Murder, and Adultery,
The punishment of Criminals.
at which they are very dextreous, either by Stratagems, or downright
violence, and he that reckons up the most of such dire Actions, appears amongst
them the bravest Fellow.

These People* though they have no superiority amongst them, neither by the
Show great respect one to another, and chiefly the Youth to the ancient People.
honor of Birth, nor their own acquired Riches: yet the Seniors keep the
Juniors at a greater distance than we in Europe; the old Men exacting a greater
Respect from the younger by far, over whom they exercise absolute Authority,
and Arbitrary Power, without any limitation, Youth being no better than a Slave
to Age; for wheresoever a young Man sees one more aged than himself (though at
a great distance) he must start suddenly out of the way, as if a Prince were
coming with all his Train; and if he chance to call and beckon to him, then
sending him of an Errand, he dare not refuse, though to the farthest part of
the Isle; neither dare they once offer to come near, or intrude into any Room
where Parents are together; so that to be young, is to be a Slave* and when
old, a Prince, having no honor of Superiority but by their years.

The Males must not Marry before their one and twentieth Year, nor wear Strange
Marriage.
long Hair till the seventeenth. Their ceremonious Rites of Matrimony are only
consummated thus: The Suitor, who by the advice of his Parents or his own
Affection, has cast his Eye upon a Mistress, begins his Courtship or
Gallanting with a Present, which his Mother, or a near Relation, carries to her
House, there presenting in her Servants Name, with all Complements, and
Manifestations of his Affection. These Gifts are commonly eight Skirts or
Petticoats, as many Wastcoats, or Upper-Bodice, four hundred Armlets of pleited
Rush, a dozen Rings for their Fingers, either Copper, or white polished
Hartshorn, and so many Laces of red Dogs Hair, five Linen Girdles, twelve Dogs
Hair Coverlets, thirty Chinesie Pieces of Cloth, a great Box full of Dogs Hair,
with which they make a Border, or Love-shade, to beautify their Forehead and
Temples, which they call Ayam Maniang, and five pair of Hart-skin Stockings.
These Presents are sent only by the Wealthiest; and those that are less able
according to their abilities. If what they thus present is received, the
business is concluded, and Marriage presently confirmed by the Nuptial Bed.

Notwithstanding the concluding Ceremony, the Husband and Wife dwell The
Formosan Men live not with the Women*
not together, but live apart by themselves; but in the Night he is allowed in
a clandestine way to steal to his Enjoyments; whither making his approaches, he
is neither allowed Fire nor Candle, but with all silence and secrecy steals
into the Bed; neither there must he speak to his Bride, but if he want any
thing, that he signifies by Coughing; upon which, guessing what it may be, his
Wife administers, and her Houshold-business being done, she comes to Bed; a
hard Lodging, where indeed they have no Bed, neither Pillow nor Bolster, but a
Buck-skin spread upon the Floor; yet others have a Bedstead spread with Rushes.
These hardships, as they suppose, makes them fitter for the encounters of
Venus, and more stirs up Loves fervor than warm dalliance in softer
accommodations: Neither may he linger there, but e're the Dawn visibly appear,
thence he must, that so his departing with an appetite, he may be the more
earnest for a second fruition: But all this while neither of them are a burden
to one another, but each provide for themselves, and follow their own affairs;
and if they meet by chance in the Day, they pass by like Strangers, the Husband
May not speak to them in the daytime.
not daring to speak to his Wife without her License. The Charge of bringing up
of the Children is left to her Care, till they are above one and twenty years
of age, then their Father receives and keeps, or disposes of them as he thinks
fitting.

But the Formosan Women have a barbarous Custom (void of all Motherly
affection, and humane reason,) for whoever proves with Child before thirty
seven years of age, when the Fruit of her Womb waxes ripe and fit for
Delivery, they cruelly and in unspeakable manner destroy: for in stead of a
Midwise that should assist them in their Labor, or Childbed-throws, they employ
a cruel Dame, who laying them in a fit posture on their best and softest Bed,
crushes Horrible Murder of their Infants.
and kneads the tender Infant in the Womb, till it become like a lump of Dough,
which departs from them with more extreme torture, than if they were naturally
delivered.

Georgius Canidius, a Minister of the Gospel, residing in Formosa Anno 1628
relates, that he knew a Formosan Woman, who was delivered of sixteen Children
in that horrible manner, her first Abortion being in her seventeenth Year; and
he being inquisitive to know why she thus made away what would have been her
own dear Issue, and to be esteemed most of all worldly joys by her, received
this answer from her, That her shamefacedness and modesty forbad her to be a
Mother before she was of age of discretion, being accounted amongst them thirty
seven Years.

The Husband (as we said before) in the fortieth Year of his Age, forsakes his
In what year the Formosan Men begin to keep House with their Wives.
solitary abode, and lives with his Wife, spending the remainder of their days
together in small Huts or Hovels in the Field: but upon the least jangling or
falling out, they part; so that sometime they change their old for new Wives
once a Month. If he can clearly convict her, showing just reason for his
separation, he recovers her Dowry, seizing those Gifts which he presented
before Marriage; but failing either in his Arguments or Proofs, the Divorced
Wife preserves her own Estate. Some Marry two Wives, but they are looked upon
as committing Fornication or Adultery; but of late, Custom, and the common
practice, makes the offense not altogether so heinous.

Their Youth and Batchellors have their peculiar Residence; for in every
Village, Unmarry'd People have their Dwellings apart.
as we said before, sixteen Houses have their Chapel, in which they have
distinct Lodgings, as in a College, where they keep their Batchellors Place,
though Married, till such time as they go to live with their Wives.

The Formosan Houses are the handsomest, and exactest built of any after the
The Formosan Houses are artificial.
Indian manner; for in stead of digging deep, they raise a Foundation six Foot
high of firm Clay; the Walls of the Fabric are raised only with Reeds and
Rushes, artificially strengthened with interweavings, having four Doors opening
Their Household Stuff.
to the four Winds; but the prime Buildings have eight: The Ornament without,
and Furniture within, are Stags Crested Heads, and wild Boars, Chinesie
Raiments, and Deer-skins; and also Assagays or Javelins, Shields, Swords, Bows
and Arrows, Cattle, Axes, Cans, Pitchers, and Troughs, Vessels of Barks of
Trees, and Earthen-Ware. But they pride most in the Bones, Sculls, and hairy
Scalps of Enemies Conquered by their own Hands.

They use no private, but public Feasts, to which every sixteen House-Parish
Feasts.
repair, being kept in their little Temple, or Chapel, where after their
Devotion to their gods, they spend the rest of their time in Feasting, Singing,
Dancing, and all manner of Idolatry; and he that appears there in a Dogs Hair
Coat, is the bravest Fellow.

The manner of disposing their Dead, and Funeral Obsequies, are thus: Strange
ordering of their Dead.
When any dies, the Corpse being Laid out, after four and twenty hours they
elevate it upon a convenient Scaffold, or Stage, four Foot high, Matted with
Reeds and Rushes, near which they make a Fire, that so the Corpse may by degrees
dry: to which place the Friends of the Deceased daily flock together, and that
they may keep up Sorrow the better, bring along with them store of Man's Flesh,
and several strong intoxicating Liquors. But before the sick Person departs,
being just ready to give up the Ghost, thus they begin their inebriating Grief:
One beats on a Drum made of a hollow Tree, which gives notion of a Person
deceased; at which Summons the Women come from all Parts near, bringing their
Pots and Vessels of Strong Drink with them, and making themselves, and the
Relations of the Deceased, drunk. They Dance all Night before the Door after
this manner: They take a Trough like a Chest, Strange Dancings
but longer and broader, and turning the bottom upwards, the Women get up, and
two by two, Back to Back, move their Legs and Arms in a Dancing time and
measure; which pace, or taboring tread, sends a kind of a murmuring, or doleful
Sound, from the hollow Tree; when these mounted Couples are weary, they come
down, and others supply the Place: Thus the Maudlin-Drunkards dance nine Days
together, whilst the Body lies parching by the Fire, sending forth a very
noisome Stench; then having bathed the Corpse nine times over, they wrap it up
close in a Mat, and lay it higher than before, so covering it with a fitted
Canopy from all Light, there lying three years, till such time as nothing
remains but a Skeleton, all else being consumed to Dust; then they Interre him
in his own House, with all the Ceremony of Feasts, as if lately departed.

The ordering of their Sick is no less unnatural and preposterous; for they How
strangely they order their Sick.
use them worse than if the Devil were their Doctor; for in stead of Potion or
Pill, and the like, they have but one Medicine for all Diseases, and that is a
dry Halter, especially in the Village Teopan; for as soon as any Person falls
sick, and begins to complain, lying down, and not able to walk about, and
follow his Business, they presently prepare a tough Cord, in stead of Cordial;
so putting the Noose about his Neck, they hoise him up to the top of the House
with a Pulley kept for that purpose, then let him suddenly fall with a Jolt,
which commonly proves an immediate Cure, by killing them; yet some mend upon
this choking Medicine, either by the strength of Nature, or their Spirits
irritated by the fright.

The Formosans neither Write nor Read, using no Books, Letters, nor Characters:
The Religion of the Formosans.
but yet that Law and Religion which they have amongst them, they observe
without alteration, delivered by Tradition from Generation to Generation: For
certain young Men are appointed to be instructed from the elder; and faithful
Memories are their only Registers and Records.

First, They believe the Universe, Heaven and Earth, to have been without
beginning, and shall be without end.

Secondly, they acknowledge the Immortality of the Soul; for which reason, they
build a little Place, in which they put a Tub of Water with a Dish in it,
before the Door of the Deceased, supposing the Spirit thereof comes daily
thither to bathe or cleanse.

The next Article of their Faith is, That there are several Punishments after
this Life, according to the equality of their Crimes, and Rewards of Eternal
Happiness for those that have, when living, merited by doing well: therefore
they dig broad and deep Trenches, filling them with Mud and Slime; over which
they make a floating Bridge of bundled-up Rushes, which leads to the most
delightful and luxurious Vales in the Country: Over these, as they affirm, the
Souls of the Deceased must pass, which the Wicked endeavoring to cross, the
unstable Truss, or rolling Bridge, tumbles them over into their Stygian Lake;
but the Just and Godly walking in safety over, enjoy there all Pleasure in an
everlasting Elysium.

Those Sins which they account most heinous, are but frivolous Toys, built What
they account Sin.
upon Superstition and slight Observation, as not to go naked (as we said
before) at their set and appointed times; to wear Clothes or any thing of Silk*
Women to bear Children before their seven and thirtieth year; to fetch and eat
Oysters not in due season; and to venture to undertake any Business; though of
little or no consequence, before they have observed good Auguries from the
Notes or Language of the Birds: All these are Capital, and, as they hold sorth,
unpardonable Offenses; but Murder, Theft, Lying, and Forswearing, these have
their Qualifications; for some may commit them, and some may not, without any
scruple; but in general they are looked upon no more than Peccadillo's, and
venial Offenses.

When they take an Oath, they ratify it by breaking a Straw. To be a public
and common Drunkard, and to be an Adulterer, and Debaucher of young Women, if
carried privately, is no harm.

Though they believe the Immortality of the Soul, yet they utterly deny the
Resurrection of the Body.

Amongst their several gods which they worship, the chiefest are Tamagisanhach,
Their chiefest Idols.
who Governs and Inhabits the South; his Celestial Spouse, Taxankpada Agodales,
commands the East, where when it happens to Thunder, they believe that she
exercises her Tongue, the Females best Arms, scolding so loud at her Husband in
the South, because he neglects his Office, not sending Rain when the Earth
needs; who being nettled with his Wives bitter and sharp expression, not
enduring to hear her any longer, opens his Mouth, sending, and dispersing with
his Breath abundance of Water.

Another Deity which they worship out of fear, because Tamagisanhach, as they
say, creates Men with comely Visages, and well-proportion'd Bodies; this being
an angry and ill natured Power, delighting in mischief, makes it his whole
Business to spoil and mis-shape what Tamagisanhach has made fair and handsome,
disfiguring their Faces with Pox and Blasting, bunching their Backs, withering
and crooking their Limbs, and the like, then deriding at their Lameness and
Deformity: so this Sariafing they hold in great Veneration, that he would be
pleased to spare them, and do them no harm.

When they take up Arms, and proclaim Hostility, they offer Sacrifices to Their
gods of War.
Talafula and Tapaliape, their two gods of War.

Their Priests, or rather Priestesses, which they call Inibs, are Women, the
Women perform Divine Services.
whole Function in Divine Service, or Worship, belonging to them; for they not
only Pray to their gods, and Preach, but also Sacrifice: Their chiefest
Offerings are Stags and Boars Heads, presented in a Charger, upon boiled Rice,
Pynang, and other strong Drinks, as a Condiment: This performed, two of the
Female Order stand up before the Congregation, and make a Sermon, in which they
set forth the Praise and Honor of their gods, going on with that vehemence of
expressions and loud declamations, that at last their Hair stands upright, and
their Eyes rolling, seem ready to start out of their Heads; then Strange
actions.
near the Conclusion of these their dire Exhortations, they fall down in a
Trance, and oftentimes lie so for a whole Hour, whilst the People gathering
near them, tear their Throats, and cleave the Air with hideous shrieks and
cries; when coming to themselves, in a cold and faint Sweat, their Limbs
trembling, their Teeth chattering, strangely discomposed, they tell the People,
That in their Trance the gods appeared to them, unfolding mysterious things for
their good, not yet to be expressed; besides, two others of these Women mount
the Battlements of the Temple, and standing at the gable ends, they make afresh
loud, and long Supplications to their gods: At last they strip themselves, and
thus denuded, crying more earnestly to their gods, and first shaking, then
taboring, or clapping with their Hands, raging as in a phanatick distraction.
All the Women, following their impudent example, throw off with their Weeds all
Shame at once, and so Tope and Deboush, till Drunkenness a Virtue.
they disgorge their too plentiful excess.

Besides this their public Worship in the Temple, they Offer in the open
Streets, and exercise private and domestic Devotions, performing Familyduties
daily in their own Houses, to which those that please may repair, and join with
them in this their Idol-Service.

With these Inibs also they consult concerning fair or foul Weather, when The
Office of the Inibs.
they have any Business abroad; also of future Events, which they seem to
foretell, and if bad, advise how to prevent, or at least to mitigate: They also
profess Exorcism, to drive away Evil Spirits, and to charm and confine the
Devil, and all such deceitful Tempters; which they perform in a Rant, with loud
Hectoring Acclamations, drawing a Iapan Faulchion, with which they Fence,
Strike, and Thrust, flourishing it in the Air, making them believe, that thus
they Fight the Fiend, and slice Satan out in Sippets, forcing him, thus being
mangled, and cut almost into Attoms, to dive for his better safety into the Sea.

Yet these so salvage People, and blind with an overgrown ignorance, have
Formosans become Christians.
lately (since the Hollanders East India Company settled here, and built a Fort
for their Defense, and convenience of Trade) without any great difficulty
embraced the Doctrine of the Christian Faith; which was the easier introduced,
the Inhabitants being their own Governors, and under no Supreme Authority, Why
they are easier converted than other Indidians.
who exercising a Tyrannical Power, would, as other Persecutors, force them
back from Gods true, to their false Idol-Worship, as at that time most part of
India was, being either under Heathen or Mahumetan Governors, who with great
fury obstructed the Gospel, which else might have flourished through the
Oriental World: Besides, the Formosans kept no Books, wherein the Bounds of
Religion were fixed, and a settled maintained Doctrine, which still caused great
variance, and hot Disputes amongst themselves, the whole Conduct of their
Divine Laws being left to a few frantic and ignorant Women, who know nothing
but by Tradition. This made it the more easy to reduce them from their
Paganism and Idolatry; and finding little in their frenzied Inibs, that might
persuade them to persist in their former Superstitions, many of them, with
small difficulty, became good Christians. Thus far Candidius, which we have
acquainted you with in our Iapan.

David Wright a Scots-man, and later than Candidius, who dwelt in the Isle
several years, has thus enlarged more particularly in every part.

This Island is not under the Jurisdiction of one peculiar Governor, but The
Island Formosa is divided into eight Dominions.
stands divided into eleven Shires or Provinces, all lying to the Inland, of
which every one has several Towns and Villages belonging to them, besides
diverse Lordships on the Mountains.

Under the Hollanders Command, (with which we will begin first) were formerly
in the Northern Confines Sinkkan, Tavakan, Baklawan, Soelang, Mattou, Tiverang,
Faberlang, Takhais, Tornap, Terenip, and Assoek.

The second Province is Kabelang, a Territory by the Netherlanders called The
Bay of Kabelang, and contains seventy two Towns and Villages, every one
governed by their own peculiar Laws, and in amity with each other. The
Hollanders never being able to subdue the Inhabitants thereof, were forced to
make Peace with them; after which they not only Traded with several sorts of
Merchandise, but also sold their Sons and Daughters to them for Slaves, taking
commonly for a Youth of thirteen years old, ten Rix-Dollars.

The third Dominion belongs to the King of Middag, lying against the North-East
of Tayowan, Southward of the River Patientia.

This Prince has seventeen Towns that obey him, the biggest whereof, called
Middag, is his chief Seat, and Place of Residence: Sada, Boedor, Deredonesel,
and Goema, are four other of his eminent Towns, which last is a handsome place,
lying five Miles from Patientia, in a Plain, whereas all the other are built on
Hills. He had formerly twenty seven Towns under his Jurisdiction; but ten of
them threw off the Yoke. He keeps no great State, being at his going abroad
accompanied only with one or two Attendants. He would never suffer any
Christians to dwell in his Dominions, but only allows them to Travel through
his Country.

About seven Leagues to the Northward of Middag, and four Leagues from the Sea,
lies Mount Gedult, so called from its difficult and hard Ascents: It appears
square like a Table, so even and smooth, as if it were the Work of Art, not of
Nature, having the advantage of adjacent Plains round about, and is overgrown
with Brambles. On the South Side, at the Foot of this Hill, glides a River with
so strong a Current, that the stoutest of the Natives, which are Men of able
Bodies, dares not adventure to wade through it in any place; so that to make it
fordable, they never attempt with less than twenty or thirty together, holding
fast one by another; wherefore the Spaniards have by an Irony called it Rio
Patientia, The Patient River; because to pass that rapid Stream, asks not only
a great deal of Labor, but also some Patience.

The fourth Jurisdiction is that of Pimaba, comprehending eight Towns, and
several Villages, the chiefest whereof is Pimaba, the Residence for the
Governor. The Inhabitants thereof are a stout and warlike People, and most
expert in their manner of Arms, of all the Formosans. This King, looked upon as
a brave Person, keeps a constant Guard, and is always quarrelling, and making
War with his Neighbors. He was formerly in Friendship with the Hollanders, and
proud to serve under them as Sergeant of a Company.

The fifth is Sapat, lying quite on the other side of Formosa, and commands
over ten Towns; the Governor whereof is in League with Pimaba.

The sixth Dominion is called Takabolder, and has eight Towns, besides several
Villages under its Jurisdiction.

In Takabolder appears an exceeding high Mountain, which may be seen from
Tayowan.

The seventh Lordship is that of Cardeman, governed by a Woman, who for her
kind reception of the Christians, was by the Hollanders called The Good Woman:
She commands over five Villages. When the Hollanders marched into the Field,
she sent them Provisions, had a great Authority over her Subjects, and being a
Widow, married to one of the Princes of the Country.

The eighth Territory has twelve Villages, of which the chiefest are Deredou,
Orrazo, Porraven, Barraba, Warrawarra, Tannatanna, and Cubeca.

The ninth is called Tokodekal, and has seven Towns, and seven Villages; the
chief whereof is Tokodekal, where the Governor has his Residence.

The tenth, named Pukkal, consists only of one handsome City, and maintains a
continual War against the seven Villages of Tokodekal, and likewise against
Percuzi and Pergunu, two Towns, which make the eleventh Dominion.

Besides all these forementioned Places, there are abundance of Lordships in
the Mountains; but we will not trouble the Reader with naming them, because
they are so numerous, and for that every one is for it self, and continually
make War one against another: But those Places which formerly the Hollanders
had reduced, they kept in good order and quiet.

These Islands of Formosa and Tayowan, especially the Coasts, suffer much (...)
Storms and Tempests; for oftentimes the Wind blows down whole Trees and Houses,
rending both Walls and Roofs from top to bottom: Besides by these Huricanes
yearly many Ships are lost that approach near the Coasts.

Both these Isles also endure terrible Earthquakes. Anno 1654. happened a mighty
Earthquake, on the fourteenth of December, which continued, with short
intermissions, almost seven Weeks together. It also rains here very much;
wherefore none can travel above two Months, being December and January, for
then is generally the fairest Weather; but their greatest and perpetual Rains
happen only in July and August. There are two Mousons, o^ Stormy Seasons; the
one the Northern, and the other the Southern Mouson: The first begins in
October, and continues till March; the second begins in May, and holds till
September, which the Hollanders called The unconstant Month, because of its
often change of Weather.

The circumjacent Sea, that washes the Skirts of these Isles, abounds with
Fish, especially the Harder, or Shepherd-Fish, and another called the
Kings-Fish. The Chinese come yearly toward February, from the Main-Land, with
thousands of Jonks, to take these Shepherds, some of the Jonks being able to
carry five or six hundred Tun. There sail also another sort of Vessels amongst
these Jonks, which they call Koiaes, or Wankans, somewhat smaller than our
Cock-boats.

This Harder, or Shepherd, is a Fish about the bigness of a Whiting, which when
taken, is slit to the Back like Habberdine, then salted, and packed up in
Barrels, is sent in Pickle all over China, as we and the Hollanders send our
Herrings through Europe. The Rows of these Fishes are also salted, and put into
Pots, which remaining very red, are accounted for a great Dainty amongst the
Chinese.

For the Privilege of Fishing under this Island, the Chinese used to pay the
Tithes of all Fish for Custom, to the Hollanders there resident.

The Soil has in it a natural Fertility, yet lies most part waste, through the
ignorance and sloth of the Inhabitants: The fruitfullest Tract the King of
Middag possesses, which produces abundance of Rice, Wheat, Barley, Rye,
Kayjang, Ginger, Sugar, several sorts of Trees, and great variety of Fruits, as
Lemmons, Oranges, Citrons, Pumpeons, Water-Melons, Cucumers, Ananasses,
China-Roots, Kadjang, Fokkafoka, Potatoes, Ubes, Sweet-Herbs, Cabbage, Carrots,
and abundance of Physical Herbs, and Cane-wood. Kadjang is a certain small
Seed, green, and about the bigness of Coriander, which boiled with salt and
fresh Fish, gives a more pleasant taste. Fokkafokas is a Fruit like a Pear, but
thrice as big as one of our greatest; white on the shady side, and on the
other, in stead of Red, of a Purple Color, and shines on the top like Glass.
It is first cut into four Quarters, then boyld with Flesh or Bacon, like
Turnips, Carrots, or Coleworts: Of the Broth, sweetened with Sugar they make
good Drink.

They also have some few Sheep, and store of Hearts, Goats, stags, Conies,
Beasts.
Hares, tame and wild Swine, Tigers, Bears, Apes, and the like: But they have
there also another kind of Creature, by the Hollanders called Tayowans Devil,
about an Ell long, and five Inches broad* it is full of Scales, both under his
Belly, and on his Back; has four Feet, a long sharp Head, very sharp Claws,
and a Tail thin at the end; his Food nothing but Pismires; for being hungry,
they put forth their Tongues, which when they perceive creep upon it, they draw
in again, and so swallow their Prey: It is an Enemy only to the Ants, and is
very fearful of Men, from whom it flies upon the first sight, into any hole, or
else winds it self together; but if taken by the Tail, and shaken, opens again;
so that the Hollanders have by an Irony named it the Tayowans Devil, being so
harmless, that it will neither offend another, nor defend it self. None of
these are found in all Asia, but on this Isle, where they have all manner of
Fowl else, except Parrots. There are also Serpents, Millepedes, Scorpions*
Hedgehogs, and many other monstrous Creatures. They likewise oftentimes see
great Swarms of Locusts.

Anno 1655. abundance of Locusts spread themselves over these Islands of
Formosa and Tayowan: At their first appearance in Tayowan, they fell down from
the Sky, like a great Snow here with us, and covered the whole Ground: After
two days they directed their way to Sakkam, multiplying in such manner, that no
place was free of them. The People endeavoring to destroy the young Locusts in
Sakkam, in four or five days got thirty thousand Picol weight: But Every Picol
is 125 pound weight.
all proved in vain, and they were forced to give over, when they saw their
prodigious increase, utterly destroying their Sugar and Rice Fields every where.

Against the North-East part of Formosa lies a great and rich Golden Mine,
surrounded by many other Marble Quarries: At the Foot thereof runs a River,
with many winding Reaches; so that any one which intends to go in quest of the
Gold, must cross this Stream above twenty times, and not without great danger,
because of the Stones, which frequently tumble from the Rocks. In August the
great Rains sweep down an incredible Store of this rich Metal, which falls into
Pits made on purpose at the Foot of the Hill, which the Inhabitants draining,
gather the pure Oar from the bottom.

These Mountains are inhabited by a People which know no Prince, nor hitherto
have been conquered by any. The Hollanders have often endeavored to gain some
Ground in these High-lands; but were always repulsed.

The Men of Formosa are very large and strong Limbed, especially those in the
Plain Country; for those of the Mountains are generally of lesser Stature, and
the Women yet smaller than either. They are full-fac'd, and without Beards, not
naturally, but by continual plucking out of the Hair so soon as it buds: They
have great Eyes, flat Noses, large Breasts, and very long Ears, which they
count a great Ornament, and are bored through, and tenter'd out broad with a
Horn; some hang a round Tablet in the Hole, painted and carved after their
manner; others, colored Shells; but chiefly on Festival days, and when they
are to appear before their Idols; for on other days they leave their long
extended Lugs, which cover their Collar-bone, naked and without Ornament, then
no beautifying Addition to take Strangers, hanging almost half way down to
their naked Breasts: Their Hair as black as Jeat, is also very long, and by
most worn as they do in Europe; but some, after the ancient Chinese manner, tie
it on the top of their Heads, or braid it into one Lock. They are of a Tawny or
Olivaster Complexion, not much fairer than the Mulatto. The Women of Midag are
bright, like the golden Yellow, as likewise like those of Soetan Nouwe, and the
Island Lamey.

They are ingenious, of subtle Wit, and great Memories, and none of the
Indians are fitter to understand the Mysteries of, and readier to embrace the
Christian Faith.

Their Habit or Summer-Garment, is only a thin Cotton Coat, made wide, Apparel.
tied fast on the Breast by two Corners, and then put under one of their Arms;
so that generally one side of their Bodies is covered, and the other bare;
about the middle close girt, and hanging down below their Knees. They neither
wear Shoes nor Stockins; but sometimes a kind of Pumps or Sandals, made of
Goat Skins, which they fasten on the top of their Feet.

In the Winter time they wear Tigers, Leopards, Bears, and other Wildbeasts
Skins. The People of Soulang went habited like the Dutch, being still
conversant among them; but all the rest, like the Chinese.

Before the Spaniards and Hollanders coming thither, the Inhabitants went
naked; which Salvage Custom those that live in the Mountains still continue,
wearing only a small Cloth before.

The Women's Habit agrees almost with the Men's, only with this difference, that
they tie Clouts about their Legs, like Spatterdashes, and have short Coats,
like a Half-shirt without Sleeves, which reach down to their Middle, and under
that a Cotton Cloth, falling down to their Knees. Their Heads are filleted with
a piece of Silk, about a Yard and half long, whose two ends stick out like
Horns, on their Foreheads; and none of them ever wear Shoes: But every Woman
has commonly a great Pig running after her, as we use to have a Dog.



The Men paint the Skin of their Breasts, Backs, and Arms, with a Color which
remains in the Flesh, and will never be got out, and by them accounted a great
Bravery: about their Necks and Arms they hang Glass Beads strung, and Iron
Armlets, which sit very straight, like an Elbow-Gauntlet, so narrow in the
Wrist, that it seems impossible almost how they could be put over the Hand; and
on their Legs they have Anclets of white Shells, joined together like a Scallop
Lace.

The Men of Tokdadekol wear as an Ornament a long Cane, which they stick behind
their Backs at a Girdle, the other end bowing over their Heads, having a white
or red Flag about two Handfuls broad.

Their Heads on Holydays are gay with Cocks Feathers, and their Arms and Legs
with Bears Tails: The Women also use Glass, and Stones, and sometimes also
Rix-Dollars. The Skins of Deer, spread on the Ground, serve them for Beds and
Blankets. They have no Societies of Artificers, or Manufactory; but every one
is his own Workman, and Seamster, making what is necessary or useful for
themselves to wear: They are very dexterous and ready in handling their Bows
and Arrows; and such excellent Swimmers, that they will bear on their Backs
another Person through the swiftest Current.

They exercise themselves much in Running, and are very swift of Foot; so that
some of them are able to beat a Horse at full speed: When they run, they hold a
kind of a Bell about six Inches long in their Hand, which tinkles slower or
faster according to their motion.

They never venture out to Sea, but Fish in Rivers with small Canoos.

The Inhabitants neither understand to brew Beer, as in Europe; nor press Wine,
having no Grapes: But they use a certain Liquor called Musakkauw, or Machiko,
made of Rice and Water, after this manner. A Vessel about the bigness of a
Hogshead, or a Barrel, they fill two third parts with chaw'd and boiled Rice,
and then filled up with Water to the top: This being a Brimmer, luted up, is
put seven Foot deep under Ground, where it stands a whole Year; then it is again
taken up, and the Moisture pressed out of the Rice (for most of the Water is
soaked into the Rice) with their Hands: After eight days the Juice works it
self into a very wholesome Liquor, which may compare with the strongest Wine,
and will remain good twenty or thirty Years; for the older it grows, the
stronger and pleasanter it tastes, being preserved in the same Pots it was made
in, and covered over with Earth. There are some Houses which have stowed in
their Butteries two or three hundred of these Vessels. At the Birth of a Child,
the Father prepares two or three Pots of this Drink, and preserves it till the
Child's Marriage. All the Wild People, both Men and Women, are great Lovers of
this Liquor, and account it the chiefest Regalia, when they are caressed with
this Cordial.

They have yet another sort of Drink, by them called Cuthay, made of the same
pressed Rice (which they preserve, and through not away) in this manner: They
take a Handful of this Rice, and put it into a Callabash, which contains about
two Gallons, which they fill up with Water: This is a cool Drink, not strong,
and has only a smatch of the Masakauw.

In the Northern Part of Formosa, between Kelang and Tamsay, and between Tamsay
and Mount Gedult, they make another Drink of Wood-ashes, which is also very
strong, but unwholesom for the Europeans, because it is apt to excoriate,
breeding the Bloody Flux: But the Natives, though so well stored with these
several Liquors, yet for the most part satisfy themselves with Water.

Their usual Diet is dried Venison, Flesh of Wild Swine, and Fish; all which
they eat raw, without Seething or Rosting: Boiled Rice serves them for Bread,
which they take with their four fingers, and toss into their Mouths. They
sees not their Rice in Water; but putting it into a Cullender, hang it over a
Pot filled with boiling Water, from whose ascending Steam and Heat, the Rice
grows moist and warm.

In the Southern Parts of Akkou and Zoetanau, they make Cakes of Rice, and
prepare their Venison after a strange manner; viz. The Flesh cut from the Bones
in Slices of two Inches thick, is salted in a Trough, and packed very close;
and after lying thus one Night, they set it on the Roof of their Houses to dry
in the Air, where it becomes so hard as Stock Fish, yet tastes better than
Mutton, and is generally sold for about a Shilling a Cattay, that is, a Pound.

The Inhabitants also take Tobacco* although it grows not there, but is brought
to them from China: Their Pipes are thin Reeds or Canes, with Stone Heads: That
which the Hollanders often smok'd there, was brought from Iapan; which though
strong, is but like the Refuse of other Tobacco.

Their Houses are all built of Wood and split Canes, which because of their
Houses.
ignorance in preparing of Lime or Stone, and the decaying of the Canes, seldom
last above four or five years, at which time they pull down the old, and build
new ones in the same place, though not without great charge, occasioned by the
unsatiable drinking of the Workmen all the time of their Building; so that an
ordinary Man is scarce able to build a House. They generally stand six Foot
from the Ground, on a Hill of Clay: When the Foundation is first laid, they
raise several Steps from the Street to go up to it: The foremost part of the
Foundation resembles a Semicircle, or Half Moon, and likewise the Roof over the
Front; the rest thatched with Straw, and other such like Materials, is above
twenty, and sometimes above thirty Foot high, jutting four Foot over the Front,
that in rainy Weather they may stand dry. Every House is almost sixty Foot
broad, and two hundred Foot long, with only one Room, and one Story. Their
Penthouse, or Front-Roof, they hang full of Swines Teeth, Glasses, Shells, and
such like Baubles, strung on Thread, which by the Wind being stirred and blown
one against another, make a gingling noise, very pleasant. The Roof, which they
finish on the Ground, is by the Builders divided into two parts, one on one
side, and the other on the other laid upon the House. They begin their
Buildings at a certain time of the Year, viz. in January or February, because
those are dry Months; but before they build, they make Observations of their
good Success by Dreams, which they tell to one another every Morning: If they
dream of a Post, or Pisang Tree, or short Cane, they look upon it as a good
signification, and begin their Building* but if they Dream of a long Reed on
Cane, in their Language called Foerik, they take it for an ill Omen, and defer
the Work till they have better Visions. When they begin to build, they thus
invoke one of their Idols: Oh Father, be with us; when we go to cut Canes, and
we will build an Edifice for thee, and pull the old one down; which done, we
will serve thee with more Zeal than ever we did before.

Coming into the Cane Thicket, they first cut off one of the slenderest of all,
speaking these words: Ipatahoang, Tuataki, Maganich, Maling; that is, To your
Honor, O ye gods, we cut this Cane, because you have made good our Dreams. This
Reed or Cane is not stripped of its Leaves, because the gods may see what it was
cut off for, and is Planted on the North side of their Temple; for on the South
side is the Burying and Offering places for their Dead; but on the North side
they offer all living things.

After they have cut as many Canes as they want, they pull down the old House,
having before made a small Hut, just big enough to hold their Goods; before
they go to work upon the main House, they offer to their gods a Box of Pinang,
boiled Rice, and a dried Shepherd, or some other the like Fish, with entreaties
that they would not be angry at it; for say they, We will build you a new
House, we pray you preserve us; O you that help us in all our troubles, defend
us against our Enemies, and provide for us in necessity; We pray you be not
offended with us; receive our Offerings, and enter with us into our new Houses.
Which done, enquiry is again made amongst themselves, what appeared to every
one in their sleep the Night before, and he who is judged to have had the best
Dream, begins the Work first, and offers strong Drink, and Pinang to the gods,
praying them to grant him two quick Hands to perform his Labor. When the Walls
are made, the Master of the Work first entering the House, makes an Offering to
the gods before all the People.

When they raise the Roof, three or four Women stand ready with Callibashes
full of Water, out of which drinking, they spit some part into the Mouths of
each other, which if delivered cleanly, and received without sprinkling, they
count it a good Omen, that their Houses will prove stanch and long lasting. But
the Women must be very quick in this performance, for according to their
thinking, the more exquisite and nimbler they are in performance, the sooner
they believe the whole work will be ended; which when effected, and the House
perfectly finished, then they Tope at such a free and plentiful rate, that they
conclude these Ceremonious Rites in the height of Ebrity. After this, some
distance from the House, sit two or three Men, every one holding a black Pot,
which they call Tatak, and Worshipping, say, Here is Liquor, come let us drink
up all, neither be offended with us, O you gods, but assist us now, and always,
in our Buildings. Lastly, They ask again for every ones Dream, and he that has
Dreamt best, must lay the Floor, and kindle the first Fire.

But concerning their Superstition in Divine Worship, they give to each
Priestess a Box of Pasie, that is, a Peck of Rice in the Ear, desiring them
about Noon to come to their Houses, to make an Oblation to their gods, which
they perform in this manner:

First, A fat Porket being brought to the place, is laid with his Head toward
the East, then the Priestess strikes him with all her strength on the back with
a Pestle, such as they beat Rice with, for they touch not the Head, for fear of
bruising the Brains, which must remain whole, and without any confusion; if the
Pestle chance to break with the blow, they take it for a certain sign, that
they shall die that year. With the Hog they offer Pinang, Siri, and scalded
Rice; on the Head they pour Masakhaw, and cut the Belly into handsome slices,
whereof they lay one on a Chest in the House for an ornament, praying their
gods to fill it with costly Goods. In like manner, they lay another piece on
their Swords and Shields, and then pray to their gods to strengthen them
against their Enemies; nay, they leave not a Callabash in the House without
Sanctifying it by laying a piece of the flesh upon it; but all the Inwards are
offered to their gods, with these words: This we give to you, our gods, to keep
our Swine, and make them fat; for this trouble the Priestess, as a reward, has
ten Boxes of Pasie, and two yards of Painted Cloth, the right shoulder of every
killed Pig, a piece of the Belly, a piece of the Heart, Liver, Kidney, some of
the Guts, and Masakhaw; then they desire her to come every day to their Houses,
there to Implore, that they may stand a long time: And such a prevailing power
do the Formosans ascribe to these Sacrifices, that they believe no evil Spirit
after can hurt them or theirs.

If any House accidentally happen to be set on fire (by which oftentimes whole
Streets, nay whole Villages, by reason of the combustible Materials, are burnt
to Ashes) they Apprehend, Accuse, and without Examination, as if Convicted,
punish that Man whom they first find in the Street, forcing him to make good,
if able, the damage toward the Re-building, which if he refuse, his House is
immediately set on fire; but if they find no body in the Street to accuse, then
as if all were guilty, they lay their hands to the work, and at their own Costs
and Pains finish it.

The chief Power and Strength of this Island consists in its People, the
Country being wonderfully populous.

The Towns which War continually one against another, are fortified with all
manner of Inventions for strength; and in stead of Walls, surrounded with great
Woods, Planted on purpose, and much stronger than any Walls, for the Trees
stand exceeding close, and above three hundred Paces in breadth. The strength
of the Island.


The Passages in and out are only little cross Paths, with many turnings and
windings, only wide enough for one Man to walk, so that they must follow each
other: On both sides of the narrow Ways are some little Out-lets, in which they
may lie in an Ambuscade, so that no man can pass by them, but they command him
with their Bow. In the Night they stick them full of Spikes like our
Galthrops, which they make of a very hard Wood; sometimes they use Snares and
Traps, which whoever comes amongst them is caught being entangled; these Paths
thus made, as occasion offer, they can change and desert, and make new ones
when they please.

In Middagh and Pimeba, nay, in every Town are three or four very high Towers
built of Canes, on which Men Armed watch with Bows and Arrows Night and Day.

They continually maintain War one against another, Lord against Lord, Manner
of Fighting.
and Village against Village: In like manner, before they March into the Fields
they Superstitiously observe their Dreams which they had the Night preceding;
and augury, from the singing and flying of a certain small Bird, called Aydak;
if this Bird meets them flying with a Worm in his Bill, they take it for an
infallible sign, that they shall conquer their Enemies; but if the Bird flies
from them, or pass by them, they are so much disheartened with the ill Omen,
that they return home, nor will Engage till they have better signs: They choose
always one most approved for Valor as their General, whom they style Tamatuwa,
who never takes the Field, or Engage in Battle, before he has by Offerings
endeavored to pacify and implore the gods for good success.

They show no Mercy, nor give any Quarter, but Slaughter all, not sparing Women
and Children; neither are they satisfied with killing them, but carry home the
Heads of the Slain as Trophies of their Victory, being received at their return
by their Wives and Children, with great rejoicing expressed by Singing and
Dancing, and enter the Towns with the Heads of their Enemies erected upon long
Poles, which they present to their gods seven succeeding Nights; after having
taken off all the flesh, they hang up in their Houses the Sculls as Ornaments,
as we in Europe use Paintings or Statues.

When they draw forth again to the like bloody Work, they take the
beforementioned Sculs with them, and stop their Mouths full of Rice: And when
thus cramb'd, invoke after this manner: You Relics, though of our Enemies, O
let your Spirits departed from you, march with us into the Field, and help us
to obtain the Victory; which if you please to grant, and we have the day, we
promise to present you with continual Offerings, and reckon you among the
number of our favoring gods: But if they be routed and some slain, whose Bodies
they could not bring off, they return to their Towns with great lamentations,
then feed their fancies with representatives, dressed up as Babies in Clouts,
like those that were lost in the Field, whom they Interr, as if the very same
Persons, and get the Priestess to make Offerings to the Deceased Souls,
conjuring them not to go amongst, nor by intelligence help their Adversaries:
Then the Priestess goes by her self to the appointed place, and offers to the
Souls of the Deceased a Swines Liver, Heart, and one or two of the Feet,
together with scalded Rice, Pinang, and Masakhaw; at her return she relates
what a sad complaint the Souls departed made, and that they were almost starved.

Their Arms are Bows, Arrows, Shields, Swords, Faulchions, Spears, of Arms.
Darts, about the length of a half Pike, headed with pointed Steel, and having
four Rings of Barbs, close to which hangs a long Line, wherewith when they have
discharged the Dart, and wounded any, they hale to them by the Line and Staff
of the Javelin the struck Enemy, whom when within their reach, taking hold of
the Hair with their left Hand, with the right they whip off their Heads, and
leave the Corpse neglected.

They fight not always, though drawn up in battle array, but when the two
Armies are in view, often from each Party a bold Champion steps forth, Armed
with a Shield, two short Swords, a Spear, and half a dozen lesser Darts; thus
provided they fight valiantly till one is slain, and the Victor returning with
his Head upon his Lance, about whom his Friends flock, Rejoicing, Dancing,
Singing, and Drinking Masakhaw; then returning home, he fixes his bare Scull as
a Register and Trophy of their Victory; and this Duel, for that time decides
the Quarrel, and all march off in quiet.

If any of the Natives of this Isle happen to fall sick, they apply themselves
only Curing of their Sick.
to Women-Doctors, for no other officiate there; who finding out the part
affected by inquiry, they rub and chafe it very strongly, and if that cure not,
which seldom happens, they are at a loss, being utterly ignorant of the
knowledge of Physic, or how to make any application, either by Herbs or other
Compound Medicines fitting for Distempers, or in any manner how to rectify the
Diet of the Sick. But before the Tamatatah (for so they call their Doctress)
comes to the Patient, she Sacrifices to their gods; if the Distemper be small,
then only with Masakhaw; but if the sickness be dangerous, with Pinang and
Siry; if the Disease be stubborn, then the Priestess being sent for, makes
Offering to the gods Tagitelag and Tagesikel; but if the Distemper does not
remit, then the Doctress and Priestess come both together, and seek by Charms
and Incantations to find out whether the Person shall Live or Die, which they
perform after this manner: The Priestess pretending to speak with the Sick Man's
or Woman's Spirit, pulls them by their Fingers, which if they crack, she
comforts them with hopes of recovery; but if not, they look upon it as a
certain sign of Death. Secondly, they take a Leaf from a Tree, by them called
Fangack, which putting before the Sick Persons Lips, the Priestess comes with a
Mouth full of Water, and spurts on the Leaf; if the Water runs off toward her,
it is a sign of Life; but if it remains with the disaffected, or fall on the
other side, they expect certain death; but if at last the Sick recovers, he is
not permitted to come into their Congregation during their Karichang, for that
is a testimony of his Thankfulness for the preservation of Life; and then he
brings to the Priestess a Pot full of Masakhaw, an Offering to the gods
Takafocloe, Telumalum, and Tapali Appe, saying, Accept this as a token of
Thanksgiving from my Hands; you have well done to give me Life. While they are
going to the Priestess about this affair, they must take heed that they meet
with no Blind or Decrepit Person, for if they should, they must return, lest
they be punished with another Sickness. They also account it a strange Omen, to
hear any one Sneese in their going: But if the Distemper increase daily to a
greater height, either by Convulsions or other acute Pains, they lay the whole
blame upon the Devil himself, as being the Author, whom they call
Schytinglitto; whom to expel, they send for the Priestess, who conjures him in
this manner: First, after some Oblations, she prays to the gods to strengthen
her against the Devil, and banish all manner of fears from her; then calling
for a Sword, and a Pot of Masakhaw, attended with some of the stoutest Youth,
which are so valiant as to venture with her, hunts through all the corners of
the House after the Devil; whom when she has found, as she cries out, she
drives away, assisted by the young Men, making a most terrible noise. Having
thus driven him a considerable way to the Bank of a River, or some running
Water, or to the Woods if there be no Water near, then she takes the Pot with
Masakhaw, and first drinking a good Soope out of it, throwing the remainder Pot
and all after the Devil, and says these words, Take that, and return not to the
Patient from whom I expelled you. This done, she plants a Cane in the Ground,
of which (as they report) the Devil stands in great fear.

When the Fiend (as she says) approaches her, she strikes very fiercely at
him, and shows some Hair hid about her for that purpose to the People, which
she makes them believe (and they credit) that she has broke the Devils Head,
and pulled those Locks from it; and for this her trouble she receives a Red
Stripped Garment, and so departs: But if the Distemper still continues, and that
there is no sign of amendment, they send again for the Priestess, who coming
thither, says, That the Devil loves the House, and therein intends to dwell;
Whereupon, being desired to drive him from thence, and also her Reward showed
her, she takes a Spade, Digs a Hole in several places of the House, and pulls
out some more Hair which she has hid, crying aloud to all the standers by,
that she has had the Devil by the Head, and that that is his Hair; then
seeming to force him out of the House, with many scurrilous Exclamations.

After all endeavors used in vain, and that their Stiches and Pains no way
abate, then they commit them to their gods; but when they are ready to yield up
the Ghost, they pour so much strong Liquor down their Throats, that running out
at their Mouth and Nostrils, it drowns and suffocates: Thus having fetched the
last Gasp, all those that are about him cry out with a lamentable voice, making
strange Gesticulations, clapping, and stamping with their Hands and Feet; and
to give notice that one is dead in the Town, they go up and Mourning for the
Dead.
down Tabering upon one of their Drums; which done, and the Corpse washed in
warm Water, his best Clothes are put on, adorned with Bracelets and other
Ornaments, his Weapons laid by him, and Rice and Masakhaw proffered to him, all
which lie two days by the Body; which if they should not do, his Soul (they
say) would be angry: Likewise they kill a Hog for his Provision, to supply his
long Journey, and then they offer the Corpse up to their gods: Before the House
they set up a long Cane, with a Pennon on the top, and near it a great Tub with
Water, for the Soul to Bathe in: Against the Evening, all the Friends come
thither, accompanied with most of the Townsmen, every one with a Pot of
Masakhaw; the nearest of Kin to the Deceased, lay themselves down by the Corpse,
and making a mournful complaint, utter these words; Why did thou die? why
did thou leave us? What hurt, what harm have we done thee? O my Son, my
loving Child come hither to us, and stay with us; If you will not, take us to
your self, since we are ready to die and follow you; What shall we do without
you? what do we do here after you?

To increase their sorrow, the Women make a very doleful noise, by trampling
and tabering with their Feet on a hollow Trough before the Door, at which the
standers by cry, Hark, how the Trees bemoan the loss of this Man. This stamping
on the Trough, is by them called Smaghdakdaken: They also hire several Women
which sit constantly crying by the Corpse, and sometimes make sad Complaints,
and Sing mournful Elegies which they name Temulidid* These Women likewise pray
to the gods, that the Soul may have a good place in Heaven, and find a new Wife
and Friends there: The young Men, in the mean time running up and down with
Rattles in their Hands.

After the Corpse has lain two days on Rushes, they bring it to a place called
Takay, where they wash it several times with warm Water; but if a rich Person,
with Masakhaw, then scrape it so long, till pieces of Flesh and Skin hang*
dangling about it. Lastly, they make a gentle fire nine days under the Corpse*
which Roasting by degrees, occasions a horrible stench.

The Body thus Broyl'd is wound up in a Mat, and laid again on the Rushes as
before; then they make a great Feast called Gahalhal, killing ten or twelve
Swine, some for offerings to the gods, others for Taghimihe, or Provisions for
the departed Souls Journey.

Some of this Pork is cut in small pieces, and served about to the Mourners; at
that time the House is filled with Men and Women, every one with a Pot of
Masakhaw, all which sometimes Weep, and sometimes Drink, till they are all
Maudlin-Drunk; they mix a strange complaint with horrid confusion: Then the
nearest Relations go again to the Corpse, and make the forementioned complaints,
why he died, etc. If it be the body of a rich Person, it is kept some years
before it is Buried, and served every day as if living, setting fresh Meat and
Drink before it.

If the Deceased died a Batchellor, then they relate all the Heroic Exploits
which he performed in his Life time, and the number of his slain Enemies; over
his Head they hang a Cane, with as many Notches in it as he has killed Men.
Lastly, they carry the Dead to the common Burying-place, close by their
Temples, where some must watch nine or ten days, for they certainly believe
that the Devil watches about him all that time; after the ten days expired,
their Friends go thither with Rattles, and Boughs of Pisang Trees, with fire in
their Hands, making a terrible noise, under pretense to hunt the Devil from
thence. The Wife to the Deceased (if he leaves one behind him) Prays before him
so long as he lies in the House, desiring the gods, that they would be kind and
merciful to him. And while the Corpse is above the Ground, the House may not be
swept, but when the Corpse is carried out, and the House swept, the Woman that
did it must throw away the Broom toward the South, saying, Who owes the House?
whereupon answering her self, It does not belong to me nor us, what then have
we to do with this House?

These People observe seven Solemn times as Festivals with great Ceremonies:
Seven Feasts.


The first called Trepaupoe Lakkang, which begins at the latter end of April,
First.
and is kept by the Sea side, whither both Young and Old, Rich and Poor, flock
in great multitudes: Here their Priestess pretends to speak with, and receive
Answers from their gods, offering them Swines-flesh, Rice, Masakhaw, and
Pisang, with Prayers to send them store of Rain for the forwarding the growth
of their Corn, or if it be already grown, to keep it from hurtful Winds.

After their Sacrifices ended, they sit down about the same place, and fall a
Drinking to excess; while the ancient men standing on a row every one with a
whole Reed in one hand, and a Lance in the other, sprinkle them with Masakhaw.
In their Huts they discourse of all their Villainies committed, or brag who has
slain the most of their Enemies, and brought home their Heads as Trophies; but
he that has done the most work in Harvest, is accounted the bravest Fellow.

The second Feast called Warabo Lang Varolbo, that is, Tying Fast, they
generally Second Feast.
hold in June, against which they observe their Dreams, and Singing of the
Birds.

At the day of Offering they rise very early, and make themselves ready for the
Work, both Men and Women, with great Zeal; the Women first Consecrate the Irons
with which they Weed; the Basket in which they carry their Caps, likewise the
Callabashes, Rings, Bracelets, Chests, the Front of the House and Bridge;
Praying also to the gods Tamagisangak, and Tekaroepada for good Fortune, and
security against Fire, and to be their Defense against Poisonous and Voracious
Beasts; all which they do before they go out.

The Men Pray to the gods Topoliap and Takavoelie, and offer them Masakhaw,
boiled Rice, Pinang, Siri, and Swines flesh, begging of them in time of War, to
defend them against their Enemies, to sharpen their Swords, Arrows, and
Assagays; and lastly, to harden their Bodies against their Adversaries, Darts,
and Arrows.

Then both Men and Women, but most of the Female Sex go to their Priestess
called Ibis, to whom they show great Reverence and Obedience; some years ago
there was a certain Ibis called Tiladam Tuaka, which was used to perform many
abominable Ceremonies at this Feast, viz. She climbed on the Roof of the
Temple, where she stood in sight of all the People, then began to tell them,
that the gods would have taken her to them from the Temple; which done, she
called for the Drink Offerings, and holding a great Pot with Liquor in both
Hands, said, That the gods, unless she did so, would not drink; then being
drunk, she pulled off all her Clothes, Because the Children of God, said she,
cannot enter into Heaven with any Earthly Robes. Thus standing in sight of all
People, she began to evacuate what she had so greedily swallowed, saying, That
the gods, according to the quantity of her Vomit, would send them Rain;
whereupon the People force upon her more Liquor, that they may have plenty of
Rain: If the Priestess chances to Urine through the Roof of the Church, then the
Spectators promise to themselves a fruitful year, but if not, great scarcity,
so that they often drink the more to satisfy the People; then bidding the
whole Congregation look up, she Tabors on her private parts a considerable
time, which Taboring the Spectators observe with as much Zeal, as in our
Country the Auditors give ear to the Preaching of a Sermon.

Lastly, coming down, she falls flat on the ground, and begins to roar and
foam, rolling too and again, and spreading her Hands and Feet, then lies still
a while, as in a Trance; her associates come to lift her up, but seem to have
met with too weighty a burden; yet at last recovering, after she has made a
small Speech to the People, her Companions lead her into the Temple, where she
drinks her self dead Drunk; all which impudent debaucheries, as they say, are
done to the honor of their gods, to grant them store of Rain, and a plentiful
Harvest.

All the Women must appear naked at this Feast, except their Privacies, which
they cover with a Kagpay, that is, a little piece of Cloth; so also must the
Men: When they have drunk out all their Liquor at the Temple, the Congregation
goes home, where they Drink till the Morning, and walk from house to house,
committing all manner of Villainies, not fearing to lie with, or vitiate their
Sisters and Daughters.

The third Feast called Sickariariang, they keep in June; the manner thus:
Third Feast.


After every one has done their Private Devotions in their Houses, and as they
say, spoke with the gods, they make themselves ready to go to the general place
of Sacrifice near the Sea. The Men walk stark naked, but the Women have a small
Clout before them. At their general Assembly, the Priestess offers to the gods,
of whom they now request, that they may be strengthened against their Enemies;
and the Women, that the Corn be preserved from Tempests and Wild Beasts.

Amongst all other, this is the most Celebrated, because it is as one of
Bacchus and Venus's Feasts; so that it differs much and exceeds the rest, in
perpetrating unheard of Abominations, both night and day: The young Men are
commanded by the Magistrates of the Town, to go naked to this Feast, and to
exercise themselves with Running, and Martial Discipline, which they willingly
perform.

The fourth named Lingout, begins in Harvest, and kept also on the Sea shore,
Fourth Feast.
near the mouth of a River: Hither also both Men and Women going naked, pray to
the gods for Rain, to keep the Corn in the Ears, to banish Storms and Tempests,
which very frequently rise in that Month. Great villainies are committed at
this Feast. The Youths are stuck and hung with green Boughs and Garlands, and
so adorned, must run Races with Rattles in their Hands; he that gets first to
the River wins the Wager, and by the Maidens is conducted and carried over,
where he enjoys the handsomest of them at his pleasure.

The fifth Feast called Piniang, is kept in October, at which time the
Magistrates Fifth Feast.
have a piece of Wood cut in the fashion of a Tortoise-shell, tied to their
Bodies, whereupon in the Night, with their whole Congregation, they walk
Drumming and Shouting up and down the Town. At this Feast they come all clothed
to their place of Offering, to run about with the artificial Shell, which is
first performed by those whose Parents are yet living, then by those that are
Orphans. This Feast is no less polluted by vicious performances than the other.

The sixth they name Itaoungang: At this Feastival the old and young Men appear
Sixth Feast.
in peculiar Habits, and have a pretty way of moving their Hands and Feet,
Capering, and hitting their Feet one against another, and likewise act several
Postures with their Hands; besides many other Ceremonies, too long here to
relate. This continues two days, meeting both Morning and Evening, at the sound
of the artificial Tortoise-shell; after they have performed their several
Offerings to their Deities, they fall a Drinking, in which they spend the whole
Night.

The seventh Feast called Korouloutaen, is kept in November with great
Solemnity. Seventh Feast.
At the time of this Feast they adorn their Arms and Heads with white Feathers.

The Formosans (except those by the Hollanders converted to Christianity)
believe not in God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, but Worship thirteen Idols.

The first and chiefest is called Tamagisangak, and resides in the West part of
Heaven.

The other his Wife, Takaroepada, and dwells over against him in the East: both
these are by them accounted for their powerfullest gods, and reverenced with
great Devotion; for if any War lay desolate their Cities, or Sickness and
Famine oppress the People, they say all proceeds from the neglect of their duty
in worshipping these gods.

The third God called Tamagisangak reigns in the South, and shapes handsome
People, as the fourth his heavenly Consort Teckarupada, in the East gives
growth to Corn and Field-Fruits; they say, these Deities have the ordering of
Man's Life, wherefore the Women present them with Seeds and Plants: They believe
likewise that Thunder is the Goddess Teckarupada's voice, chiding at her
Husband for not sending Rain timely upon the Earth, and he always, when thus
ratled up by his thundering Wife, delays not to send Rain in abundance.

The fifth God called Tugittellaegh, and his Queen Tagisikel the sixth, have
the cure of the Sick, and are worshipped by them.

The seventh Deity being Tiwarakahoeloe, and the eighth Tamakakamak, are
chiefly reverenced by such as frequent the Woods and Forest, to hunt and kill
wild Beasts.

The ninth called Tapaliat, and the other Tatawoeli, govern all Martial
Affairs, and are for the most part invoked by Soldiers.

The eleventh named Takarye, and the twelfth Tamakading, preside their annual
Feasts, and punish the omission of their long settled Customs.

The thirteenth Farikhe, they say resides in the North, they esteem him a
crossgrain'd and ill natured God, whose business is to deform what ever nature
makes Comely, and therefore only worship him that he may not mis-shape them.

The Natives relate, that this last God was formerly a Man living in Sinkam,
very fierce, and of a stern Countenance, with an exceeding long Nose, which
caused the People so to mock at him, that growing impatient to bear such
indignities any longer, he desired of the Gods to take him amongst them, which
was immediately granted; that after some stay there, he descended again, and
gave his Contrymen twenty seven Articles or Commandments, charging to
observe them strictly, threatening, that if they neglected, he would send upon
them many and great Plagues. These Commandments they keep ten days together
every Month, beginning when the Moon enters Aries, which time is by them called
Karichang* of which Laws more hereafter.

The Formosans are very slothful, and Till but little, although they possess
much fruitful and rich Land. None dare be so bold to Sow his Ground, before he
has offered two Hogs at Tamacuwalo and Tamabal, chief Houses belonging to the
third and fourth Gods, Teckarupada, and Tamagisangak; and this Oblation is
required by one of the Priests belonging to the same Houses. In like manner,
the Oldest of the Village, when it Rains, bring a Hog, and abundance of
Masakhaw to the Priests that dwell in those two Houses, to be offered to their
Gods.

If at their going to Sow their Fields, they chance to meet a wild Beast, and
kill it, they carry the Liver and Heart as a Victim, to their Gods in the two
Houses; and when all the People are assembled, the Priests of the two Houses
must first Sow a small spot of Ground, and then all the rest may proceed,
having first laid between two Bundles of Straw, by them called Tenguro, a
Pisang Leaf, a little Siri and Lime, to be offered to their Gods.

The Seed being put into the Ground, a Rice Pot, in their Language called
Sangi, is placed on the North side of the two Houses, and left there till the
Rice has attained its full growth.

If the Corn near the Pots (for close by them they Sow a little) grows well,
they take them away with great joy, and freely believe, that they shall have a
kindly and plentiful Harvest.

They are not permitted to take Tobacco in the Seed-time, lest (as their
Priestesses tell them) all their Seed should turn into that stinking Vapor. The
are forbidden in that time to throw the Bones of Salt Fish, or Peels of Onions
on the Ground; but must carry them in a Talangack, or Pot, into the Woods, to
prevent the devouring of their Corn by Poisonous Serpents.

They must keep no Fire, lest the Corn should be burnt. Sugarcanes or
Pomegranates they may eat only in the Evening; but they may not during that
Season taste any Roast-meat, for fear the Corn should be set on Fire by wild
Swine; nor any Mahall, that is, Powdered Flesh, lest it should be devoured by
Worms: They must also abstain from Kanging and a Hay, both Fishes, because they
believe, if they should eat of them, that the Corn would have no Ears.

They conceit, That if they should sleep in the Field during their Seed-time,
their Corn would not grow upright, but lodge on the Ground; and if they drink
any Water, except mixed with Masakhaw, that the Grain would never ripen, but be
green and watery.

If the Dust or Sand happen to light in ones Eyes, he may not endeavor to get
it out by rubbing, or otherwise, till he has quit the Field they have sown.

They never cut their Corn before they have made Offerings to their Gods.

If a Thorn chances to get in any ones Foot, he must not pull it out in the
Field, but must leave the Place.

No Woman may turn her back Parts to a Man, nor go naked.

Many more ridiculous Customs they use during the Seed-time, which are strictly
observed by them; as, when the Corn is ready to be cut, they thresh one Bundle,
and laying a Lump of Earth upon it, implore the Gods to fill and make weighty
the Ears of all the rest.

After they have brought in the Corn to their particular Houses, they offer a
Swine, and use many Ceremonies in the killing of it; amongst others, they lay a
great piece of Clay on a large black Pot, which they firmly believe makes their
Corn grow more full and weighty.

Their Hunting, which is never less than twelve days together, is performed
Hunting.
sometimes by few, and at other times with many People, who for the most part
use Snares and Canes, and also Assagays, Bows, and Arrows. When they have
appointed a great Match, they build a House in the Fields, which they call
Cadelang, wherein they hang all their Implements.

And as they have their third and fourth Gods that look over their Tillage, so
their seventh and eighth, named Tawarakakoeloe, and Tamakakamak, bear the sway
in Hunting. Before they go out, they tell to one another the Dreams they had in
the Preceding Night, and also neglect not Augurial Observations; insomuch that
if the Bird Aydak meet them, they count it a good Omen; but if it flies either
on the right or left side of them, they put off their Venating Sport till some
other time.

Others also go to a River side, where they make a peculiar kind of Sacrifice
to their Gods, with these Words, If the Devil, or any other Evil Spirits follow
us, we beseech that you would drive and banish them from us.

From the first Quarry of every sort of Wild Creatures, they take a snip from
the Tail, Mouth, Heart, and Kidneys, which with a Pisang Leaf, scalded Rice,
and Masakhaw, they present to their Deities.

Coming back from their Recreation, they return thanks to the Gods, in the
House which they built to put their Arms, and Hunting-necessaries in, praying,
That those which come after them may have no success, nor kill any thing.

Lastly, They pull down and burn the House, having first sent for the Women to
carry home the taken Venison, who coming thither, bring abundance of cheering
Tope to make merry with.

They often kill at one of these great Hunting-Matches, eight hundred, a
thousand, nay, sometimes two thousand Head of Deer; so that the Netherlanders
could buy there the best and fattest Hanch of Venison for a Shilling.

All the Formosans much differ from one another in their Speech, so that you
Language.
shall seldom find two or three Villages, though but three or four Leagues
distant from one another, but their Dialects vary so much, that they are forced
to use Interpreters.

They have neither Letters, Writings, nor Books, neither were willing to learn,
although both the Spaniards and Hollanders have offered to teach and instruct
them.

The Islands Formosa and Tayowan lay very convenient for the Netherlanders
Chinese Trade, because at most Seasons of the Year they could sail to them from
the Coast of China, out of the River Chinch, or Chinchieu.

The chiefest Merchandise which the Hollanders got at Formosa, consisted in
Sugar, Goats and Deers Skins, which they transported thence to Iapan.

The Companies Merchandise was carried in Chinese Jonks to the River Chinchieu,
and the City Eymuy, to their Factors or Merchants residing there, and also to
other peculiar Chinese*Merchants, whose Credit was good, to send them such
Returns as were desired at Iapan, India, and the Netherlands, which Trade was
connived at by the Koabon of the Territory Fokien. There also came some
peculiar Merchants out of China, with their own Vessels, to dispose of their
private Merchandise, though of small concern: Therefore when the time
approached, that the Ships were to go Annually to Iapan or Batavia, and that
the Goods came but slowly from China, they were necessitated to go themselves
with two or three Vessels to China or Eymuy, where the Goods were brought,
weighed, and received aboard in several Parcels, and were forced to give eight
or ten Tail more on a Picol of Silk, than* otherwise; each Tail valued at about
five Shillings Sterling, and a Picol, a hundred twenty five Pound weight.

The Formosans observe a Time, which they call Karichang, very strictly,
abstaining from several things while it lasts.

This Karichang comes every Month once, which is when the Moon (as we mentioned
before) enters our Vernal Sign Aries. It was, they say, first constituted by
one that lived in Sinkan, called Fariche Fikrigo Gon-go-Sey, being of a very
stern Countenance, with a long Nose, for which, mocked and derided by all his
Acquaintance: He therefore tired with their continual gybes and jeering, having
still one fling or other at his Nose, desired the Gods that they would please
to take him from this wicked World, and place him in Heaven; which being, as
they say, granted, after some time he descended again on the Earth, where he
commanded the People, as a punishment for their former derision, strictly to
observe the following twenty seven Commandments, which if omitted, he threatened
them with severe Punishments.

I. Thou shall not in the time of Karichang build either Houses, Walls, or
Resting-places, by them called Taekops; nor any Hedges or Fences in the Field.
II. Thou shall neither buy nor sell Skins, Salt, Gangans, Painted Clothes, nor
any thing else of that kind. III. No Married-men shall sleep with their Wives
in the time of Karichang, neither shall a Young Man espouse, nor bring his
Household Stuff or Goods to his Bride, nor enjoy her, lest he die soon after,
have a lingering Sickness, or live at debate. IV. Thou shall not manure new
Lands, nor lay Straw or Grass upon them, nor sow any Seed upon them, lest all
thy Labors, and what thou have done, be destroyed. V. Thou shall not make
Bows, Arrows, Shields, Swords, Assagays, or Snares; neither shall thou catch
any Beast. If any Woman make Bracelets, they shall have great Pains in their
Arms. VI. Thou shall not put on any new Garment, nor use any new thing
whatsoever, lest thou lose that, and suffer also a great Sickness. VII. Thou
shall make no Bridges, lest they fall, or be broken down, and thy Swine die.
VIII. No Clothes, Gangans, Rice, Rice-Stampers, Black Pots with two Ears, nor
any other Drinking Vessels, shall be brought into the Houses: None shall cut
green, but only dry Canes; and those they may not put into their own Houses,
but into one of their Neighbors. IX. Thou shall not plant Pinang, nor
Clapper-Trees, nor Canes, nor Potatoes, nor any other Plant. X. Thou shall
kindle no Fires on thy new Place of Assembly, which is called Kavo, nor sleep
in them, lest thou be punished with great Sickness. XI. No young Men shall
exercise themselves in running the Race called Tragaduwell. XII. No Child born
in that time shall be taken from his Mother; lest it die immediately. XIII. Let
no Man wear any Armlets called Salahim, lest their Arms should grow sore. XIV.
Thou shall not kill any Swine, though one of thy chiefest Friends come to visit
thee, unless at Obits. XV. Thou shall not Fish or Hunt for more than thy own
Provision. XVI. Thou shall not put any Swine in the new Houses made before the
Karichang, if there were none in before. XVII. Thou shall not name the Child
that is born in that time, till the Karichang be over, lest the Child die:
XVIII. Nor shall the Mother stir with her Infant from the Childbed Chamber,
further than the next Neighbors. XIX. A new Tamatawa, or General, shall not
march into the Field till the Karichang is over. XX. A Bridegroom shall not
walk with his Bride, except he has gone abroad with her before, lest some
dangerous Sickness ensue. XXI. No Parent shall knock out their Daughters two
upper Teeth before (as it is customary with them) nor bore Holes in their Ears
during the Karichang. XXII. No Man that never traveled before, shall then
begin his Journey. XXIII. No Maid shall taber with her Feet on a
Funeral-Trough, if she never Danced before. XXIV. Young Children, called
Taliglig, shall wear no Armlets, lest some hurt should befall them. XXV. None
shall go in Pilgrimage, called Zapuliung, to the City Mattou, in this time,
except they have been there before. XXVI. Thou shall not receive into thy House
any Chinese, or other stranger; but carry them to thy Neighbors. And if thou
make any Contracts or Alliance, thou shall do it with a Straw in thy Hands over
a Chost, saying, Shall I gain by this, or not? If I speak angerly, will he be
patient? Which said, thou shall pay the Gods the usual Offering. XXVII. Thou
may not make any Mariche thad Kaddelangang, either in thy A kind of their
Meat or Drink.
Towns, Houses, Fields, or at thy Hunting, nor no Vagacang, in the time of
Karichang.
ANno 1652. the seventh of September, the Chinese of Tayowan and Formosa being
then under the Hollanders obedience, depending on the great numbers of their
People, broke out into Rebellion, led by Fayet, a Ruler of Smeerdorp, lying two
Leagues from Sakam, with a design to surprise or force the Castle of Tayowan,
which thus they contrived, viz. To invite the Governor Nicholas Verburgh, with
all the Officers and chiefest of the Merchants residing in the City Zelandia,
to their Full-Moon Feast, resolving when they were in the midst of all their
Mirth, to dispatch them in a general Massacre.

This done, they intended to march to the Castle, under pretense to bring the
Governor home, and upon the opening of the Castle-Gate, to press in upon them,
and so Master it.

But one Pau, a Chinese Commander, who dwelt in Zelandia, and Brother to Fayet,
the Chief Leader of the Conspirators, disputing with his Brother the
probability of carrying on the Plot, said, The Design is good, very good, and
may be brought to effect; but if we should fail, and the Plot be discovered,
and these Devils the Hollanders get the better, what will become of us then?
You shall not suffer only, and the Party that you have engaged; but thousands
of Innocents, that knew nothing, shall scarce satiate their Revenge with their
miserable Slaughter. To which their General Fayet replied, Brother, if you are
not satisfied, and your Fear overcome your Judgment, you are at your Liberty
to dispose of your self; be Neuter, go to your Habitation, and which way soever
the Victory falls, there you may in safety, and unsuspected, enjoy your Freedom.

Pau having received this Reply, departed, musing as he went, but at last
resolved to discover the Plot, and make himself secure indeed. Coming therefore
to Tayowan, near the Castle, he desired the Sergeant to admit him to speak
privately with the Governor; but the negligent, left Pau waiting with a slight
Answer, the Governor and the rest being then at Prayers: But he more
importunate, and big with so great a Business, by earnest soliciting was let
in to the Governor, to whom he discovered all: At which Verburgh the Governor
being startled, first commanded to secure Pau in the Castle, and sent an
Officer with eight Men to Smeerdorp, as Spies, and to inquire News; who brought
word back, that the Chinese were already gotten into a Head, and that setting
upon them, they had escaped by flight. At this Alarm, the Hollanders that had
settled in Sakam, being to the number of thirty, in great fear fled for safety
to the Forts.

Fayet, who judged Delays dangerous, and doubting that his Brother would, or
had discovered the Plot, marched with his Forces to Sakam, where falling
without mercy upon the Town with Fire and Sword, he gave no Quarter to any.

A Gardener belonging to the Dutch, going on that Sunday Morning early with a
Basket of Fruit to the Governor, in the Castle Tayowan, the Revolters
overtaking him, cut off his Head, and taking out the Fruits, laid it in the
Basket, designing to have sent it before them; but the Humor altering, they
cast both it and the Body under a Bridge. The News of this Massacre spreading a
strange Fear seized all the Hollanders, wherever settled through the Country,
so that dispersing, they hid themselves wherever their Fear carried, or their
Hopes led them, to escape the Slaughter. But one Captain Marine, well mounted,
with three more, with their Swords in their Hands, broke through the Enemy, and
killing the first that opposed him, came safe to Tayowan.

Verburgh the Governor well knowing how untowardly the Business stood, and the
hazard wherein the Hollanders abroad were, lying open to destruction,
immediately sent out a hundred and twenty Men, commanded by Captain Danker.
This Handful, in comparison of their Enemies great Forces, went in one Sloop
and a Boat from Tayowan to Sakam, whither being come, the first that endeavored
to Land, being Captain Hans Pieters, leaped Breast-high into the Water, by
which Example, the rest encouraged, forsook their Boats, and resolved wading to
fight their way to the Shore; which the Enemy observing, sent down with the
Lieutenant General a thousand Men, to oppose their Landing. While they were
thus drawing up toward the Shore for the Service, Fayet the General gave his
Lieutenant Loukegwa new Orders, thinking it more fit to suffer them to Land,
saying, It would be a higher pleasure to him to see the Christian Dogs die on
the Land, than in the Water, which would be much the better sport, having them
there environed with his Army, as in a Net. But Loukegwa not so persuaded, nor
willing to receive these new Commands, earnestly advised the General that he
might go on, and set upon them in the Water, averring, That these being the
Hollanders choicest and picked Men, if they did not cut them off at this
Advantage, they should never have the like: But however the Generals Opinion
prevailing, he obeyed, and retreating, gave the opportunity of Landing in
safety; where a little toward the left Hand of the Enemy, he drew up his small
Party into a Body, when a Negro that had married a Hollander, coming out of a
Wood where she had hid, running for her safety toward them, they intercepting,
ripp'd up her Bowels, and cutting the Child in pieces, threw the Limbs at them,
vaporing aloud, That so they would serve them all. But the Hollanders not
replying, marched boldly up to the Front of the Enemy, where in the first
Charge killing fortunately their Prime Commander Fayet, which presently noised
through the Army, all struck with a Panick fear, threw down their Arms, and
disbanding, fled, shifting for themselves; but the Hollanders pursued, firing
at their Heels through Sakam, and the Town cleared, they sat down in their
Enemies Headquarters: But before Night, while yet they were triumphing for the
Victory, came two thousand Christian Formosans, raised by the Governor
Verburgh, to their Aid, who, according to present Orders, marched together in
pursuit of the Enemy, some few of whom the next morning they spied drawn
together upon a rising Ground, but a River betwixt impeded their present
Charge; but soon after the Formosans, who knew the Fords and Avenues, got over,
and charging them smartly, one being slain, they were suddenly dissipated;
which Victory they and the Netherlanders pursued, making Execution till
Sunset, from whence returning to their Camp weary and hungry, they found store
of fresh Provisions, boiled and roast, with which they feasting, were refreshed.

Thus the Enemy dispersed, and their whole Design frustrate, Fayet's
Lieutenant, having sculk'd in the Mountains eight days, enforced at last by
necessity to venture to Toukoya, seven Leagues from Tayowan, was there
apprehended by the Dutch, and thence carried to Tayowan, where he was Executed,
being, to the Enemies great terror, roasted alive, then taken off, and having
been dragged at a Horses Heels through the whole Town, his broyl'd Head was
fixed on a Pole before the Castle: And those that ripp'd up the Bowels of the
beforementioned Woman, were broke alive upon the Wheel, and afterward
Quartered.

This Tumultuary Commotion was in fourteen days thus concluded, in The
Rebellion ended.
which, of the Enemy were slain four thousand Men, besides as many more Women
and Children, and not one Hollander so much as wounded.

Two Years after this War, Anno 1645. in May, came abundance of Locusts A
Plague of Locusts.
out of the North-West of the Isles, which devouring all the Fruits of the
Field, occasioned so great a Famine, that eight thousand Persons died of
Hunger. These Locusts were of a strange shape, having a Back and Breast like a
Pikeman, and an Helmet on their Heads, such as Soldiers wear. They made an
affrighting noise with their Wings in their flight, as if it had blown a Storm.

They flew from the Island Tayowan to Formosa, where they staid three Months,
and at last took their Progress from thence, toward the North-West, from
whence they came at first, on Sunday the ninth of August about Sunset: Yet
though they were gone, the fear of that Plague was no ways abated; for they
left young ones behind, which were far worse than the old* eating up all that
remained; yet by the Industry of the Inhabitants, with the Governors Order,
most part of them being not fledged, were taken and destroyed.

The Island TAYOWAN.
THe Island Taywan, or as others call it Tayovan, and Tayowan, lies South from
Formosa, the uttermost North-Point being distant almost a League, but the
Southermost Point within a Bowe-shot of the Land, over which at low Water they
wade to and again; but between the North and Formosa, it is at least thirteen
Foot deep at Low Water.

It spreads South-East and North-West, and has two Leagues and a half in
Tayowan very barren, yet populous.
length, and a quarter of a League in breadth, being naturally a spot of barren
Sand, rather than a fertile Isle, producing only Pine-apples, and other wild
Trees; yet here resided above ten thousand Chinese, who lived by Merchandise,
besides Natives.

On the North-side, upon a Sand-hill, stands the Fort Zelandia, built by the
Fort Zelandia.
Hollanders, Anno 1632. surounded with a double Wall, one investing the other,
whereof the outermost fortified with Sconces and Redoubts.

Under the Castle, Westward, lies another Fort, square, guarded by two Points
of the Sea.

A Bowe-shot distant lies a strong Out-work, being the Key to the Castle Castle
of Utrecht.
called Utrecht, raised sixteen Foot high with Stone, and defended with seven
Pallisadoes: Eastward from which stands a Town, built also by the
Netherlanders, called by the name of the Isle, and about a Mile in
Circumference; adjoining to which, is a Haven, called by the Chinese, Loakhau,
and by the Dutch, The Straights of Tayowan. On the other side of the Castle
lies a rising Sand, called Baxemboy, where a few scattered Villages appear.

Since the Chinese possessed Tayowan, under the Pyrate Coxinga, and his Son
Sepoan's Jurisdiction, they made a new Gate to the Castle, between the
Amsterdam and Guelderland Points; and near the new Point, a Moat of a Fathom
wide, Walled in on both sides, and joining to the Wall strengthened with Iron
Rails, through which the Water and Fish passing, rendezvous in the Castle,
before the Governors House, in a Pond, on which a Banqueting House being
built, which the old Koxin often frequented, taking his Pleasure in Fishing there.

Anno 1664. according to the Information of the Netherlanders, which then lay
with a Fleet before Tayowan, under Command of the Admiral Balthazar Bort, sent
thither to obtain the Netherland Prisoners from the Enemy, and likewise to
conclude a Peace with him, the Castle was every where well fortified with Guns,
and the Breast-works strengthened with new Canes, besides the Platform before
the Haven, which was planted with twenty four Pieces of Cannon. In the Castle
dwell only the old Koxins Wives, with a Guard of Soldiers.

On the other side, in the Main of Formosa, stand the Fort and Village of
Sakkam, well planted with Cannon: The Village near it was enlarged with Houses
to the number of five hundred; but not all of Stone. The way toward the South
was also more built and inhabited than formerly; but they could see but twenty
four small Vessels, which were most A sort of small Vessels.
Koyaes, that lay within the Haven, under the Forts.

Most of the Inhabitants of Tayowan are at present Out-lawed Chinese, which
Inhabitants.
first rebelled against their Native Emperor, and since will not acknowledge
the Tartar; who taking both Tayowan and Formosa, Anno 1661. from the Hollander,
brought all under the Subjection of their General Coxinga.

The Chinese on both these Isles, and those that live in China, differ only
in the wearing of their Hair long, and braided, after the old Chinese manner;
which following the Tartars, they now wear short in China.

And as the Formosans have several Gods which they worship, so have likewise
the Chinese inhabiting these Islands: Our Author, David Wright* reckons
seventy two in the following Discourse.

They acknowledge one Almighty God, Governor of Heaven, Earth, Sea, Sun, Moon,
and Stars, whom they call Ty, and look upon him as the Supreme and first Deity.
They make Offerings to this great God, yet but once a year, at which time they
sacrifice a Wild Boar, burning alive with Sandal-wood; for to offer this their
Almighty any thing but Swines Flesh, they account Abomination.

The next whom they worship is called Tien Sho, and Ioch Koung Shang Tee, who
is the second Person or Governor of Heaven; wherefore he is named Tien Sho,
that is, The second Person of Heaven; and Ioch Koung Shang Tee, that is,
Governor of the Earth. He commands three ministerial Spirits more: The first is
Heuoung, that is, The Ruler of Rain.

The second Aerial Spirit, Teoung, has Power over all Living Creatures,
whether Rational, Sensitive, or Vegetative.

The third Spirit, and eighth Deity, called Tsuy Zyen Tei Oung, that is,
Commander of the Sea, and of all that is therein, or upon.

The third Person in Heaven the Chinese call Iok Tie, who was formerly a
Prince on Earth, but so righteous, that he was taken up to Heaven for his Piety
and Justice.

The fourth God they style Quanoung, who also was formerly a Prince; and
likewise the fifth, whom they call Iamoung; but both of them were afterward
for their meritorious Actions taken up to Heaven.

To these five Gods, being as Chief in the Government of Heaven, belongs the
three forementioned ministering aerial Spirits, and are indeed, though Deities
themselves, subservient to the first five, making up eight Gods.

Besides these eight Gods, there are twenty eight Counselors, or Ministers of
State, which have formerly been Learned Philosophers, and now preferred to the
Government of the Stars.

Moreover, the Chinese have many Demy-gods, or terrestrial Deities, which
ascend every year to Heaven, there to intercede and gain Indulgence for the
sins committed by Mankind all the year past.

The first of these is rather a Nymph, or Demy-goddess, and being the thirty
seventh, goes by the Name of Potsou, and is represented in the shape of a Woman
with a Child in her Arms, and was, as the Chinese believe, a Kings Daughter, a
great Prophetess, and a Virgin that bore a Child and not impregnated: which
Fatherless Child they named Bachu; who coming to years of perfection, was also
a great Exemplar of Prudence and Magnanimity; yet not so much looked upon, or
worshipped as the Mother. They make her also to have a Servant called Pausat, a
very ancient Man.

There are some Traditions amongst them, that this Heroine is not a Native of
China, but born in a foreign Country: Others again conjecture, that she is the
same with the Virgin Mary, and the old Man, her reputed Servant, is indeed her
Husband Joseph; but the vicissitudes of affairs and time have left us nothing
of the truth of this fabulous Tradition.

The thirty eighth terrestrial Numen they instile Quanien; but Paulus Venetus*
Quamina; and Johannes Gonsales, Quianira, who said that she was the Daughter of
the Chinese Emperor Tzonton, which built the Wall between China and Tartary.
But this Opinion David Wright explodes, making her the Daughter of the Emperor
Biou Tsongong, which Reigned many years before the first Emperor Quantekong,
presently after the Deluge, which he thus endeavors to prove.

This Biou Tsongong (says he) had three Daughters, two of which he had bestowed
on Husbands, but the third, Quanien, he could not prevail with to enter into
that Estate, although her Father had selected for her a Companion worthy her
Love and Esteem: but seeing her no ways inclined to it, he resolved to put her
into a Cloister; where to humble her, he commanded the Overseers to put her to
do the Drudgery of the House, viz. fetch in Water and Wood, and make it clean.
But the Swans, as the Chronicles of China relate, came from the Mountains, and
the Angels from Heaven to help her to carry Water, and the Beasts out of the
Forests brought Wood for her. Her Father informed thereof, judging she did
those things by Magic, was very much enraged, and commanded the Cloister to be
set on fire. The Daughter observing that she only was the occasion thereof,
thought to make her self away. But the Heavens pitying her innocence,
commanded Hevong the God of Rain, to send down such an impetuous Shower as
might quench the Fire, now beginning to rage in the Cloister as bad as her
Father in his frantic fury, which was accordingly performed. Nevertheless
Quanien sled to the Mountains, where she continued a great while. Her Father in
the interim by Divine Providence was struck with Leprosy, and almost devoured
alive by Worms, no Physicians or Medicines being able to cure him: Of which his
Daughter having at last some knowledge, touched with a natural affection, and
feeling as it were in her self her Fathers misery, came and cured him; which so
wrought upon the old Man, that through an excess of joy converting his rage
into a contrary passion, he would have worshipped her; but she refusing such
honor, bad him return thanks to Heaven and the Gods; which he ceased not to
do, after that becoming a zealous Penitent. Not long after Biou Tsongong died,
and Quanien betook her self to Lamhay, a Place in China, where she spent the
remainder of her Life in great Piety. After her Death they built a stately
Temple in honor of her, and Interred her Corpse in the middle, which remains at
this day (as the Chinese believe) as fresh and sound, as if it had been buried
but a day. Every year the Priests go thither to celebrate the Anniversary of
her Death, in the sixth Moon, on the eighteenth day, with Sports and Feasting,
which has won so much esteem, that the Chinese implore her help and
assistance in all Tribulations.

The thirty ninth Goddess is called Nioma, or as others will have it, Matzou;
she was born in the City Kotzo, in the Territory of Houkong, where her Father
was Viceroy. This Nioma resolving also to live and die a Virgin, to that end
went to dwell in the Island Piscadores, or Fishers-Isle, otherwise by the
Inhabitants called Pehoe, lying to the Northward, twelve Leagues distant from
Formosa, where she spent her Life in a Pious and most Religious manner. Her
Image not long after was set up in the Temple with two Servants, one on the
right, and another on the left-side, each of them holding a Fan in their Hands,
which covered the Goddesses Head. She has also (as they say) Spirits under her
command, and is highly honored amongst the Chinese for so great and powerful a
Deity, that all the Emperors at their Inaugurations must not omit to pay their
Devotions in the Temple of this Nioma. Her greatest Festival is on the three
and twentieth day of the third Moon; when the Priests repair from all Places of
the Empire to her Tomb, because she knows (as they believe) when any Strangers
shall address themselves to that Country, and whether their intentions be good
or evil; nay more, will give certain Responses to any that consult her, in what
affair soever; so that they are so persuaded and superstitious concerning her
admonishments, that they think all is lost if she advise not thereunto. The
original of her Adoration sprung hence (as the Chinese Records have it;) One
Campo, a Chinese Admiral, going out with an Armado to Engage with a foreign
Enemy, being driven by contrary Winds, was necessitated to anchor under the Lee
of this Isle: but afterward the Storm ceasing, and the Wind and Weather
growing fair, the Fleet weighed, and hoising Sail, set forward; but all the
Seamen with their conjoined strength could not get up his Anchor; which while
they wondered at, this Goddess appeared to the Admiral; whom imploring, she
advised to take her aboard: for the People against whom he had Commission to
Fight were great Magitians, practicing the Black Art, and could raise or lay
Spirits at their pleasure, but she was able to frustrate their diabolical
practices. Thus persuaded, the Admiral with great reverence took her into his
Ship, and coming to the Shore where they intended to Land, these Masters of
occult Sciences used their skill as Nioma had foretold; but she baffled them in
their own Arts, and so made their powerfullest Charms of no effect: wherefore
the King that trusted to his Necromancers, being necessitated to Engage with
the Chinese, was by her direction and assistance, contrary to his confidence,
utterly defeated and brought under subjection. The Admiral, though sensible of
the wonderful Service which she had done by her power, desired that she would
do something in his presence that he might relate, having so many
eyewitnesses, to the Emperor. And having accidentally a withered Cane in his
Hand, Nioma took it, and upon his Request immediately made it grow and blossom,
and to yield a sweet smell: Which signal Prodigy the Admiral fixed on his
Stern, and coming to the Emperor, related to him all his Adventures: whereupon
he in honor and commemoration of her favors, commanded that they should worship
her as a Goddess through the whole Empire. Since which every Ship bears her
Image in the Stern, and the Seamen are strangely devoted to her.





The fortieth God called Sikjaa, born in the Kingdom Tantaico, opposite to the
West of China, they held for the first inventer of that Religion which the
Chinese observe to this day. He always went bare headed, neither eating Flesh,
Fish, or other Creature that had life* and lived single. This Sikjaa Drawn or
Carved to the life, stands upon the Altars in their Temples, and on the
right-side at the entrance of the Door. Over against him, and in some Temples
round about him, stand long Tables; at which the Priests sit reading and
muttering to themselves Prayers to Sikjaa, to receive them into Heaven. Two
Priests watch day and night before his Altar, often bowing to the Ground, and
lifting up their Heads equally together, whilst their Tabors and Pipes,
consorted with other Wind-Instruments, makes no unpleasing harmony. In their
Diet the Priests follow the strict Life of Sikjaa, eating nothing but Rice,
Grapes and Herbs: they live some in the Wildernesses like Hermits; others
frequent the Temples abroad, and spend their time for a small gratuity in
making Offerings in peoples Houses, having no allowance either from the
Emperor, or Charity of the People: They never pare their Nails, some of them
growing six, eight, ten, and twelve Inches long, which the Chinese count a
great Ornament. The Doctrine of this Sikjaa is at large declared in the
following Description of China.

The one and fortieth God is called Ang-jaa, and is carried from House to House
on the eleventh day of the third Moon on an Altar by six Priests, whereof three
go before and three behind; before him stands a Perfuming-pot with burning
Incense, and other Aromaticks. The Mendicant Priests stop at every House, and
never leave Singing and Praying, tinckling two small Basins one against
another, till the Master of the House comes and brings them some Money in a
piece of Paper, as an Offering to this God.

This Ang-jaa is not Clothed like the other Gods, but quite naked, having only
a Cloth about his Middle, which reaches down to his Heels, and over his
Shoulders a Scarf: his Hair, Beard, Mustacho's, and Face, differ much from the
other Chinese Numens, the Hair of his Face more resembling an European than an
Asiatick; concerning which dissimilitude the Chinese themselves are altogether
silent.

The two and fortieth Deity called Tontekong, is represented in the shape of an
ancient Man with a white Beard, and said to be a great abhorrer of Gaming and
Adultery, which by all means possible he sought to extinguish; wherefore the
Chinese have placed him in Heaven, and also invoke him daily to defend them
from Thieves.

The three and fortieth God, named Teiton, a valiant Hero, represented with a
drawn Sword in his left hand; whose Services in redeeming the Empire, like to
be lost by the Invasion of the Enemy, have listed him in special rank amongst
the number of their Gods.

The four and fortieth Schercong next takes place, adored for the invention of
Tragedies and Comedies, and other Enterludes Acted on the Stage.

The five and fortieth God, named Amkong, has obtained the like honor merely
for his great Merits and Virtues.

The six and fortieth Tswajong, was in his lifetime a mighty Man, of a
Gigantick Stature: his Club, which he could flourish with one Hand, weighed
ninety two pounds, so that for his strength and valor he was very famous in
China, and therefore worshipped as a God.

The seven and fortieth Hangoe, another Giant, whose Helmet weighed one hundred
twenty five pound, whose strength and valor made him living, a Viceroy, and
after death, a Deity.

The eight and fortieth Hanzing, with whom none could stand in competition
either for Prudence or Science (except Quantecong and Sodejong) who performed
with a few Men greater Acts by his subtle Stratagems, and politic Conduct,
than others with vast Armies, and therefore the Chinese worship and hold him
for a God.

The nine and fortieth Sodejong, a wise and politic Prince, yet meek and
loving to his Subjects, looked upon as superior in his Character to Hanzing,
but much inferior to Quantecong.

The fiftieth Sjengoesoeng, also a very strong Giant, and much reputed for
serving his Country against the common Enemy.

The one and fiftieth Goumatzintzing, signifies Pastor Gregis, The Shepherd of
the People, and a Servant to God. He had (if you will believe the Chinese)
five Eyes, two in the right places, and two above them, and the fifth in the
middle of his Forehead, like the Cinque upon a Dye; two of these were always
sawake, or open, whilst the other three were shut, for which they implore him
as their Watch in Heaven.

The two and fiftieth Soumanoaom, had four Eyes, two in his Neck, and two in
his Forehead: when those two in his Forehead closing slept, the other two kept
open watchful; wherefore he being General, was never defeated, whom for his
never-sleeping Care and Conduct they worship as a God.

The three and fiftieth Zjenzucung, a Lord of small Stature, wearing short
Hair, but of an acute Wit and profound Understanding, and abominator of Gaming
and Drink.

The four and fiftieth Quantecong, though by Johannes Gonsales and others
called Vitie; whom the Chinese honored more than any of their Gods, being
reckoned the first Emperor in China: for Valor, Subtilty, and Science,
unparalleled, and not to be matched: such was his wonderful and Gigantick
Stature, being as they fable, twelve Foot and eight Inches high, and his
Shoulders four Foot broad; his Sword weighed ninety two pound, which he used
with one Hand. In the beginning of his Reign he possessed only one Province,
but by his Conquests and Achievements became Master of the fifteen which now
make the Empire. He established many Laws and Ordinances, especially one
against Idleness. He first invented Clothing, and Dying of Stuffs, which they
use to this day, for before they went naked like the Indians. He also modeled
and invented Ships, made Saw-Mills, Gunpowder, and Guns, and improved
Architecture. Some Buildings and Edifices are yet to be seen, whereof, as they
say, he was the Contriver. He made a Law, That all Mechanics should continue
their Parents Trades from Generation to Generation. He erected Cities, Towns,
and Villages, and commanded the People to inhabit them. And as their Chronicles
relate, this Quantecong with his own Hand slew in one Battle three thousand,
some say four thousand Men. He had a Negro for his Squire, or Armor-bearer, who
was no less valiant than himself, for he accompanied him in all dangers
whatsoever, and was called Tzicutzong; he performed great Exploits in his
Masters Service, by conquering many People and several Countries: but besides
Quantecong had another Servant, a White, called Quanpiong, yet no Martialist.

This Quantecong is so highly esteemed and honored amongst the Chinese, that
most of them, except Sea*men and Fishers, and they also make him weekly
Offerings, and burn every Night a Lamp with sweet and odoriserous Oil before
him. Their Oblations consist in two pounds and a half of Hogs-flesh, three
quarters of a pound of Deers-flesh, one boiled Hen, nine Cakes of Meal-Flour,
half a pint of a certain Liquor called Aoytziu, a Cup full of the Drink
Lotchin, another full of Souchin and of the good Tope Samsoe, and lastly two
Dishes of Rice; all which is set before the Image Quantecong, and stands three
hours; after which time it is taken away again: both which are performed with
great Ceremony, as bowing of Heads and Bodies; afterward the Meat is eaten by
the Offerers.

In every City is also a Temple erected to the honor of Quantecong, in which
stands his Image: On one side of him stands his black Squire, with a Sword by
his Side, and a large Knife, like a Mowers Scythe; four Paces from him on the
other Side his white Page Quanpiong. Nor was he invocated only by his
Contrymen, but also by the Tungkins their Enemies: for as soon as any War
broke out, they set a Guard before his Temple that none might hurt him; for
they believe he would punish their neglect with the loss of their Army. Nay
farther they say, That mounting his red Horse Angbea (for he only used a red
Steed, there being none of that kind else in China) he Rid against their
Enemies, and destroyed their whole Army, in revenge of the damage done to his
Temple.

The six and fiftieth Kongsou, is held for the first inventer of Printing,
which the Chinese have used eight hundred years and upwards, insomuch that
they say the Christians learned that art from them; because at that time they
Traded with Christian Merchants.

This Kongsou stands on a Throne, environed with People of several Nations,
every one holding a Book; of all which the Germans stand nearest to him,
because they (according to the testimony of the Chinese) have greater
Judgment, and Print better than any other Nation.

The seven and fiftieth Tegoe, that is, Transitory Bull.

The eight and fiftieth they nominate Kjenke, that is, Crow, or Chicken-Thief.
A strange fancy and belief possesses the Chinese about these their two
Deities: for, say they, when Tegoe has the Earth on his Shoulders, then Kjenke
comes from Heaven and pecks Tegoe on his Body; whereby necessitated to shake
himself, the Earth trembles and shakes with him: and as soon as any such
trepidation begins, they fall a laughing, saying, Now is Tegoe peck'd by Kjenke.

Father Martinius, in his Chinese History says, That the Soil of China is very
Lib. 9. page 389.
little subject to Earthquakes: yet the Chronicles of that Country mention,
That the Year before the Birth of our Savior 73. happened such a great
Earthquake, that several Mountains were swallowed up: from whence the Chinese,
a People much inclined to Superstition, prognosticated the destruction of their
Empire, such things, say they, proceeding from an angry and threatening Heaven.

The nine and fiftieth Luikong, or The God of Thunder, for Lui is Thunder, and
Kong a Governor. They represent him with a Head like a Crane, Feet and Hands
like an Eagles Claws, and large Wings, wherewith he seems to fly through the
Clouds. When this Luikong (say they) intends to Thunder, he stands between four
Clouds, with a Drum on every one, on which he beats continually with two great
Iron Pestles: And when any one is struck by a Thunderbolt, they say that
Luikong is much enraged against that Person, and therefore struck him with the
forementioned Pestles: so that they are very fearful of him, and when it
Thunders creep on their Hands and Feet under Benches and Tables.

The sixtieth is the Ruler of Lightning, and represented by the Chinese with a
Straw Wisp in her Hand, which when it Lightens she spreads abroad.

The sixty first Kieugkong, the God of Rainbows: the Chinese nickname him
Omho, that is, Mischievous, because at his appearance he spoils all their
Fruits of the Field; so that they honor him only because he should come but
seldom.

The sixty second Pankun, according to the Chronicles of China, finished and
completed the World; for they say that the World when God Created it was
without shape or form, but was by Pankun brought to its full perfection in four
years time. They represent him with many Iron Instruments, such as the
Stone-cutters use. He was the first that invented the Art of Stone-cutting, and
therefore is the peculiar God of Bricklayers, Stone-cutters, and Potters.

The sixty third Houngkong, rules Winds and Spirits, and is figured like a
great Bird with huge long Legs and Feathers, sticking up like Hogs Bristles.
The Chinese say, that the fluttering of his Wings occasion great Winds, Storms
and Tempests: therefore Fishers, Seamen, Gardners, and other People that fear
too much Wind, adore him.

The sixty fourth Khuotquan, in his lifetime was a Viceroy in China, and the
first that made Salt, which he accounted the richest and best Commodity in the
World. Another Viceroy having at the same time found out Sugar, esteemed that
above Salt: upon this they fell at variance; but both sides appealing to the
Emperor, he commanded a Proof to be brought him of each sort, and having tasted
both, he preferred the Sugar, as being more pleasant. But Khuotquan
contradicted this sentence, saying, That there never was a thing of greater
value than Salt, which gave a relish and savoury taste to all things. The
Emperor angry at Khuotquans petulancy, commanded him to go out of his Presence:
who thereupon much discontented, went instantly and drowned himself in the
River Melo, which flows by the City Siangin, in the Territory of Huquang; but
highly advanced him that made the Sugar. The next day (says Wright) after
which Khuotquan was drowned, being the fifth Day of the fifth Moon, in the
Morning (as the Chinese Chronicles affirm) there began an extraordinary great
Rain, which without cessation continued twelve Months, wherefore for want of
dry Weather no Salt could be made, by which means a third part of the People
died, and some that lay just upon the point of Death, having but one Corn of
Salt put into their Mouths presently recovered: The Emperor informed of this
Calamity by his Substitute Governors, commanded him that had made the Sugar to
be killed, and that none should dare to make any more mention of him, that
thereby his Name might be forgotten: whereupon the Rain immediately ceasing,
the Emperor sent strict Edicts through all his Dominions, that they should
worship the forementioned Khuotquan as a God. On the day of his decease, which
is kept with great solemnity, and called Tuonu, the Houses are hung round with
Garlands of Roses, Palm-Boughs, and the Ships adorned in like manner; and every
Chinese wears a green Sprig on his Head: neither do they any Work in five days,
all which time they hold his Festival. The second day they represent Wayangs,
or Stage Plays. On the third they go with hundreds of curious Gilt and Carved
Boats, hung with all manner of green Boughs, Flowers and the like, and full of
People up and down the River, seeming to look for the Corpse of Khuotquan;
coming to the Place where they say they find Khuotquan, they lift up their
Oars, and take hold of their Flags and Pendants, and then beating on their
Drums, cry with a loud voice, We have found him. This Ceremony, which is
observed in all Places and Rivers in China, continues three days one after
another.

This Khuotquan died about three thousand years since, and being taken up two
days after his Decease, was kept ten years Embalmed before he was Buried.

The sixty fifth Schante, was in his lifetime a valiant Man, and a great
pitier of the Poor, to whom he was very charitable.

The sixty sixth Naon, was an Assistant to the God Tegoe before mentioned: he
is represented with a Ball on his Foot; for (as they fable) when Tegoe grows
weary with carrying so great a burden as the World, then this Naon helps him
to support it with his Foot: wherefore they place this Naon in Heaven, and
worship him, because when displeased he should not let the World fall by taking
away his Foot.

The sixty seventh Atzion, was Conceived after a strange manner by his Mother
Lintion, who walking in the Field, and casting her Eyes up toward Heaven,
espied a Lions Head in the Clouds; by which Vision she Conceived with this
Atzion, without knowing Man: for which his wonderful Conception he is by the
Chinese honored for a God.

The sixty eighth Alsa, taught the People first to Boil and Roast their Meat:
for before his time the Chinese did eat both Flesh and Fish raw. He instructed
them also to build Huts of Wood for a defense against wild Beasts; and to make
Clothes to cover their nakedness.

The sixty ninth Huntzuihoykong, they say first invented Fire, and taught them
to Buy and to Sell.

The seventieth Otzoe, was Conceived after as strange a manner as the
beforementioned Atzion; for his Mother Hautzibon going to the Garden for an
Onion, she saw some Footsteps of a Man that had been there before her, in one
of which she put hers, to try how much bigger it was than her own; which she
had no sooner done, but a great Light encompassing her, she immediately
Conceived this Otzoe, who was the first that established Matrimony amongst the
Chinese, and invented Musical Instruments.

The seventy first Ezolon, the first Finder of Medicines and the Virtue of
Herbs; had great knowledge in Astronomy, Soothsaying, and Magic; instructed
Men in Agriculture by the use of the Plough and Spade, and all sorts of
Ploughing Tools.

The seventy second Skadingkon, was the first, as they say, that taught them
the use of Arms, and Martial Discipline.

Besides these five Governors of Heaven, three Spirits, eight and twenty
Counselors, and thirty six earthly Deities, in all seventy two, the Chinese,
according to the forementioned Wright, have three Cacadaemons, or evil Spirits.

The first is called Tytsoequi, that is, Prince of Devils, for Tytsoe signifies
Prince, and Qui the Devil: and as their Stories would make out, he was first an
Angel in Heaven, but the supreme God observing the wickedness of Mankind on
Earth, he called Tytsoequi to him, saying, I have seen the wickedness of Men on
Earth, and their hearts are inclined to evil; wherefore none of them shall come
to me in Heaven: Therefore do you descend; I have prepared a Place for you, and
an everlasting Prison of torments for them. I elect you as our Substitute to
Govern Hell; take them to you and punish them; they shall stay with you for
ever, and never come near me.



The Chinese are of opinion, and believe, that this Prince of Devils knows all
future things, and that he sends out his Spirits to fetch vicious People to
Hell, where he torments them for ever; therefore they worship him that they may
not be tortured.

They also firmly believe, That the Souls of the Wicked return again on Earth
to plague and terrify those alive, which, they say, appear to them in several
Visions.

On the fifteenth day of the seventh Moon they present him a well dressed Swine
whole, and likewise Hens, Ducks, Pinang, and Cakes of fine Meal, Keekieuw, that
is, Arak, or Brandy, and Sugarcanes. The Hog they lay down on his two foremost
Knees, with his Head on his fore-Feet opposite to the Image Tytsoequi; and use
afterward so many extraordinary Ceremonies at this Offering, that beginning
early in the Morning, it continues above an hour after Sunset.

Several Gilded pieces of Paper, made like a Boat are also burnt in honor to
him; and they are very zealous in their Prayers to this Tytsoequi.

In Hell, they say, he is served like a King, having two Counselors and twelve
Spirits, which wear mighty Knives, and wait upon him continually like
Halberdeers, to receive and execute his Commands; besides several other Spirits
which serve him as Gentlemen.

The second, or Viceroy of Hell, they call Iamkoen, who Commands with great
Authority, wherefore they worship and fear him.

The third Iamtouwi.

The Chinese also observe a certain day in the Year, on which they Offer to
all the happy departed Souls, calling it Chinkbinch, and is kept Annually on
the third day of the third Moon the Year after Leap-year, but in the Year
before Leap-year on the twentieth day of the same Moon. Thus far David Wright.

In Valor and Warlike Policy the Chinese of Tayowan and Formosa far exceed
those on the Main Land, most of them at all times wearing Skeans by their
sides, except when at Meat in their own Houses.

They use no Knives, Forks, or Spoons to eat withal, but take it up with two
small Sticks made of Ivory or Ebony-Wood, Tipped at the ends with Silver or Gold.

Women of mean Capacity maintain themselves with Spinning and Twisting of raw
Silk, which is brought thither from the Territory of Chickinny.

The Women eat not constantly with their Husbands at Meals; and when heretofore
the Men found no Women according to their minds on the Islands, they sent for
them out of China, and bartered for them as other Commodities.

Lastly, it is requisite in this place to give a short account how Coxinga and
his Associates, Anno 1661. took both these Islands from the Netherland
East India Company; but first we will show his Extract, strange Rise, with the
Ruin of his Father, who was called Chunchilung, and by Foreigners Iquon, or
Ikoan and Equan: a Man of mean Descent, born in a small Village on the
Seashore, in the Territory Fokien, near the City Annay, his Father very poor,
and as some say, a Tailor by Trade: He first Served the Portuguese in the City
Makao, and afterward the Hollanders on the Island Formosa; where soon after he
became a great Merchant by the Iapan Trade, and at last a Pyrate. Having from
this small beginning gotten a great Fleet of Ships, and obtained by his
politic Designs and grand Undertakings, to so great Treasure, that the Chinese
Emperor was not able to stand in competition with him; for he only of all the
Chinese engrossed the Commodities of all India in his own hands, driving
therewith a vast Trade with the Portuguese at Makao; with the Spaniards on the
Philippine Islands; and with the Hollanders at Formosa and Batavia; and
likewise with the Iapanners; besides other Oriental Kingdoms and Islands. He
only Transported the Chinese Commodities by his own People, bringing back the
Indian and European in Returns for them; so that he began to grow so
exceedingly rich, that he could fit out a Fleet of three thousand Sail.

Yet this Chinchilung, or Iquon, not contenting himself herewith, began to Plot
how to be Emperor of China; but well knowing that he could never effect it, so
long as any of the Imperial Tamingian Family was in being, which at that time
held the Royal Seat, therefore he made choice of a time to extirpate that
Family, which was Anno 1644. when the Tartars overran the whole Empire, except
three Provinces, being Folnien, otherwise called Chincheo, Quantung, and
Quangsi; and the more closely to hide his Design, he pretended to take up Arms
against the Tartars, as Enemies to the Chinese, and defend that Empire with
all his Forces. And without doubt under this Disguise he would have been taken
for the Redeemer and Protector of that Crown, had he not held Correspondence
with the Tartars, to whom he gave what Intelligence he thought good for his
advantage. At the same time when the Tartars fell into the Country of Fokien,
Iquon was declared General by the Emperor Lungun, of all his Forces; the
Officers also were either his Brothers or Friends, so that being able to do
what he listed, he permitted the Tartars to come into the Empire; for which
they gave him the Title of King, making him King of Pingnan, which is in the
Southern part of China, and sent him many great Gifts, the more easily to
delude him: and though perhaps not ignorant of his Design, but fearing his
formidable Power, they durst not use any rigorous course against him, but
rather Treated him very honorably with Presents, high Entertainments, and large
Promises of the Government over the Territories of Fokien and Quantung; so that
he thought easily to get an absolute Command over the Southern Countries. But
when the Tartar intended to return to the Imperial City Peking, and all his
Viceroys according to custom came to attend and accompany him some part of the
Way; Iquon also not suspecting any danger, came to show his Respects in like
manner, and went with a few, having left his Fleet in the Haven before the City
of Focheu: but now being ready to depart, having performed his Complements, and
desiring leave to return, the Tartar Prince requested him to go with him to
Peking to the Emperor, where he promised him the highest Preferments: and
although Iquon sought with many Arguments to put off this Journey; yet was he
at last forced to go; so that by this Stratagem he was taken, which could not
be by force of Arms, or any Device whatsoever. Coming to Peking he was put
close Prisoner, not only under a strict Guard, but the Door of the Place
wherein he was kept, made up with Stone, and himself loaded with Fetters about
his Neck and Feet; and if any new Troubles happened by his Son Coxinga, and the
News thereof brought to the Court at Peking, as it did Anno 1657. (at which
time the Netherlanders were there in an Embassy) they laid fifteen Chains more
upon him. His Son Coxinga and Brothers informed of his Imprisonment, betook
themselves again to the Fleet, and made all the Seas near China by their
Pyracies almost useless.

Upon this account Coxinga with his Associates, and a crew of Rebel Chinese,
kept the Tartars on the Coast of China in continual Alarms, and had his
chiefest Residence on the Islands Ay, Quemuy, and others lying under the
Continent of China. The Chinese themselves on the Main Coast, who had
submitted, and in token thereof shaved off their Hair, conformed to the
Tartars, brought them all sorts of Provisions, and drove also a private Trade
with them. The Tartars at last, to stop all Provisions from going to the Enemy,
commanded all the Villages, Towns and Hamlets that stood along the Seashore,
or the Main Continent, to be burnt to the Ground, and the Country laid waste,
and no People suffered on pain of death to live within three Leagues of the
Sea. By this means, and likewise by the great Losses which Coxinga sustained
from the Tartars, assisted by the Netherlanders, who set upon them both at Sea
and Land, he found himself so straightned, that Anno 1660. he Sailed with all
his Forces to Tayowan and Formosa, both which Islands, and also the Castle
Zelandia; he took in March, Anno 1661. after a Siege of ten Months. Very
cruelly were several of the Netherlanders dealt withal, especially the
Ministers Anthony Hantbroel, Aren Vincenius, Leonard Campen, Peter Muts and
others, and at last put to death: others against Agreement kept in Prison,
without hopes of attaining their Liberty, notwithstanding the great trouble the
Hollanders took upon them to procure their enlargement. Therefore in revenge of
Coxinga's Cruelties, and also to regain the conquered Places, a Fleet was sent
out the next year after, under the Command of the afore-mentioned Admiral
Balthazar Bort, and Vice Admiral John van Campen, with the Ambassador
Constantine Nobel, with Letters from his Excellency John Maetzuiker, to
Singlamong, Viceroy of the Territory Fokien, and the General Taisang Lipoui
for the same purpose, and also to request liberty for a free Trade.

Since the Letter to the Viceroy Singlamong in brief contains the Reasons and
Intentions for sending out the Fleet to the Coast of China, and the dispatching
of an Ambassador thither, and may also serve for a small declaration of our
following Discourse, I judge it no way amiss to set it down beforehand, being
to this effect:

This Letter comes from John Maetzuiker, chief Governor, and the Council for
the Netherland State in the Countries of India, to Singlamong, Viceroy, or
Governor for the Mighty Emperor of Tartary and China: of the Territory Fokien,
whom the God of Heaven grant long Life, and Prosperity on Earth. Great and
Powerful Sir,
THe Letter sent some time since from Your Highness to our Governor of Tayowan
he has received in due time, and also not been negligent to Answer according
to Request, and with all speed sent five Men of War with some Soldiers, to the
Bay of Engeling, that according to Your Highness's noble Proposal and Request
they might, bidding defiance to Coxinga, fall upon him. But We were so unhappy,
that as soon as the Ships set Sail from Tayowan, they were surprised by a
mighty Storm, which separated them one from another, so that some of them came
back to Batavia, and others were forced to return again to Tayowan, which is
the only Reason that We could not perform Our good Intentions according to
Your Highness's Pleasure. Since which time Coxinga has joined all his Forces
together to Master our Castle in Tayowan, having Besieged it ten Months,
raised great Batteries against it on all sides, and so straightened the Besieged
with his Army, that the Governor and his Council concluded to deliver him the
Fort; which We have resented very ill of our People, because, as We suppose,
they have not as they ought to have done, manfully resisted the Enemy; which as
an Example to terrify others, We will not pass by unpunished. Yet since We
have suffered so great a Loss and Damage, and chiefly for that against his
Promise he has most cruelly Murdered several Unarmed Christians on the Island
Formosa; God who is a hater of such Villainies, and a righteous Judge, commands
Us to take Revenge for our sustained Wrongs; so that we are resolved with all
our Forces to prosecute this Tyrant, and not leave, till by force of Arms We
have brought him to naught. And since we are informed, that Your Highness also
intends and endeavors the like Ruin toward him; so at once to free the Empire
of China from the Oppression which it has suffered so many years by his Means:
Therefore We think it now the most proper time to obtain as well Your
Highness's, as our own Desires: to which end, according to Your Highness's own
Proposal, We are inclined to join all Our Land and Sea-Forces with Your
Highness's Militia, against which We suppose Coxinga will not be able to
subsist long. And to show that We really intend it, We have sent from hence
under the Command of Our Admiral Balthazar Bort to the Bay of Hossien, the
number of twelve well prepared Men of War, which, considering their strength
and fit posture for defense, may justly be termed Floating Castles, and will be
able to make Coxinga quit the Sea, which will not a little trouble and disable
him: of which We hope Your Highness shall in a short time see the Event. We
therefore fortify Our selves, (hoping that Your Highness will do the like)
that We may enter into a firm League with the Empire of China, with Promises
faithfully to assist one another against Coxinga, and to hold him for our
mortal Enemy, and with all Endeavors, if it be possible, bring him and all his
Party to utter Ruin, so to make him taste the sharpness of Our Revenge for his
committed Villainies. But since at present, having lost Tayowan, We have no
convenient Harbors to preserve Our Ships in stormy Weather, Our humble Request
is, That your Highness would please to do us that favor, as far as your
Commands reach along the Seacoasts, to Permit and Order us a place wherein our
Ships, if they should chance to be necessitated, may come to an Anchor, and
that they may be kindly received, and our People entertained as Friends, and
buy Provisions and other Necessaries for Money.

China and Batavia (as your Highness very well knows) lie a great distance one
from another, therefore it is very necessary and requisite, that we had a
convenient place of Rendezvous near Coxinga's Channel, there to keep our Ships
together, and watch for his Jonks; so that we desire of your Highness, that you
would be pleased to direct us to such a place, and to give us leave likewise to
Fortify the same against Coxinga's Assaults; for we do assure your Highness,
if this cannot be granted us, it is altogether impossible for us to do the
Enemy that damage which may be expected: Therefore if we intend to manage this
War with Prudence, we must be there to wait on our business continually, or
else we shall not be able to clear the Sea of Coxinga's Ships.

And as the driving of Trade makes all Nations and People flourish, and we are
used from Antiquity to promote the same, for the benefit of the public good,
we thought fit to make our inclination known to your Highness, that we heartily
desire to furnish the Emperor of China with our Commodities, which formerly the
same Coxinga has prevented by his wicked Practices; therefore to perfect all
our good Undertakings, we desire that we may be permitted to come into the
Empire of China, and have Passes from the great Cham, which we entreat your
Highness to procure for us, not doubting, but they may easily be attained;
because when two years ago the Emperor was Complemented by two of our
Ambassadors with Presents, he in part promised it to us; which your Highness
having at that time the Command over Canton, and conversing much with our
People, may perhaps remember.

We send to your Highness with this Letter our peculiar Friend Captain
Constantine Nobell, humbly to Complement your Honor; and at large declare our
Intentions, with Request, that your Highness would favorably be pleased to hear
him, and speedily to dispatch him: We also promise, that whatever your Highness
agrees with him about, we will approve of, and stand engaged to: And for a
Present, we here send to your Highness these underwritten Commodities,
desiring your Highness to accept them in good Friendship.

One Piece of Scarlet Green Cloth. Black Cloth. Blue Cloth.
One Piece of Red Crown Serge. Grass Green Crown Serge. Blue Crown Serge. Musk
Color Crown Serge. Black Crown Serge.
A handsome Musket, Gilded and Varnished. A Fire-Lock or Snaphance, adorned
like the first. One pair of Pistols and Holsters, likewise well Varnished and
Gilt. Twenty Ounces of Blood Red Coral, upon one String, in an hundred and one
pieces. Sixteen Ounces and a half of Branch Coral, of the same Color, in one
Polished Branch. Three Pound and three Ounces of Amber, in four great pieces.
One Pound and four Ounces of Amber Beads, in fifty five pieces. One great
Bengael Alkatiff. Ten pieces of fine Moereisen, or white Linen. One Pikol of
Cloves. Half a Case of Rose Water. Two hundred and sixty Katty of Sandal-wood,
in three pieces.
From the Castle of Batavia, June 21. 1662.

John Maetzuiker.


The Letter to the General Taisang Lipovi, was writ almost after the same
manner, with the same Requests and Promises; viz. A League with the Empire of
China, to help to ruin Coxinga, upon condition, that the Netherlanders should
be free to enter any Haven, and take possession of a convenient place on the
Coast of China; as may be seen in the same Letter in its proper place, where it
is set down Verbatim. Hereupon the Grand Commissioners at Batavia, the General
John Maetzuiker, and the Indian Council began to prepare and make ready several
stout Men of War, storing with plenty of Ammunition, and Provisions, and
Manning them also with Soldiers and Seamen.

The whole Fleet that lay thus ready at Batavia for any Engagement, fitted
Number of Guns, Seamen, and Soldiers.
out to retake the Islands Tayowan and Formosa, consisted in twelve Sail, eight
Frigates, viz. the Naerden, Zierikzee, Domburgh, Hogeland, Meliskerke, Overveen,
the Sea-Dog, Ankeveen; and four Pinks, the Vink, Loenen, Breukelen, and
Ter-Boede, every one well Armed with Guns and Ammunition, and Manned both with
Soldiers and Seamen. The Naerden Commanded by the Admiral Balthazar Bort
carried four Brass, and twenty eight Iron Guns, and an hundred and ninety Men,
whereof an hundred and thirteen Soldiers, and eighty four Seamen. Zierikzee,
Commanded by the Vice Admiral John Van Campen, had also four Brass, and twenty
eight Iron Guns, with an hundred ninety one Men, viz* eighty one Soldiers, and
an hundred and ten Seamen. Domburg, Commanded by Captain Constantine Nobel,
and Captain Ysbraent Boumeester, had four Brass, and twenty one Iron Guns, an
hundred forty seven Men, to wit, sixty two Soldiers, and eighty five Seamen.
The Hogelande, Commanded by Harmen Symons, carried twenty four Iron Guns, and
an hundred and six Men, twenty nine Soldiers, and seventy seven Seamen. The
Meliskerke, Dirk Gerritsen Captain, had five Brass, and sixteen Iron Guns, an
hundred and two Men, thirty six Soldiers, and sixty six Seamen. The Overveen,
Commanded by Barent Iochemz, carried one Brass, and twenty Iron Guns, an
hundred and sixteen Men, thirty five Soldiers, and sixty one Seamen. The
Sea-Dog, Commanded by John Hendrikson, had twenty four Iron Guns, an hundred
twenty nine Men, fifty three Soldiers, and seventy six Seamen. The Ankeveen,
John Ysbrandsen Van Bank Captain, with one Brass, and seventeen Iron Guns, had
ninety three Men, twenty eight Soldiers, and forty five Seamen. The Vink,
under Captain Dirik Valk, with two Brass, and eleven Iron Guns, had sixty eight
Men, twenty five Soldiers, and forty three Seamen. The Loenen, Commanded by
Jacob Horse, with eleven Guns, had sixty six Men, that is, twenty six Soldiers,
and forty Seamen. The Breukelen, Abraham Ben Commander, carried eight Iron
Guns, and fifty eight Men, twenty five Soldiers, and twenty three Seamen. The
Ter-Boede, Commanded by Auke Pieters, had two Brass, and eight Iron Guns, one
and fifty Men, fifteen Soldiers, and thirty six Seamen. In all the Ships, were
twenty three Brass, and an hundred and sixteen Iron Guns; five hundred twenty
eight Seamen, and seven hundred fifty six Soldiers; in the whole, one thousand
two hundred eighty four Men: With these twelve Ships of War, three Merchants,
being the Leerdam, Singing-Bird, and Loosduinen, set Sail, richly Laden for
Iapan, under the Command of Captain and Admiral Henry Van Indiik, having
Command to keep company with the Fleet, so long as they did not go out from
their Coast.

The day on which they were to set Sail, the Admiral Bort, and Council of The
Fleet divided into three Squadrons.
War, for certain reasons, divided the Fleet into three Squadrons, and every
Squadron under one chief Commander, viz. The Zierikzee, Meliskerken, Hogelande,
Ter Boede, with the Fly-Boat Leerdam, under the Command of the Vice Admiral
Campen. The Naerden, Overveen, Sea-Dog, and Vink, with the Singing-Bird Pink,
under Captain Balthazar Bort* The Domburgh, Ankeveen, Breukelen, Loenen, with
the Pink Loosduinen, Commanded by Constantine Nobel.

When his Excellency, General John Maetzuiker, and the Council Charles
Hertzing, and Ryklof Van Geuns, went aboard the Naerden Frigate, Commanded by
the Admiral Balthazar Bort; and the Vice Admiral, John Van Campen; and the
Rear-Admiral, Constantine Nobel, and there empowered every one in their several
Offices and Places, by taking their Oaths; and delivering them their
Commissions and Orders the Fleet Weighed Anchor from Batavia, and on Saturday
Weighs Anchor.
Morning, June the 29. Anno 1662. firing their Guns, set Sail, and Steered
North-East, bending their Course directly toward China.

About Noon, the Fleet being be-calm'd, cast Anchor on the North of the Island
of Hoorn.
Island Van Hoorn, lying in sight of Batavia, near several other Isles, which
bear the Names of diverse Cities in Holland, as Amsterdam, Enkuizen, Medenbleck,
and the like.

All these Isles, though desolate and uninhabited, are Planted along the
Shores, and up into the Inland, with several sorts of excellent Trees, which
make a pleasant Prospect off at Sea, and stand in such order, as they had been
the Workmanship of Art, and not the mere Dress of Nature.

And likewise the Valleys, Plains and Hills upon them afford, diverse sorts of
Flowers, Herbs, and Drugs.

Under these Islands the Iapanners and Chinese that dwelt on Batavia, used to
fish, and catch abundance of Breams, Shepherds, and other sorts of Fishes,
unknown in Europe.

The Trees are laden with all manner of Singing-Birds, whose Harmonies are so
pleasing, that the Inhabitants of Batavia often go to this Island in Boats, to
recreate themselves with their Music, as we to our Wood sides, to hear the
Thrush and Nightingale.

On the same day, the Council concluded to Sail first to the Islands Laver and
Timon, lying in their way close by one another, that there they might supply
themselves with fresh Water, all sorts of Provisions and Fuel, Anchorstocks,
Hand-spikes, and other Materials of Wood, which that place yields in abundance.

In the first Watch of the Night, the Wind coming gently out of the South, they
Weighed Anchor, and Steered their Course, though but slowly, toward the
North-East.

The twenty fifth, the Fleet Sailed in the depth of thirty one or thirty two
Fathom, Tacking up and down, having the Wind against them out of the
North-East, yet blowing gently.

On Monday morning, being the twenty sixth, the Fleet came near
Thousand-Islands, Thousand Islands.
having the Wind Easterly, and fair Weather, in twenty two and twenty three
Fathom Wather, and hard Ground; and were at Noon in five Degrees and eighteen
Minutes South Latitude, the Ground still the same, but the depth only fourteen
or fifteen Fathom.

The same day, the Admiral Balthazar Bort, and the Council of War made an
Order, which the Commanders of every Ship in the Fleet in their Sailing were to
observe as follows.

During the Voyage, or till such time as it is ordered otherwise, the good Ship
Ter Boede (being under John Idze de Vinke) shall carry a Light on his Poop, and
in the day time Sail before, because the Master of her is experienced in these
Seas.

Therefore all the Captains of Ships are expressly Commanded, continually to
observe his motion, that when he Anchors, Sails, or Tacks, they do the like, so
the better to keep the Fleet together, and prevent separation.

None shall offer in the Nght to Sail by the same Vessel, much less alter his
course on forfeiture of four Rix-Dollars for the Master, chief, or Under-Mates,
in whose Watch soever this misdemeanor shall happen.

If the Pilot thinks it fit to Tack in the Night, either for the Winds
shrinking, or otherwise, he shall put Candles into two Lanthorns on his Poop,
and all the other Ships one, that thereby it may be known, whether they see the
Sign or not.

In the Night, the altering of the Course shall be left to the discretion of
him that carrys the Lanthorn.

When they have Sea-room enough, they shall not Tack, for the Winds shrinking
of one or two Points, for the prevention of all dangers, and keeping together.

If he that carries the Light, thinks fit to Anchor in the Night, he shall set
two Lights, one over another on his Stern, which sign being seen, the other
Ships shall instantly come to an Anchor, and likewise set a Candle on their
Sterns.

When it is thought fit to set Sail again, he shall fire a Gun, and make a
signal by another Light from the Poop; which the other Ships seeing, shall also
put out a Light, and then Weigh Anchor.

If it should happen that any Ship or Ships should by accident either prove
leaky, run a-ground, strike upon a Rock, Land, or ought else, he shall unfurle
a Pennon from his Foremast, and fire a Gun; whereupon, every one shall be
obliged to come with his Boat and Pinnace, and assist the Vessel according to
the utmost of their power, on forfeiture, as in the Council it shall be judged
fit.

If an accident shall happen by fire, they shall discharge two or three Guns
presently one after another, that with Buckets and Pails the rest may come and
help the Ship in distress.

And that the Ships in dark or misty Weather may not straying loose each other,
they shall sometimes speak to one another with their Guns, and as often reply.
If the Lanthorn Ship judges it fitting to Tack, he shall fire a great Gun,
which the rest hearing, shall answer him, and Tack together.

If in a dark Night they are forced by stress of Weather, or an overgrown Sea
to lie at Hull, or carry no Sail, the guide shall set forth two Light^ of one
height, and the other Ships one apiece, the better to keep together.

In a calm, with a rolling Sea, they shall take great care that the Ships do
not fall foul one upon another, by endeavoring to keep as far distant as they
can.

When it grows light, and they from Sea descry Land, Sounding for Ground, they
shall unfurle the Princes Flag or Colors, and also fire a Gun; if in the Night
they chance to discern Land, or Fathom Ground, he shall light two Candles by
one another, and fire two Guns.

If any Ships stray from the Fleet, and afterward appear in sight, they shall
hoiss up their fore-Sail three times, and then let it down again; then fire a
great Gun, and draw back the fore-Sail, till probably the rest have seen it,
and also furle up his Sprit-Sail and Mizzen; after which signs he may come
again to his company.

If this should happen in the Night, they shall call to one another, by the
word, Holla, Ship, if it be one of our Fleet, he shall answer, Victoria, which
if he does not do, it is a certain sign that it is a strange Ship, and either a
Chinesy Jonk or Vessel; and if it be possible, give notice of it to the
Admiral, Vice- or Rear-Admiral, who ever of them be nearest, however, to keep
within shot; and if it be an Enemy, to give notice to the rest, by the firing
of Guns.

He that descrys any strange Ships, or Jonks by day, shall let his Colors fly
from his Stern, and Veare his fore- Shete, and soon after hale it up; if by
night, he shall light two Candles together, without making chase after it,
before he has spoke, and received order from the Admiral, except it be a
Portuguese, or Chinesy Vessel, which by that means might make his escape.

In this exigent, though the Enemy be never so powerful, let him fall on, and
if he can possible make himself master thereof; afterward to do according to
the Orders given in Martial Affairs.

If any Frigates should be separated from the Fleet, either by Storm or other
accidents, they shall according to an express Order from his Excellency the
Lord General, and Lords of the Indian Council, come to the place of Meeting or
Rendezvous chosen by them, being Isla de Lemas, one of the most Eastern Islands
of Makao, which lies in the way of our Voyage, and we may touch at without
prejudice or loss of time; and also because his Excellency has received
information, that there is not only a good Haven, but fresh Water; so that the
separated Ships are strictly Commanded, not to pass by the forementioned Island
De Lemas, but put in to it, and there wait for the Fleets coming, that so they
may proceed on together in their Voyage, and the more resolutely bid the Enemy
defiance, if they should Rancounter.

After leaving the Island De Lemas, and coming on the Coast of China, they
shall first put in for the Bay of Engeling, or rather that of Hoksiu (they
being the safest and convenientest Harbors in the Southern Bay or Mouson) and
with the whole Fleet (except those bound for Iapan, which will part from us
before) run into them, to inquire how the Affairs of War stand between the
Tartar and Coxinga, and whether he be in China, or Formosa; therefore if in the
way from Lemas to the Coast of China any Frigates should be separated from the
Fleet, let them put in for the forementioned Bays of Engeling, or Hoksiu, where
they shall join with the Fleet again.

When the white Flag shall be set up at the Admirals Stern, and a Gun be fired
from his Ship, then the General Council of War shall meet, consisting of these
following Persons to consult with the Admiral, viz.

Henry Indiik of the Ship Loosduinen, John Idze de Vink, or Van Campen*
Vice Admiral of the Fleet; but so long as Indiik is by the Fleet, the Finch
shall carry the Flag as Rear-Admiral of Zierikzee.

The Merchant Constantine Nobel; who carries the Light before the Fleet, after
Indiik has taken leave, shall bear the Flag of Domburgh.

Peter Iansz Veldmuis, Captain of the Naerden: Ysbrand Bowmester, Captain of
the Domburgh: Barent Iochemsz, Captain of the Overveen: Harman Symonsz,
Commander of the High-Land: John Hendriksz, Master of the Sea-Dog: Dirk
Gerritz, Commander of the Meliskerke: John Ysbransz Van Bank, Captain of the
Ankeven: Valk, Master of the Vink: Christopher Edwartsz, Secretary.

If the Admiral lets fly his Red Flag from his Poop, then all the remaining
Commanders of the Fleet, as Brukelen, Loenen, and Ter-Bode, shall also come
aboard with the forementioned persons; and likewise their chief Officers of
War, as the Ensigns and Sergeants: But if the Admiral will have his Privy
Council to come aboard, he shall put out his white Flag with a Bend from the
Poop.

The Privy Council shall consist in the following Persons: Henry Indiik, John
Idze de Vink, Constantine Nobel, Peter Iansz, Veldmuis Commander of the
Naerden, Ysbrand Bowmester Captain of the Domburgh.

If the Admiral is desirous to speak with the Captain of the Loosduine, he
shall let a Pennon flow from his Mizzen-Yard; if with the Zirikzee, a Pennon
from the Fore-Yard; if with Domburgh, a Jack from the Sprissel-Yard.

If any one be found to neglect these Orders, he shall be put in mind of it by
the Secretary, and after examination of the cause, receive all due punishment.

All these were made, and agreed on in the Naerden Frigate, Sailing about the
Thousand Islands, the 26. of June, 1662.

Balthazar Bort, John Idze de Vink.

On Thursday morning, being the twenty seventh, the Fleet having the same
Weather, found themselves to be in four Degrees and eighteen Minutes
South-Latitude; and in the afternoon, beyond the Point of Boomy's Riff, Boomyes
Riff.
in nine and ten Fathom Gravelly Ground; in the Night, on fourteen and fifteen
Fathom, the same Ground, they spied the Banks of the foresaid Riff at a pretty
distance.

On Wednesday Morning the twenty eighth, the Fleet (being in thirteen and
fourteen Fathom Water, the Wind Easterly) saw the Island Lucipar, or Lukapar,
Island Lukapar*
lying to the South-West, about a League and a half from them. This Island lies
near Sumatra, in the Mouth of the Straights of Banka, and is fourteen Leagues
in Circumference. It is uninhabited, yet Woody, and yields a pleasant Prospect
with its high Trees toward the Sea; it is interlac'd with many murmuring
Streams, which abounding in Fish, and the Woods with Beasts, makes it a fit
place for the Seamen to refresh in.

In the afternoon, being in three Degrees, and seven Minutes, Lukapar lay three
Leagues South South-East from the Fleet; and having got the first Point of
Sumatra on their Starboard, their Course being North-East and by East, they
Sailed along the Coast of Sumatra in ten and thirteen Fathom Water.

The twenty ninth about Noon, the Fleet Sailed by Poele Nancha, lying in the
Straights of Banka, thirty Leagues to the Inland, in two Degrees and twenty
five Minutes Southern-Latitude, and were got within a small League from the
third Point of Sumatra.

Poele Nancha, that is, The Isle Nancha, (for Poele is Island, and Nancha the
proper name of the place) and signifies Round Island, so called, being indeed
almost Circular, and has eight Leagues in Circumference, very barren, being
only Sandy Ground, having on the Shore nothing but a few Turtles.

In the Evening, about Sunset, they came up with the high Promontary Monapien,
on the North of the Island Banka; and the Fore-Land of Sumatra lying West
South-West, about a League from them.

Banka, an Island about a League from Sumatra, is inhabited, fruitful, and
Island Banka.
full of Woods.

The thirteenth, being Friday, the Fleet was at Noon gotten into one Degree and
twenty two Minutes South-Latitude; and had Poele Toutyon, that is, Poele
Toutyon.
seven Islands, East and by North, four Leagues from them in sixteen and
seventeen Fathom Water. These Isles, though they lie close by one another, yet
are uninhabited.

Close by Poele Toutyon, toward the East, lies the Isle of Linge, Inhabited on
Island Linge.
the Shore by Fishers and Rusticks; but in the Country by a People who came
thither from the Mountain Passarvan, which is in Iova; for these People oppressed
by the King of Passarvan, with great Tributes and other Inconveniences, fled
for their better accommodation to several places; most of them being Licensed
by the King of Bantam to have settled behind the City, on the Coast of Sunda, at
the foot of the Mountain Gomon Bezar, where they have built the City Sura, and
several Villages, Electing a King of their own, which pays Tribute to the King
of Bantam. Others have settled themselves on this Isle, and built Towns and
Villages, which they enjoyed in Peace a long time, but submitted themselves at
last, either out of kindness, or force, to the King of Sura.

These People live peaceably and friendly, maintaining themselves with
Husbandry or Tillage; and observe the old Pythagorean Doctrine, concerning the
Transmigration of the Soul; therefore they neither kill nor eat any animated
Creature.

They go clothed in white Paper made of Trees, of which they tie only one piece
about their Head, and another about their Middle, for decency.

This Isle has all manner of good Provisions, though not in very great plenty;
but abundance of Birds, which are from thence Transported to China for a great
Dainty.

The first of July, about Noon, the Fleet finding it self in twenty five
Minutes South-Latitude, spied the East Point of the Isle of Linge, North-West
from them; and Poele Zay, South-West and by West, in eighteen and nineteen
Fathom gray Sandy Ground, mixed with little Shells; their Course North and by
East; the Wind at South-East and by South.

Poele Zay are several small Rocky Isles, and uninhabited, lying in a Train
Poele Zay.
one by another.

The second, being Sunday, the Fleet Sailed about Noon in fifty three Minutes
Northern Latitude.

In the afternoon the Pink Loosduynen being seven Leagues to the Eastward of
the Island Poele Panjang, ran on unknown Rocks, not specified in the Maps, to
which the Vice Admiral John Van Campen Rowing with his Boat, and some Tackle,
giving speedy assistance, helped the Pink off from the Rocks without any Damage.

Poele Panjang, signifies, Long Island, so called from its narrowness and Poele
Panjang.
great length, it is uninhabited, but full of Woods, where a Bird by the
Indians called Emy, or Emeu, breeds. He has a long Neck, which when he
stretches out, makes him at least four Foot high; before at his Throat hang
two Lappets, like slips of Parchment, two Inches long, and red. His Neck, as
Clusius relates, is about thirteen Inches long, and his Body two Foot broad,
and three Foot long from Breast to Stern; his Legs seventeen Inches long: The
Feathers with which his whole Body was covered, were all double, being grown
out of one little and short Quill, and lying one upon another, were thick at
the ends, and thin and small at the Root, and of several lengths. These
Feathers resembled rather a Bears Fur than Plumes: His Wings consisted chiefly
of four long black Quills; but the upper part thereof had the same kind of
Feathers that grew on the Breast; for it is to be supposed that with these
Wings he helps himself in running, not being able either to fly, or lift
himself from the Ground. The Head holds no proportion to the Body, being
little, and almost bald: The Eyes, a little above the opening of the Bill, were
very big and sparkling: Upon the top of his Head grew a Crest or Comb, hard as
Horn: The upper part of his Bill five Inches long; the forepart of the Neck,
about four Inches below the Bill, had two fleshy Gills, two Inches long, of
ruddy color; the hindermost part of the Neck also bald, and from the Head to
the Back reddish, and the lower part covered with a few red Feathers, mixed
with some black. And although this Bird seems to resemble the Ostrich, taking
all things that are thrown before him, yet he has not cloven Feet, but three
very strong Claws, with which side-ways he seizes his Prey. But though he
swallowed whatever was cast to him, as whole Oranges, and the like; yet his
usual Food was Wheaten or Rye-Bread, which broken in great pieces, he gobbles
up; and mad after new-laid Eggs, which went down Shells and all; but if they
were hard, or lay heavy upon his Stomach, he muted them, and then taking them
the second time, digesting, put them well over. These Birds, they say, breed
not only on the Molucco Islands, but also on Sumatra, Taprobane, and in the
neighboring Countries.

On Monday, being the third, the Fleet proceeded on her Course
North-North-East, full before the Wind, and reached about Noon in two Degrees
and three Minutes Northern Latitude, and in sight of the Island Poele Tingi*
which lay North-West from them. In the first Watch the Zierikzee and Ter-Boede
Frigates came to an Anchor on the West side of Aura, in thirteen Fathom Water,
and put each of them a Light in their Lanthorns, for a Sign to those Ships that
were behind.

The fourth, being Tuesday, the Admiral with the Naerden Frigate, accompanied
with the Overveen, Sea-dog, Singing-bird, High-land, and Vink, came to an
Anchor in the same place; for the Domburg, and six more, took their Course to
the Isle of Timon, according to Order when they set sail: Their Boats going
ashore to fetch fresh Water and Wood, brought also many Baskets of Fish and
Fruits, besides some Hens and Goats, which they either bought for Money, or
bartered for.

Next Morning, being the fifth, the Singing-bird, Sea-dog, and the Goldfinch
weighed their Anchors, and sailed to Poele Pisang for fresh Provisions and
Wood. This Island is Populous, and full of Villages. All the Inhabitants
observe strictly their Fishing and Tillage, being bred to such Drudgery from
their Childhood. Here, as also on the Coast of the Kingdom of Sampan, and on
the Island Lingen, a kind of Birds-nests are plentifully found Strange
Birds-nests.
which at Feasts and Entertainments are looked upon as a great Regalia; nay,
the Inhabitants on their New Years Feast, which they keep with great Solemnity,
commonly present one another with these Dainties, as an infallible sign of
unfeigned Friendship. They are also transported, as a great Delicate, to China,
and every Pound thereof sold for half a That is, about two Spanish Ducats.
Tahers, they being a great Cordial, much relieving both the Stomach and Brain.

A Bird like a Swallow, about the time of the year when they choose Mates, and
fall to coupling, yields a kind of glutinous or slimy matter, which lying on
the Rocks, is the first Material of these Nests, and by a daily additional
Moisture, or Morning-dew, gathered on their Wings, and sprinkled on it, at last
becomes both large and perfect, which when dry, resembles the Bowl of a Spoon,
with high Edges, and are found here in such abundance, that they gather some
Hundred weights of them yearly.

When their Coupling time is past, and the Nests finished, which happens all at
one time, they lay their Eggs, and Brood upon them; which Father Kircher thus
describes.

Between Cochinchina and the Island Hainan, lie in a long Ridge a Series both
of great and lesser Rocks, to which in March flock abundance of strange Birds
like Swallows, there building their Nests, but of what, or how, not known; and
having bred up their Young fit for flight, they quit their Birthplace, and
leave their empty Nests, which Ships coming thither from China and other
places, transport from thence, and sell at home at great Rates, because they
are esteemed as the only Condiment either to Fish or Flesh, which being
handsomely seasoned with it, gives a delightful Hogooe.

Philip Martyn, in his Relation of the Kingdom of Tunking, says, That in that
Province are many strange Birds and Fowls, especially some little ones, that
fly like a Swallow, making their Nests on the Rocks, which are gathered, and
sold at no ordinary price, because they believe that they owe their Health to
the use of them mixed in their Dishes, and that it is a certain Cure for the
loss of Appetite.

They are of a bright color, and hard, like Sea-horn; and they esteem the
greatest Feast no Entertainment without this Dainty, which they prepare after
this manner: First they lay it a whole Night in warm Water, till it grows soft
and mellow; then again dried in the Sun, mince it very small.

It has of it self almost no taste; but, like Mushrooms prepared in Sallads,
provokes an Appetite; and as other Food asswages Hunger, and satisfies the
Stomach, this, on the contrary, makes the Appetite greater, and still desirous
of more.

There is also much Ager-Wood, and Cotton.

On Thursday the sixth, Admiral Bort firing a Gun from the Naerden-Frigat,
signified his intention to set Sail; but no sooner had he weighed his Anchor,
but the Ship was strongly driven by the Current toward the Shore, so that he
was forced to let it fall again, and firing several Guns, the Vice Admiral Van
Campen coming thither with his Pinnace, Longboat, and Tackling, found the
Naerden Frigate to ride about three Cables length from the Rocks, on good
Ground, able enough to hold out a great Storm: But carrying out a small Anchor,
and weighing the other, at last got under Sail, and was followed by the rest of
the Ships.

The seventh, being Friday, the Zierikzee, Highland, and Ter-Boede Frigates came
about the East side of the Isle of Timon (for the Naerden and the other Ships
lay at the North-East Point) to an Anchor in thirteen Fathom, where they took
in Water, Firing, and fresh Provisions, as Hens, Goats, Fish, Potatoes, and the
like.

The eighth, being Saturday, the Zierikzees Men going into the Woods, cut
Anchor-stocks, Oars, Hand-spikes, and Leavers; and fishing in their Sloop, took
some Shepherds and Breams.

About Noon happened a great Thunder-shower.

The ninth day, being Sunday, the Zierikzee, Highland, and Ter-Boede, weighing
their Anchors, ran to the North-East Point of Timon, to the Naerden, and the
other Ships.

Admiral Bort putting out his white Flag to call a Council, they judged it
convenient to steer further out from the Shore, and also sealed their Orders.

The Admiral here complaining that he had many young and unexperienced People
in his Ship, Order was immediately given, That two of the stoutest Seamen
should be taken out of each of the other Ships, except the Gold-finch, and put
aboard of him.

In the afternoon the Fleet set sail, and took their Course North-North-East,
and saw the Isle of Timon about Sunset, bearing South and by West, and
South-South-West, about five or six Leagues distant.

The tenth in the afternoon, under three Degrees and eight Minutes, the Fleet
had thirty eight Fathom Water, sandy Ground.

But by the eleventh at Noon they had reached five Degrees and four Minutes
Northern Latitude, and in forty and forty one Fathom Water, gravelly Ground.

The next day at Noon they were in five Degrees and fifty six Minutes, and had
thirty nine Fathom Water.

The thirteenth, the Fleet being in seven Degrees and six Minutes, had twenty
nine, thirty, and thirty one Fathom Water: But the Naerden sailing with his
Squadron about the East, had almost lost sight of the Zierikzee.

The fourteenth about Noon the Fleet was in eight Degrees and sixteen Minutes,
and had twenty two and twenty three Fathom Water, fine sandy Ground, mixed with
white Gravel. At Night, about the latter end of the first Watch, appeared the
two Isles lying to the West of the Island Poele or Candor, a League from the
Fleet, which had eighteen Fathom Water. This Poele or Candor lies in the Bay of
Siam, near the Coast of Vancinaer Cambodia, uninhabited, and about three or
four Leagues in Circumference, surrounded with high Rocks and Mountains,
crowned with shady Trees, and abounding with good Provision, to the great
refreshment of those Ships that put in there.

The fifteenth in the Morning the Fleet came up with the North-East Point of
Candor, which bore South-East and by East about three or four Leagues distance
from them, in the depth of seventeen and eighteen Fathom Water, white Sand,
mixed with small Pebbles.

The sixteenth in the Morning they sailed in fifteen and sixteen Fathom Water,
the Table-Mount being North-East, about three Leagues from the Shore. About
Noon they found themselves by observation in ten Degrees and thirty one Minutes
Northern Latitude, and had fifteen Fathom Water, about three Leagues from the
Coast of Champa.

Champa, so called according to Texeira, from the Portuguese Pronunciation,
Champa; by Martinius, Changpa; and by others, Ciampa, is a Kingdom, which has
the Principality of Camboya on the West, and, according to Father Lerin, that
of Laos, from which it is separated by the vast Deserts and Mountains of Samao;
the East respects Cochinchina and Tunking, and reaches with its Coasts to the
main Continent of China, before you come to the Shore against the Island of
Makou.

The chief City, which lies up in the Country, has its denomination from the
Kingdom: The other Towns are Varella, Penaria, and Tauchonarella. This Country
abounds in all sorts of Provisions, and the Hills with Elephants, which are
transported from thence to several Places. There is also store of the best
Calamback-Wood, by some called Calampart, by Linschot, Calambu, and Calambes,
Lignum Aloes.
or Lignum-Aloes; by the Arabians, Agalugen, and Haut; and by the Inhabitants
of Zaratte and Dekan, Ud, which has a most sweet and odoriferous smell, said
to proceed from its rotting under Ground; for the sound Wood has no smell at
all. The Tree (says Garzias) resembles that of an Olive, but somewhat bigger;
and the firm and sound Wood has no kind of smell; but with the putrefying of
the Bark and Wood, the fat and Oily Moisture may also communicate of its
Sweetness to that likewise. This Wood they prize so highly, that they equally
value it with Gold; yet much used by the Chinese in their Offerings to their
Gods. The Country, though badly stored with Gold and Silver, yet is enriched
with excellent Drugs, costly Woods (as the Sampan and Ebon-Wood) Rice, Lint,
and Cotton: There is also plenty of a Fruit called Oaby, which is very great,
weighing ten or twelve Pounds apiece, and by the Chinese used for Bread, and
sometimes mingled with Meat like the Bottoms of Artichokes: They also have a
very large Fruit, by the Inhabitants and other Indians called Nankussen, and by
some, according to Garzias and Acosta, Iaka.

The Country is Governed by a King, that Rules, neither acknowledging
Subjection to the Emperor of China, the Cham of Tartary, or any other Superior.
The Vice Admiral Van Campen spoke with the King himself, who sat in a great
Court, in a very large Hall, hung with rich Tapestry; but was not permitted to
enter the Presence, till he pulled off his Shoes and Stockings, because none
may appear before the King unless barefooted, such was their Custom of due
Reverence.

The Grandees or Persons of Quality there, are mounted on Steeds, with Bells in
their Ears, like our Cart-Horses.

The seventeenth, in the Night, the Fleet doubled the South Point of the Bay of
Pangerang.
Bay of Pangerang, which bore West and by South about three Leagues from them.
In the bottom of this Bay, being a most convenient Harbor for Ships, stands a
great City, whose Jurisdiction extends a vast way into the Country, and
Governed by a peculiar King. The Vice Admiral going ashore, spoke with him with
his Shoes and Stockins on, and was presented by the King with soms Fans and
Stuffs. The Country thereabouts abounds with Calamback-Wood. Lignum Aloes.


The Fleet steering North and by East, found her self about Noon to be in
eleven Degrees and thirty five Minutes, about three Leagues from the Champan
Shore. In the Morning they plied about the five Islands, close by the
forementioned Coast, the Southermost part of which appears like a round
Hay-stack.

The eighteenth, at Noon, by Observation they found themselves in twelve
Degrees and thirteen Minutes, two Leagues from the Shore, in seventy Fathom
Water.

On Wednesday about Sunrising the Fleet made St. John de Fyks, on the Coast of
Champan, North-East and by North, about three Leagues from them, and at Noon
were in thirteen Degrees and five Minutes Northern Latitude; and Coasted about
Sunset Cabo Avarelles, which lay Northerly from them, steering North and by
East.

Cabo Avarelles being a very high Mountain, appears a great distance off like a
Man on Horseback, and serves for a Beacon.

The twentieth they found themselves in thirteen Degrees and forty nine
Minutes, and saw the Point of Poele Candor, North and by East, a good distance
from them.

The one and twentieth, in the Day-watch, the Vice Admiral Van Campen (for the
Admiral Bort going that Night with seven Ships about the East, was by break of
day gotten quite out of sight) with the Ships belonging to his Squadron, came
opposite to the Northermost of the Box-Islands, and spied four Sail,
Box-Islands.
bearing North-East and by East, near the Coast of Champan, or Quinan; whether
he, and those that belonged to the Ter-Boede, rowed with their Sloops well
Manned and Armed; but three of them escaping, they took only one, which they
carried aboard the Vice Admiral, and found him to be laden with Rice, Honey and
strong Arak, Manned with seven Men, and having also five proper Women aboard,
that coming from Poeyan, intended to sail from Taywan, Poeyan.
not far from thence. They judged it convenient to let them pass with their
Vessel; but the Women would rather have staid with the Netherlanders, if they
might have had their desires; yet at their departure, they were presented with
three Pieces of course white Linen, which they received with great
thankfulness.

The City Poeyan, lying on the Coast of Quinan, at the foot of a Mountain,
between two Rivers, is surrounded with high thick Walls of Stone, fit to plant
Guns upon. Their Fortresses are not fortified with Towers, but here and there
with some Galleries eighteen Foot high, to which they ascend by a Ladder, and
from thence assail their Enemies.

The City has three straight and long Streets, which all concenter before the
Royal Palace, from whence one leads to the Sea, the second to one of the
City-Gates, and the third to the Mountain-Gate. None of the Streets are paved,
except those three; for the other By-Lanes and Alleys are Sandy. And
notwithstanding the whole may be Navigated by Channels that run through every
Street, which receive their Waters from the forementioned Rivers, yet are they
very foul, because when the Water falls, it goes off so slowly.

Near the Court, on the West side of the City, stands a spacious Temple; on the
East Side, the Arsenal; and on the South side, the Kings Palace, artificially
built, with spacious Courts and Walks within. At the end of the Street that
leads into the Country, stand the Mayor or Chief Magistrates House, wherein
all the Kings Servants or Slaves reside, and where are also his Stables, and
other Offices.

The City stands divided into four parts, over every one of which a Nobleman
has the chief Command in time of War, Fire, or other Accidents. In each of
these is also a Drum, as big as a Rhenish-Wine Fat, whereon they beat with a
Hammer, which always hangs near it, when any Uproar happens.

The Merchandise to be had there, are all sorts of Wrought and un-wrought
Silks, flowered and plain, of diverse Colors; as Peelings, Hokiens, and the
like: They trade also in white Linen.

At Noon the Vice Admiral Van Campen found himself in fourteen Degrees and
forty Minutes Northern Latitude, and in the Morning came up with Admiral Van
Bort, with seven Ships and a Jonk.

The twenty second, about Sunrising, the Fleet spied Poele Canton, North-West
Poele Canton.
and by North, about five Leagues from them, and were in the Latitude of
fifteen Degrees and thirty one Minutes, their Course North-East.

The twenty third the Fleet was in sixteen Degrees and fourteen Minutes North
Latitude.

The twenty fourth, being Monday, they discovered the Island Hainan, at a
Island Hainan.
good distance from them; and taking observation at Noon, were in eighteen
Degrees and fifteen Minutes, about four or five Leagues South-East from Hainan.

The twenty fifth about Noon they reached nineteen Degrees and fifty one
Minutes.

The twenty sixth they had twenty one Degrees and seven Minutes North Latitude,
and were within four or five Leagues, bearing South-South-West, from the
Southermost Island of Macao, or Macau, in twenty six and twenty seven Fathom
Water.

The twenty seventh the Zierikzee and Ter-Boede cast Anchor in the Evening near
the Island of Macau, by the Box-Heads, being separated from the rest of the
Fleet by Misty Weather, that being the appointed Rendezvous, where they were to
meet, if by any Accident they should lose one another.

The next day in the Forenoon Indiik, accompanied with the Loosduinen,
Singing-bird, and three Frigates, Domburgh, High-land, and Meliskerke, came to
an Anchor in the same place, under the Coast of Macau, in thirteen Fathom
Water, gravelly Ground, which made up their Number eight.

The Islands of Macau receive their Denomination from the City of the same
name, situate on a small hanging Islet, joined to one that is somewhat bigger;
a Ship may without danger in Stormy Weather Sail betwixt, and there lie
Land-lock'd, riding in an always smooth Sea, where they never want store of
Fresh Water from the living Spring.

The twenty ninth, being Saturday, Indiik by putting out a white Flag, gave the
Signal to the Commanders of the other Ships to come aboard to Council, where it
was judged convenient, because Indiik supposed that the staying with the Ships
bound for Iapan would be chargeable, to weigh Anchor in the Morning, put again
to Sea, and sail through the Isles of Macau, ordering every Ship now and then
to fire a Gun, in hopes thereby to meet again with the other five. Their Course
being Nor-East by East, and Nor-Nor-East, in sixteen, seventeen, and eighteen
Fathom, gravelly Ground, about nine of the Clock they bore up with one of the
greatest of the Macau Islands, in Portuguese called Ilhas de Lemas, where they
saw five Champans or Jonks lying near the Shore, which had a few Houses. Here
also eight of the Fleet dropped Anchor; for Indiik with two laden Flyboats
steered for Iapan.

The Boats went ashore well Manned, where they found five great Champans with
their Fishing-Nets, and above five thousand dried and salted Shepherd-Fish,
with two hundred Pots of the Rows of the same Fish pickled.

The Chinese taking their flight into the Woods, so left all their Goods to
the disposal of the Hollanders; only three were overtaken by the Seamen, and
carried aboard the Vice Admiral, who asking them from whence they came, they
told him, From Xantung, and also informed him of Coxinga's Death, who were glad
of the News, and paid the poor Men for their Fish.

In the Afternoon they joined with the Admiral Bort, and the other lost and
separated Vessels, which lay at Anchor full three Leagues to Lee-ward of the
most Easterly Macaan Isles, where they were not able to row ashore with their
Boats, because of the swiftness of the Current.

The Admiral making the usual Signal, the rest of the Captains came aboard,
where he ruffling a little, and chiding them for not keeping their Rendezvous
according to Order, he set upon each of them the Penalty to bring him aboard
eight Hogsheads of Water.

The one and thirtieth in the Morning the Fleet setting sail, was at Noon in
twenty two Degrees and twelve Minutes, a League and a half North-East and by
East from Pedro Branke.

About Noon spying five Sail in the North-East, the Vice Admiral Van Campen
made Chase after them, and coming up with one in the Evening, took it, with
three Chinese from Tamsua, and some fresh and salt Fish.

On Tuesday, the first of August, the Vice Admiral went aboard the Naerden
Frigate, to know what he should do with the three Chinese and their Vessel:
Bort replied, That he should let them go.

At Noon the Fleet was in twenty two Degrees and thirty six Minutes, in twenty
and twenty one Fathom Water, fine Sandy Ground, mixed with Shells; and the next
day at Noon, in twenty three Degrees and thirty eight Minutes, bearing about
three Leagues West-South-West from the Island Tang Goie, in Tang Goie.
twenty two and twenty three Fathom Water, Sandy Ground, mixed with small
Shells, their Course North-East and by East.

In the Afternoon they spied several Fisher-Boats in the North-East, which the
Admiral and Vice Admiral ordered to be chased: The Loenen Pink overtaking one
of them, found only one Man in her, the rest escaping by swimming.

The third, the Fleet came up with the Point of Puthay, lying on the main Cape
Puthay.
Coast of China, Northward from them, their Course North-East and by North
along the Shore. This Point of Land appears in Prospect Mountainous, yet full
of Valleys and Plains, planted with Trees of a wondrous height, whose Wood is
as black as Pitch, and as hard and smooth as polished Marble or Ivory; some
resembling Ebony; some a reddish Color, and others yellowlike Wax.

The Admiral putting out the Signal, commanded all the Officers to come aboard,
and caused the Chinese Prisoners to be asked in their presence, From whence
they came? If they had no knowledge of the Tartars Army? And where Coxinga's
Fleet lay? Whereupon they replied, That Coxinga was dead, that the Tartars had
a great Army near Chinkzieu and Zwansifoe; and that they were fitting out
abundance of great and small Jonks in all the Havens, to War against Coxinga.

In the Night the Fleet sailed by the Island Quemuy, to the great dislike of
the Admiral Bort, and contrary to the General and Indian Councils Order, which
notwithstanding none of the Commanders knew, only that the Vice Admiral Campen
had direction, That if the Ships should be separated from one another in the
Southern Mouzon, they should stay at the North Point of the Island Quemuy; and
in the Northern Mouzon, at the Promontory of Puthay, lying about two Leagues
North-East from Quemuy; or else, in and before the River Hoksieu. On this
Island Quemuy appear two Towers; the one with a Spiry Point; the other, being
that of the City Engely, flat and broad.

The City Engely, which stood on the Island Quemuy, was pulled down, to prevent
that Coxinga might not possess or harbor there; and at present there appears
only some few Ruins of it, not far from the Seaside.

In the Afternoon the Fleet raised twenty four Degrees and forty six Minutes,
about two Leagues and a half from the Coast of China, where in the
South-South-East they spied three Jonks, which the Admiral and all his Fleet
chased, but they escaped by their nimble Sailing. About Sunset they were three
Leagues distant from an Isle lying at the South Point of the Storm-bay, whereon
stands a Tower built like a Pyramide.

This Storm-bay makes a convenient Harbor for safety in bad Weather, or to
Storm-Bay.
take in Provisions. On the Shore are diverse Towers, with several Entrances,
adorned with Images of their Gods, and before whose chief Gate by turns one of
their Priests keeps continual Watch.

On Friday, being the fourth, about Noon, the Vice Admiral Van Campen descried
the Cape of the Cavalles, in twenty five Degrees and thirty seven Minutes, Cape
of Cavalles.
about two or three Leagues East and by North from the Rough Isle, in the depth
of thirty four and thirty five Fathom Water, their Course North-North-East.

This Point of Cavalles is a great Promontory, full of many handsome Towns and
Villages, and exceeding fertile; for besides the great conveniences of Rivers,
all sorts of Provisions may be purchased there at a cheap rate, as Sheep,
Swine, Poultrey, and the like; there are also Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, and
several other Fruits of that kind, especially one shaped like a Pear, with a
thin Shell, resembling the outward Husk of a Chestnut, white within, and of a
delicious taste; they preserve it in Sugar and Oil, because if boiled, it
loses the relish: The Horses of this place are generally very small.

Near this Point lie certain desolate and barren Isles, which by the
Netherlanders are generally called the Cavalles.

The fifth the Vice Admiral was by a Storm and hollow Sea separated from the
other Ships, when he saw three Isles not appearing in the Maps, about three
Leagues South-West and by South from him, in the depth of thirty one and thirty
two, and sometimes twenty seven, twenty five, and twenty four Fathom Water,
muddy Ground. About Noon they found thirteen several Isles in the Latitude of
twenty seven Degrees, all which the Vice Admiral supposed to be the Isles of
the Old Sayer.

Thither the Vice Admiral sailed, to wait for the Admiral and the other eight
Ships, where he was so ruffled by a sudden Storm, that his Mainmast had like
to come overboard, his Sails and Rigging much torn; yet at last he came to an
Anchor, with his four Ships, in twenty seven Degrees and nine Minutes Northern
Elevation.

The sixth the Vice Admiral Van Campen commanded the Officers of the Ships that
were with him to come aboard, to know of them if they were inclined (not to
spend any time in vain) to seek for the Admiral, with the other eight Ships, by
sailing Southerly or Northerly, because his Orders on the third of the same
Month were to meet in the Latitude of twenty seven Degrees and thirty Minutes
before the City Hoksieu (if possible,) if they should happen by Storm to be
separated one from another, and there to inquire after the state of the Tartars.

Van Campen judged it convenient to sail but fourteen or fifteen Leagues
toward the South, along the Coast of China, and if he missed of him there, to
take his Course back again toward the North, or to stay there till they came
to him, and then go together to find out their Admiral, which was agreed on.

The eighth Van Campen weighed Anchor with his Squadron, sailing a pretty way
to the Offin, and then stood in toward the Coast of China, there to discover
some Haven or River, but saw a little to the Northward of a Cape on the Coast
of China, six or seven Isles, which passing by, and plying several times from
and toward the Shore, they came again to an Anchor behind the Isle where they
had lain before.

The ninth the Vice-Admirals Pilot went ashore, to seek For Water, which he
found running out of the Rocks, between the Hills: About Noon they weighed
Anchor, and sailed to a high Isle, unknown to them, and not found in the Map.
In the Evening they spied ten or eleven Sail of Fishermen, to reach whom Van
Campen sent his Pilot with a Sloop well Manned, and one who spoke some broken
Chinese; but they only overtook one of them, which they brought aboard, where
they questioned them, From whence they came, and whereabouts Hoksieu was? They
answered, From Kita, and that Hoksieu was about six or seven Leagues Southerly
from them: And selling their taken Fish to the Netherlanders for three Spanish
Rials, promised the next Morning to bring them Hens, Swine, and Chinese Apples
aboard.

With Sunset they came between the Main Coast of China, and four unknown
Isles, and dropped their Anchors in thirteen Fathom Water, about Cannonshot
from the Shore. On the greatest stood a Light-house, with Burning Candles in it.

The tenth, being Thursday, the Vice Admiral set Sail in the Morning toward
the South-South-West, between the main Coast of China and the Islands, a
Cannon-shot from the shore. On the Main Continent appeared a House in a Bay.
About Noon they were come back into twenty six Degrees and twenty seven
Minutes, and in the Evening by calm, yet contrary Tides, entered the Bay of
Kita, half a League Southward from an unknown Island.

The eleventh in the Morning Van Campen setting sail again, spied two Jonks
lying before Tenhay, to which he sent Jacob Black, with a Boat and Skiff,
Manned with armed Seamen and Soldiers, to fight them; but the Jonks by
swiftness of their Sails got clear off; yet in the Pursuit they saw in the
North-West, near the Coast of China, three or four unknown Isles, and seven
Ships at an Anchor near the Shore, which were the lost Ships, with the Admiral,
that they were in quest of.

About Noon the Vice Admiral was commanded aboard of the Admiral Bort, by
Captain Auke Pieterson, Master of the Ter-Boede Frigate, and informed by him,
That he had taken nineteen Jonks, great and small, near Tenhay, six or seven of
which they had fetched from the Shore, and burned the rest, except one, which
was blown up by its own Powder.

The Booty of the taken Jonks consisted in forty one square Packs, nineteen
Fardels, and five Bales of fine white Silk, a hundred and thirteen Pieces of
Spiljauter, sixty seven Pigs of Lead great and small, two hundred sixty eight
Bags of Pepper, besides sixty nine Guns and Blunderbusses.

The twelfth, being Saturday, the Fleet setting Sail, steered their Course to
the River of Hoksieu, to perform the Orders of the General and Council of
India; but was forced by calm Weather, and contrary Tides, to come to an Anchor
again in seven Fathom Water, a little to the Westward of the Bay, not far from
the Land, bordered with a white sandy Shore.

In the hanging of the Mountain appeared a great and well built City, called
Sotiha, whereof the Walls of one side were washed by the Sea.

Near the Shore, and against the Gates, lay some small Jonks, and many other
Vessels, that were hall'd up above the Water-mark; whither the Admiral Bort,
and Vice Admiral Van Campen, in the afternoon sent ninety seven Seamen, and one
hundred and fifty Soldiers in five Boats and seven Sloops, with Command to set
them all on fire (for they belonged to Coxinga,) but to spare all Houses.

The Hollanders coming near the Shore, were roughly entertained by the
Chinese, with great Guns and Muskets; but being once Landed they met with
little resistance, for the Chinese fled unto the Mountains: whereupon Van
Campen entering the City with his Men, set a Watch in a great House near Sotiha
taken.
the Gate, and sent the rest of his People in three Parties through the City.

This City Sotiha had been ruined and burnt by the Tartars about a year before,
but since that rebuilt with many handsome Houses, wherein they found good
quantities of Rice, Salt, and dried Fish. Three Chinese were also taken, with
four Women, but set at liberty again immediately. A young Woman was found
Murdered, but how none knew.

This Place is now inhabited chiefly by Chinese, short-hair'd like the
Tartars, that maintain themselves with Fishing and Husbandry, being Licenced
thereto by the Governor of Hoksieu.

After the firing of twenty seven small and great Vessels Laden with Pepper,
Silk, and other Commodities to be Transported to Iapan, Van Campen with his
People in the Evening leaving the Shore went aboard, where he related his
Adventures to the Admiral. Hence the Fleet Sailed somewhat Southerly, and
Anchored before the City Tenhay in nine Fathom Water.

This Tenhay has no Walls, and inhabited only by Fishermen, and some
Merchants.

The thirteenth being Sunday, the Fleet between Tenhay and the River Hoksieu
came to Anchor in eight Fathom Water, where in the Bay of Linkun they espied
some small Fishermen with their Nets.

This Bay of Linkun lies also between the River Hoksieu and Tenhay, where some
Priests coming to the Netherlanders, requested of them a Pass, that they might
go free if any of their Ships should meet with them at Sea, promising to do the
same to them, if the Hollanders had occasion to travel by Land or Water.

The Vice Admiral Van Campen sent to the Admiral Bort, to know if the six Jonks
should stay near Tenhay, or go into the River Hoksieu, that if a Storm should
happen they might not be driven from their Anchors, with which they were but
meanly provided, and had scarce Provision for six or seven Days. In the Night
they saw many Fires upon the Mountains.

The fourteenth being Monday, in the Morning the Fleet Anchored near the Banks
of Hoksieu, about a League from the Shore, and to make their coming known to
the Tartars, Bort commanded seven Guns to be fired from the Naerden Frigate,
five from the Zierikzee, three from the Domburgh, and one from all the rest of
the other Ships.

Here it was concluded, that Captain Abraham Pon, Commander of the Breukelen,
with six Men, one Quartermaster, and the Interpreter Lakka, with three Tartars
that came to the Hollanders at Tayowan the year before, should carry a Letter
to the Governors and Viceroy.

On Tuesday the fifteenth the Vice Admiral Van Campen, according as ordered the
day before, Sailed with two Frigates, three Pinks, besides the six forementioned
Jonks, toward Hoksieu or Chancheu, commonly called The River Chang, Steering
his Course West and by South between two Sands near the White Rocks, which
appear like Pyramids, and close by the North-east Foreland: and bringing the
Pyramids on his Starboard, he altered his Course toward the South-west,
through a narrow Channel six, seven, or eight Fathom deep gravelly Ground.
Thence he Steered his Course East North-east, and Anchored in eight Fathom
Water between two pleasant Isles, and left on his Starboard two other within
Cannon-shot, which served as safe Harbors for all Ships against foul Weather.
Near the Evening Van Campen fell down with the Ebb out of the River, toward
the Bar of Hoksieu, and came about four Glasses after Sunset to the rest of
the Fleet; where going Aboard the Naerden Fregat, he gave an account to the
Admiral of Affairs, to his great satisfaction.

The sixteenth being Wednesday, the Fleet passed into the River Hoksieu, and
came presently after Noon with the Flood, by the high North-east Point of the
Eastermost Island, having the White Rocks on their Starboard, and working
through a strong Ebb in a narrow Channel, they came to an Anchor in five Fathom
Water, where immediately three handsome Chinese Vessels, with five grand
Mandarins, came Aboard of the Naerden Fregat to the Admiral Bort, and with much
Ceremony and Complement welcomed both the Admiral and Vice Admiral. At
Low Water the Naerden Frigate sitting upon the Sand much troubled the Admiral,
who called to Van Campen, telling him that he had brought the Ships to a bad
Place to Anchor in; but he little regarding such a danger, replied, To Morrow,
if it be the Admiral's pleasure, I will carry the Ships out of the River again.

The seventeenth in the Morning the Fleet weighed Anchor, and Sailed along in
five, six, seven, and eight Fathom Water: thence they Sailed Northwest up the
River along the Northermost Island; against the middle of which being a safe
Harbor, the Ships came to Anchor.

Not far from hence lay four Islands, formerly peopled, but now laid waste, and
depopulated by the Tartars. A whole Month the Netherlanders lay near these
four Islands, where they got all things in a plentiful manner, though the
ordinary Seamen were not permitted to go ashore without leave, and only six
at a time, because they should not be burdensome, nor affright the Inhabitants.

On Friday the eighteenth Van Campen went ashore with his Sloop, and came Van
Campen go's ashore.
to the South-west Point of the smallest Island at a Stone Cawsey, along which
he walked to a deserted Place, wherehe saw many large Ruins of former Houses,
and under the jutting of a Hill several Towns, besides two fair Temples, and in
them, on a row, many Chests with dead Corpse standing against the Walls above
the Ground: There also were two Light-houses, furnished with many Images,
sitting on Stools at a Table, before which they burnt Offerings, imploring
indulgence to departed Souls.

The nineteenth Admiral Bort sent Philip Mew, who had some smattering of the
Chinese Tongue, to the Fort of Minjazen, three Leagues from Hoksieu, to the
Governor, with Desire to permit them with Boats, and two of the taken Jonks, to
Sail up the River for fresh Water for the Ships, and to buy Provisions. He
brought Answer, that they might go with all their Boats and Jonks, and fetch as
much Water as they pleased.

The twentieth and one and twentieth nothing happened of any remark, every Ship
being busy to take in Water.

The two and twentieth being Tuesday, five Mandarins, with a considerable Five
Mandarins come aboard the Naerden.
Train, came in great Tartar Vessels Aboard the Naerden Frigate to the Admiral,
where they were welcomed with the firing of Guns, and three Vollies of small
Shot: Upon the Admiral's Order the Naerden fired seven, Zirickzee five,
Domburgh three, and all the rest of the Ships two Guns apiece, and three
Vollies of small Shot more. The Pilot of the Naerden Frigate carried in a Tartar
Vessel, aboard of the Vice Admiral Van Campen (who at that time being troubled
with an Ague, could not be at the Mandarins Entertainment in the Naerden) one
fat Calf, five Hens, five Ducks, three Water-Lemons, with a great Pot of
Chinese Beer, all sent as a Present to Van Campen, from the Governors of
Hoksieu and Minjazen.

The twenty fourth a Corporal with four Soldiers was sent ashore with a Flag
to the Island, being on the North side of the River, with Command to go to the
top of the Mountains, and see if he could descry any Ships or Jonks: if they
saw Ships, then they were to wave their Colors as many times as there were
Vessels; if Jonks, betwixt every Flourish to fire a Gun.

In the Afternoon Ysbrant van Bank, Commander of the Ankeveen, who died the
Night before, was Buried on the Island, and Jacob Swaert put in his Place,
being the Pilot to the Vice Admiral in the Zirickzee.

The twenty sixth and twenty seventh nothing of remark happened.

The twenty eighth three Chinese Vessels came with three Mandarins from Hoksieu
aboard the Naerden Frigate, and brought a Letter from the Governor thereof, and
Commander of the Castle Minjazen: The Contents consisted in many Complements,
with promise of Favors and all kindness from them both; likewise a free Grant
to go unmolested up the River, and buy Necessaries for their Money for the
Fleet; and lastly, wishing them a kind welcome into China: by which it appeared,
that the Tartars intended to join with the Netherland Forces. The Letter being
read, several Guns were fired from the Naerden.

At Noon the three Mandarins taking their leave went away in the same Vessels,
whilst five Cannons were fired in honor to them, and also three Vollies of
small Shot: they carried with them a Letter from the Admiral Bort, written by
the Chinese Interpreter Lakka, to the Governors of Hoksieu, with many civil
Expressions of thankfulness.

The twenty ninth, thirtieth, and one and thirtieth, nothing happened of any note.

The first of September all Officers were commanded by the Admiral to Land
their Soldiers on the middle Island, and take up their Quarters in the best
Houses of the ruined Town, with Order, that every Officer should furnish his
Soldiers with all Necessaries for the Dressing of Meat, and to give them double
allowance on the Shore of Rice, Pork, Oil, Vinegar, and Arak, which daily
occasioned a murmuring amongst the Seamen, who said, That they did the worst
Work, and hazarded their Lives as well as the Soldiers, and therefore ought
rather to have the greatest allowance.

The second, being Saturday, Auke Peter's, Commander of the Ter-Boede, and
Captain Constantine Nobell, came back from Hoksieu (whither they were sent by
Order of the Admiral on the thirtieth of the last Month) and brought with them
to the Admiral in the Naerden, five Cows, thirty six Ducks, five great Pears,
with some Pot Herbs.

The third, being Sunday, Vice Admiral Van Campen went ashore in his Sloop,
where he saw diverse Burying-places defaced by their own Soldiers, who out of
hope to find Gold, Silver, or Jewels buried within, broke open the Chests, and
threw out the Corpse, which lay in all their Apparel, as Caps on their Heads,
Coats, Breeches, and Shoes, and in their full shape, but as firm as a Mummy.

On the fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh days nothing happened worthy of relation.

The eighth, being Friday, John Melman with two Soldiers, and three Tartars A
Mandarin with a Letter from the Viceroy and General to Admiral Bort.
that came with the Fleet from Batavia, besides the Chinese Interpreter and
Secretary Lakka, came back from Sinksieu through Hoksieu, after a Journey of
twenty four days, accompanied with a Mandarin, sent to the Admiral Bort, with
Letters from the Viceroy Singlamong, and from the next Person to him, the
General Taysing Lipovy, besides a Letter from a great Lord called Santing
Houbethetok, Governor of the great City Zwansyfoe; in all which they expressed
themselves in a handsome Style, signifying the Hollanders kind welcome thither.
The two chief Commanders, the Viceroy and General, desired moreover, that the
Admiral would please to repair to them, or some other he should Depute (for
they would be glad of some People of Quality to Confer with) and likewise, that
they would be pleased to send the Letters from the Lord-General and Council of
Batavia, by a special Envoy by Land to the Camp at Sinksieu, that so they might
better know, by communicating their Intentions, how to carry on the grand
Affair; and that they should in the interim leave the Presents for the Viceroy
in their Ships till farther order; and accordingly he Commissioned the
Vice Admiral Van Campen and Constantine Nobell (yet their Letters did not so
earnestly require it as the Interpreter John Melman related to the Admiral,)
with Commands to deliver the Lord-General and Indian Councels Letters to the
Viceroy Singlamong, and the Person next to him in State, the General Taysing
Lipovy, and withal, to Treat and conclude with them concerning the grand
Affair: This being concluded on, they sent advice concerning it to the Governor
of Hoksieu, who returned this Answer:

THe dispatching of the Vice Admiral John van Campen and Constantine A Letter
from the Governor of Hoksieu to Bort.
Nobel, with Letters from the Lord-General and Council of Batavia, to the
Viceroy Singlamong, and the next Person to him, Taysing Lipovy, will,
according to my Judgment, come to a good issue; but to join with You, and make
a League to go against Coxinga or his Adherents, is beyond my Commission: but I
will prepare my self, if the Ambassadors and Letters are ready, to assist them,
and provide them Attendants, and all Necessaries which they shall want on their
Journey to Sinksieu to the Viceroy and General. About Matters of War and
Merchandise I am not permitted to Treat with You, but You must expect Your
Answer concerning it from the Viceroy, or Court at Peking.

The eighteenth, being Monday, in the Morning two Jonks, with the Interpreter
Melman, and the Chinese Interpreter and Secretary Lakka, sent from the Governor
of Hoksieu, with permittance from the Commander of the Fort Minjazen, to the
Fleet to fetch the Vice Admiral John van Campen and Constantine Nobel, with
their Goods and Retinue, and conduct them up to Hoksieu, and from thence by
Land to travel to Sinksieu to the Viceroy Singlamong, and General Lipovy.

Van Campen and Noble making themselves ready for their Journey, went attended
each with six Men, besides a Trumpet, Interpreter, and two Soldiers, in all
eighteen Persons: the Commands and Orders which they were to observe, and were
delivered them by the Admiral Bort, were verbatim as follows:

THe Reasons and Occasions are known, which have forced and moved The
Instructions of the Admiral to the Agents going to Sinksieu.
Us and the Council to send you to the chief Governors of the Territory of
Fokien, wherein Hoksieu is the Metropolis, and the usual Place of their
Residence and Court, though at present they are not there, but lie Encamped
with their Army near the City Zansifoe, about nine or ten days Journey Post
from Hoksieu. I say to you both, because Constantine Noble has Order from the
Lord-General and Indian Council, to Negotiate and Conclude that Affair with
those great Officers, according to their Excellencies Order, and the Letters to
the same Governors, viz. the Viceroy Singlamong, and General Taysing Lipovy:
the Copies of which you having between you, must serve for your full
Directions, without needing any rehearsal to be made of them; so that We only
to obtain their Excellencies favor, entreat you to obey and observe these
following Orders.

I. After you have taken leave of Us you shall go to Hoksieu, and at your
arrival there, obtain License to repair to the Governor Haitingkong, and
proffer him great Presents, and inform him that you are ready to travel to the
Viceroy Singlamong and Taysing Lipovy, with Letters to him from the
Lord-General and Council of Batavia, with a Request, that he would help you by
a quck dispatch to go thither. In the Letter which he lately Writ to Us he he
has promised to provide all things fit for the Journey: whereupon We have
Answered according to the Copy which you have, containing chiefly Our taken
Resolution of the Domburghs staying here with the Presents to the
forementioned chief Governors; Our setting Sail with the other seven Ships
about the North, to infest and gawl the Enemy, and Intentions to be here
against your Return; and amongst other things, a quick Dispatch for your
Journey: so that I hope you will find all things there in a readiness.

II. When you have left Hoksieu, and come to Zansifoe, Commanded by the Lord
Santing Houbethetok, who seems to favor Our Designs, you shall deliver Our
Letter to Him, and also these Presents, because with the Return of the
Interpreter John Melman (who has already been with the said chief Governors,)
he Writ to Us, and thereby expressed his good Inclinations toward Us.

The chiefest, nay the sole occasion of your Journey, is to deliver the Letters
of their Excellencies beforementioned to the Viceroy Singlamong, and General
Taysong Lipovy; and if they are so inclined, to Treat and Conclude with them
all those Affairs which they desire of them in their Letters, and authorized us
to Agree on, consisting chiefly in these Points.

First, to make an inviolable League with them, for the best and most advantage
of the Hollander, and destruction of theirs and our Enemies, being the Pyrate
Coxinga and his Adherents.

Secondly, to obtain a free and unmolested Trade through the whole Empire of
China.

To which two chief Points are joined some others which our Masters have
commanded us, viz. to permit us to choose some convenient Place for Factory,
where there is a good Harbor for the securing of our Ships, and fit to fortify
against Coxinga's assaults, and to that end keep a small Garrison of Soldiers
there.

To promise to procure a Grant from the Great Emperor of China for that which
they shall Conclude with you about.

That if they join with us against Coxinga, we will follow their Advice and
Resolution: Nay, if they are inclined to drive Coxinga from Formosa, we will
assist them, and carry part of their Forces in our Ships thither.

Yet nevertheless, that we at present will use our Ships to seize and conquer
Coxinga's Jonks, which Sail to and from Iapan, and likewise to hinder his
Fishing behind the Mountain Tankoia on the South Side of Formosa, which begins
every year with eighty or a hundred Jonks in the latter end of November, and
ends about the middle of January. But these Articles are strictly to be
insisted upon, as of most concern for the destroying and disabling of the Enemy.

After delivery of your Letters you must wait for their Answers. If they should
ask you if you have ought else to request of them that is not mentioned in the
Letters, then tell them, That if they grant those, there is no other Business
of any consequence to Treat about. But if you observe them not to be willing to
consent to the chiefest Articles, you must ask them immediately what they
resolve to grant us. Then accept of all things which redound to our Profit, and
by all means extol our Strength, and what we are able to perform by force of
Arms, and the faithful Service which we shall be ready to do them when time
requires, in assisting them with all things, whereby they may see our fidelity:
nay, lend them our Ships and Men against the Enemy Coxinga, and all other
Enemies of the Empire; for recompense of all which they desire naught else but
a free Trade. If they should speak of Custom and other Taxes, desire them to
tell you what they amount to, if reasonable, consent to it; for our People
ought not to pay either more or less than their own Natives, which you are to
take notice of. We are afraid, that at present they will not permit us to
Traffic, nor Conclude on any thing concerning it, but deny the Request, and
only speak and debate about the business of War. If so, and observing that to
press it on any longer, or more, all other Business might be neglected, we
judge it convenient to take no Cognizance of it at this time; yet if any hopes
be, to procure leave for the Sale of those few Merchandise laden in some of the
Ships: what they are we desire you to see in the general Inventory of all the
Goods. It may be that they will direct you to the Court at Peking, there to
obtain the liberty of free Trade from the Emperor, and also to advise us to
send another Embassy from Batavia, which you may assure them shall be done the
next year. Yet nevertheless, if you cannot attain to our Desires, leave off
further Suit, that so we may avoid such vast Expense and Charge: but if they be
inclined to send to Batavia, you may seem to be very well pleased at it, and
promise to Transport them thither in our Ships, except they will send one or
two of their Jonks, which would be the better for us. Concerning the possessing
and fortifying of a peculiar Place, you may also desist from* if you see them
not to favor the Request, but to be satisfied that our Ships may lie in the
Haven of Hoksieu, and there drive a Trade, provided they can be assured to lie
safe, and without danger there. When you come to Agree with them concerning the
War with Coxinga and his Party with our joint Forces, take care that they
oblige themselves thereto by Writing, and with us declare themselves Enemies to
the same Coxinga and his Adherents, and that they shall not without our
knowledge, much less to our prejudice, agree with the Enemy, which we will do
also on our part. Moreover, make a strict enquiry, whether or no they have not
already Treated, and are inclined to be reconciled to him, if he should submit
himself to the Emperor; this may be suspected, because they say Coxinga is
dead, and his Son in Ayanny not concerned at it: Which if you observe, let them
by no means detain you, but hasten your self from thence and come to us; for
the Vice Admiral ought on all occasions to be in the Fleet, because his
Presence is continually required there: wherefore if he can come away before,
let Nobel tarry there so long till he thinks he can effect no more by staying.
If they desire us, with them, to agree with the Enemy, you may easily
understand on what Articles, and with what advantage and satisfaction it may be
done, though you conclude noton any thing.

If you can find out any means for the delivery of our Prisoners in Eymuy,
These were taken before by Coxinga.
let nothing be wanting to procure their liberty, because the General and
Council in Batavia have highly recommended their Release to us; but that we
should do nothing without acquainting them with it, and their consent. The
Hostage with his Retinue shall be kept so long in the Domburgh, till perhaps by
the advice of his Friends he may do something that may be requisite for that
Business, because he also longs for his Liberty. The Viceroy Singlamong and
General Taysong Lipovy have every one sent us a Letter by the Interpreter
Melman; we now therefore send an Answer to every one of them, to the same
effect and purpose as theirs were, with some small Presents, as appears by the
Copies which you have, to which I refer my self, desiring you to deliver them
at a convenient time, either with their Excellencies Letters, or afterward.
The Presents which belong to them, and are signified in their Excellencies
Letters, I have caused to be taken out of the Naerden, and put into the
Domburgh: By the same Copies you may see how they are Packed, and wherein they
consist, which at all times shall be ready upon your Order, whose Acceptance
you must in a manner press, although hitherto they have not been willing to
receive. Of the Merchandise which are only aboard the Domburgh, I also give
you Patterns, if they should chance to fancy any of them; and likewise of the
Goods sent along with you, that thereby you may see what Presents to give to
one or other, as you shall think fit.

Lastly, I desire you to promote and advance His Excellency's and Councels
Desires, which at present so highly concerns the Public, with all care and
diligence imaginable; and think, that if all things fall out successfully, you
will get no small honor and advancement by it, which God grant, into whose
Protection I commit you.

Aboard the Naerden Frigate, lying with the Fleet before the River of Hoksieu,
the 19th of September. 1662. Balthazar Bort.

The next day after, having Shipped all their Necessaries for the Journey, and
put the Presents into the Jonks, they took their leave of the Fleet, and Sailed
South and by West up the River of Hoksieu. Presently after Noon they passed by
a Town called Quanto, lying on the North-west Shore, about a Musket Shot up in
the Country.

This Quanto is Walled, being about half an hours Walk in circumference,
fortified with Bulwarks and Watch-Towers, and strengthened with a great
Garrison. Here, as in most Towns in China, are several Parades, for the Meeting
and Exercising of Foot and Horse, and to Train them up in all sorts of Martial
Discipline. There are also Exchanges, or Burses for the Sale of Merchandise,
besides Markets where the Country People bring their Fruits and Provisions to
sell.

A little farther the Agents passed by a populous Village called Sanwan, near
the Shore.

The Inhabitants of Sanwan are ingenious Artificers, viz. Weavers, Smiths,
Coopers, and other Laboring Trades, who live in peculiar Places of the Village
apart one from another, and every Precinct under a particular Governor, who
gives an account of all Differences and Misdemeanors to the chief Magistrate.

All the Villages through which they passed in the Territory of Fokien are
wild, and have daily Markets of Herbs, Fish, and Oysters.

After they passed on Southerly with their Retinue to the River which flows
East and by South into the Sea, and has a small Island in its Mouth, with a
Sandy Shelf in the Channel, where they found on the North-west Shore the
Village Sayon, and came after a little Sailing to the strong Fort Benantien, or
Minjazen, which is fortified with Towers, Walls, Bulwarks, and a broad Mole: it
lies three Leagues from Hoksieu, has the bigness of a small Town, with
several Streets and fair Houses, set forth with diverse Tradesmens Shops, and in
the middle a very large open Court, where on one side stands the Governors
House, and on the other a Pagode.

Here Van Campen and Nobel went ashore with their whole Retinue, to Complement
the Governor, and were received into the Fort by three Mandarins with the usual
Ceremonies, who conducted them into a great Temple; but they could not speak
with him by reason of his indisposition. After they had presented them
Bean-broth mixed with Milk (which is accounted the greatest honor they can show
to any Person) they returned with their Train into the Jonks, and after many
Complements took their Leave. Being got about half a League high, there
appeared a most delightful and pleasant Place on the South-east side, called
Plethoeu, or Pethou; and opposite to it on the Northwest Shore, a large Pagode,
named Possang, by them held for one of their Wonders.

On the other side of the River appears a spacious Area, built about with fair
Edifices, and planted with Gardens, and Banquetting-houses in them. About four
a Clock in the Evening they came to the South-east side, near a Stone Bridge,
built over the Water on Pillars and Arches, and covered close on the top with
long and thick Planks, from Arch to Arch on each side thereof are Rails of blue
Stone, here and there adorned with Dragons and Lions, Hew'n and Carved out.
Over this Bridge four Horsemen may conveniently ride abrest.

The twentieth, being Wednesday, they went in two Pallakins, or Horse-Litters,
The Agents come to Hoksieu.
carried by four Horses, over the Bridge to the City Hoksieu, there to
Complement the Viceroy Singlamong's Wifes Mother, and to present her with an
Amber Necklace, and to speak with the Governor: Being passed over the Bridge,
they found the Highways built, the Streets paved, and crowded with thousands
of People all along the City to the Palace, insomuch that they were scarce able
to pass for the Throng.

The Viceroys Palace, in which at that time his Wifes Mother resided, was The
Viceroy's Palace.
a handsome Edifice, surrounded with Walls of Freestone, with great Portals and
fair Gates, and guarded with Horse and Foot. At their entering they were
courteously received by the Viceroy's Mother-in-law, who conducting them into
a Hall furnished with Pictures and Stools, desired them to sit down. When
seated, they were entertained each of them with a Cup full of Bean-broth, and
afterward they were all placed before a little Table, to eat both boiled and
roasted Meats, served up in Plate of Massy Gold. The Viceroys Brother (for he
was also there) discoursed with them about several affairs, and amongst other
things, asked of them if they had as great and well built Towns in Holland as
they had in China? and if they had Horses, Cows, and Sheep there? to which they
answered, that they had: Then he inquired how long they were coming from
Holland to China? they replied, Six or seven Months. Then the Viceroy's
Mother, who had many Women waiting upon her, came to them, saying, That she
intended to have eat and drank with them, but her indisposition had hindered
her; but would Write in their behalf to her Son the Viceroy, and at their
return sit at Table with them: for you are (said she) in a strange Country
full of People, and therefore had need be careful to Travel circumspectly, that
you may meet with no inconvenience: Nay, she admired that they durst venture
themselves where they knew no Place, nor any Person. Van Campen being asked
what Place he bore, and how qualified, answered, He was Vice Admiral of the
Fleet: whereupon she replied, Then your Princes and Lords must needs wear rich
Apparel, and go bravely, being much taken with the Velvet Jump he had on. This
passed, Van Campen and Nobel civilly taking their Leave of the Lady, parted
from her, and went to the City Governor's House, Guarded both with Foot and
Horse; by which passing, and being entered, they soon returned, upon a Servant's
saying that his Lord was troubled with an Ague, and lay at rest in his Chamber,
so that at present there was no opportunity to speak with him, wherefore he
desired they would please to come again the next Morning: whereupon they were
carried in Pallakins out of the City, the Streets being so crowded with Men,
Women, and Children quite to the Bridge, where their Jonks lay, that they were
scarce able to make their way through.

The one and twentieth, being Thursday, they were Visited in their Jonks by
They come to the Fort Engely.
the Governor of the Fort Engely, and several Grand Mandarins, who giving them
a courteous welcome, Drank to each of them in Bean-broth. The Governor invited
them to Dinner; which they not daring to refuse, Rode with him to his House;
where after a noble Treat he presented Van Campen with a curious Tent to use in
his Journey, which folded, was but one Man's work to carry and pitch. When they
had all Feasted very plentifully, the Governor led them over a Bridge toward
the West Side of the Island whereon the Fort stood: near which lay a great
Village, and well peopled. Here, being conducted by the Governor, they saw
several great Temples hung round with burning Lamps, and adorned with Altars
and Images; into which entering upon curiosity, the Priests presented them Tea,
or Thee, and other Sweetmeats with more than ordinary respect. After a little
stay they were brought into a delightful Place, where with a Bow and Arrow
they shot at a Mark: and from thence as they passed toward their Vessels, they
went to the House of Hanlavia, Governor of the Fort Minjazen, where they were
again Treated. In the Evening they came to their Jonks, to take their repose as
they had done the Night before.

The two and twentieth in the Morning going again to Hanlavia, they presented
him with some red Cloth, thereby to obtain his favor and assistance in their
speedy dispatch to the Viceroy Singlamong. From thence they Rode to the City
Governor's House, that he might furnish them with People for their Journey:
where coming, they found him somewhat indisposed; yet nevertheless they had
Audience in the same Place where he generally sits with the chiefest of the
Country, consulting about public affairs. Upon their asking if he would be
assisting to them in their Journey to the Viceroy Singlamong and Taysing
Lipovy, he answered, That he would be ready to do all things that lay in his
power, saying he had Writ in their behalf to the Emperor at the Court at
Peking, and to the Viceroy Singlamong in Sinksieu, and provided two Mandarins
with ninety Men to Travel thither with them. Being asked if he thought it
convenient for the Admiral to put to Sea with eleven Sail, to Cruise up and
down to the Northward, if there he could, to annoy Coxinga and his Party, and
leave one Frigate, in which the Presents were, in the River Hoksieu: he replied,
That he durst not advise about it, but their Admiral in that case might do what
he thought fit; yet as he supposed, it were better that the Ships stayed there
till the Viceroy's coming home, that there might be a better understanding:
However, you may go (said he) to the Governor of Minjazen, Hanlavia, and he
will be better able to inform you in these punctillio's what to do. Hereupon
they leaving Hoksieu, went about Noon to Hanlavia, by whom they were invited to
Dinner; when taking opportunity to ask the same Question, they received the
like Answer, viz. That the Admiral might do what he thought fittest: all which
Van Campen and Nobel writ to the Admiral Bort, with their Opinions. A little
after Dinner they went with their Retinue into their Jonks, to proceed in their
Journey to Sinksieu, and came about three a a Clock after Noon to the Fort
Aulavia, or Lavyt, near a Ferry, where on the the Shore they were courteously
received by the Governor, and entertained with the customary honor of
Bean-broth.

The Fort Aulavia, surrounded with high Walls, has a strong Garrison both The
Fort Aulavia.
of Foot and Horse, and stored with all sorts of Ammunition and Provisions.
Here whoever pass over, they pay Custom for all those Goods and Commodities
that are after sold and dispersed through the Country.

Several Troops of Horse are daily sent out of this Fort, to keep the Ways
clear from Thieves, which have their lurking-places in the neighboring
Mountains.

After some stay here they set Sail again, and in the Evening came to the The
Village Lanpon.
Village Lanpon, where they stayed all Night. This Lanpon is a Place of good
Repute, being inhabited by many rich Chinese, which drive a Trade through all
the Country; and also much frequented by the neighboring People, because of a
Temple wherein they worship an Idol, said to give good and comfortable advice
in great misfortunes or adversities, and therefore visited daily both by rich
and poor, that in their Troubles they may receive some consolation from him.

The twenty third, being Saturday, at nine a Clock they leaving Lanpon, went by
Land in Palakins along a Cawsey paved with blue and gray Freestone. This day
they traveled through abundance of Rice-Fields, and Plains full of
Fruit Trees, and all manner of eatable Plants, scattered with many populous
Villages, and moistened by murmuring Streams, that flowing out of the Mountains
made it a most delightful Prospect. They also saw several ancient Monuments,
all Sculpt out with Imagery resembling Men, Horses, Lions, and Dragons; over
which stately Arches raised high, like our, Triumphal with Inscriptions in
Chinese Characters of Gold, being ancient Epitaphs in honor of the Deceased.
About Noon they came to two great Forts, and about six a Clock in the Evening
into the City Hokzwa; which entering, they were received by the chiefest of the
Town, and carried into a great House, provided for the most eminent Persons of
the Country in their Journeys.

Here they had sent them for Presents three Pigs, twenty Hens, and four Geese;
which they requited by returning some small Trifles. In the Night, by Order of
the Magistrates of the Town, a Guard was set about their Lodgings, that they
might suffer no injury by the Common People.

The twenty ninth, being Sunday, though they prepared for their Journey, yet
they could not set forward for want of Convoy, because a strong Party of three
hundred Horse was sent by the Viceroy's Mother, with Money and other Goods to
the Army at Sinksieu, to her Son Singlamong, for the paying of the Soldiers,
so that being forced to stay in Hokzwa all that day, they were visited by many
great and eminent Mandarins of the City, and presented with Oranges, Pears,
Chestnuts, Coco-Nuts, besides several other Fruits, two Pigs, five Geese, and
ten Hens, in requital for Money and Goods worth full as much. The People seemed
to be very obliging, when they heard that the Hollanders lay with a Fleet on
the Coast of China to join with them against the Islanders of Quemuy, and the
rest of Coxinga's Party. In the afternoon they viewed the Town.

This City Hokzwa, lying in a pleasant Place, encompassed with many delightful
The City Hokzwa.
Gardens, contains several Markets and great Plains, and appears beautiful with
diverse Triumphal Arches, and stately ancient Buildings, ranged close together
with Party-walls, not being usual in China. It has thick and strong Walls, or
rather Bulwarks, continually Guarded by many Horse and Foot. About an hours
walking from thence are many pleasant Groves, with Arbors, and other like
Receptions for such as Walk to refresh themselves in, where they call for all
sorts of Fruit whatever they have a mind to, so making themselves merry.

The twenty fifth, being Monday, they began their Journey anew about daybreak,
with a Convoy of fifty Tartars; and passing by several strong Holds, and
through many Villages, they came to two Rocks, which so straiten the Passage,
that two Carts or Wagons can scarce go between: at each Entrance stands a
Block-house, so that none can pass without leave. Upon the top of these Rocks,
where there is no kind of Mould to be seen, grow many Cypress and Ash-Trees.
About Noon passing by another Hold, the Governor invited them to Dinner, which
they modestly refused by their Interpreter; yet their Retinue had as much
strong Chinese Beer given them as they pleased to drink. Then proceeding on, in
the Evening they passed through a Walled City, and well Garrisoned; and a
little Southward from the City they took their repose in a Pagode, where
several of the chief Citizens visiting, for welcome presented them with several
Provisions, such as the Country afforded: in return whereof they gave them
some Spanish Ryals, and four Pieces of course white Linen: Besides, their
Followers were entertained with two great Pots of strong Chinese Beer, a Drink
very pleasing to their Palats.

The twenty sixth about Sunrising, being ready for their Journey, they had
such a concourse of Men, Women, and Children, which came to see them from all
places, that they were scarce able to pass along the Streets, for the Palakin,
or Sedan, in which the Vice Admiral Van Campen was carried, was often stopped and
held by the People to see his Face and speak with him: but because he could not
answer them, and his Interpreter not being able to come to him through the
Crowd, they let him pass. This Day they went by and through more Forts and
Villages, and in the Evening came to the City Hokexcho, where they stayed all
Night, being Entertained by the eminentest of the Town, and visited by many
ancient Merchants, which stayed with them so late, that they took but little
rest.

The City of Hokexcho lies but a days Journey from Hokzwa: whose Inhabitants
maintain themselves for the most part by Husbandry, (for there are few
Merchants) being a kind and hospitable People: for Hok signifies Good, and Zwa,
Bad.

Between Hokzwa and Hokexcho lies a Village, in which they make great
quantities of Porcelin.

The twenty seventh before Sunrising they betook themselves to their Journey,
accompanied with several Troops of Horse and Foot; and passed most by and
through several great strong Towns and Villages. About three a Clock in the
Afternoon they Rode through a great Town, and in the Evening arrived at a
strong Castle, where they were courteously received by the Governor, and first
entertained with Bean-broth, afterward caressed both with Meat and Drink;
which kindness they requited with other Presents.

The twenty eighth they proceeded again on their Journey very early, and in the
Afternoon, about three a Clock, arrived at another City, where they were
welcomed and presented by the Magistrates with Provision, and received again in
a bartering Return, as others had before: after which they drank Spanish Wine
and Brandy with the Agents, showing a great liking thereunto, having never
tasted such Liquor; so that it was midnight before they went away.

The twenty ninth, being Friday, they set forward again with the Dawn after
Daybreak, beholding very many large and sumptuous Tombs, and stately ancient
Buildings, besides several Triumphal Arches, adorned with Horsemen, Tigers,
Bears, Lions, and Dragons, hew'n out of Freestone, and the Arches beautified
with Golden Characters: Then they passed a long Bridge over the great River
Loyang, consisting of diverse Stone Arches, Paved with Free-stones of an
incredible size, some of which being about seventy Foot long, three and a half
broad, and half a Foot thick, on each side Railed in, and accommodated with
Benches of blue Stone, with the Honors of the Empire, as Lions, Dragons, and
the like, on several Pedestals.

The Chinese report this Bridge to have been built in one Night by the Angels,
and look upon it as a great Wonder.

At the Bridge-foot stood an old House, and in it several Figures of Men gilded
with Gold. In the same House also was a great blue Stone, inscribed with the
antiquity of this wondrous Bridge.

The middle Arch of this Bridge had lately been broke down, to hinder the
Enemy's Passage, about which they were then busy in mending, laying great
Beams of Timber over the Gap.

A little before Noon they came to the City Zwansifoe, where at the Gates they
were kindly welcomed by three Mandarins (sent thither to meet them by Santing
Houbethetok, Admiral of the Sea, and Governor of the Place,) and conducted into
a great Pagode, where they were civilly entertained with a Draught of honorable
Bean-broth: after having stayed a little while, they entered the City in company
with the same Mandarins, who carried them into a fair House, whither many of
the eminentest Citizens out of curiosity came to visit them.

The Letter from the Admiral Bort to Santing Houbethetok, with the Presents,
being a pair of Snaphance Pistols with Holsters, four Yards of Scarlet, and
four Pieces of fine Linen, were by the Agents two Interpreters Bedel and
Lakka, sent to him: but he told them, That he durst not receive any Letters or
Presents before they came back again from Sinksieu, and had spoke with the
Viceroy and General Lipovy: but he intended to have visited them, had not his
present indisposition hindered him.

But Houbethetok caused his Servants to carry them Oranges, Nuts, Chestnuts,
besides some Porkers, Hens, and Geese; for which they returned the Servants
good Spanish Coin.

The next day, being the thirtieth, they with their Retinue went to see the
City, whilst the Convoy made all things ready for their farther Journey.

Zwansifoe is a Place of great Trade, full of Shops and Merchandise, adorned
The City Zwansifoe.
with several Triumphal Arches made of blue Stone, whereon Men, Women, Horses,
Dragons, Tigers, Lions, Bears, Apes, were all presented in Graven Work, to the
Life, in their various Colors, and on the top the Names of those in honor of
whom they were erected. It has also three high Steeples, with Galleries about
them; besides many inferior Temples.

The Wall about the City being twenty seven Foot high, and of equal thickness,
is fortified with many Bulwarks, Moats, and Breast-works: upon the top of it
always lie heaps of Stones and Timber, for defense against sudden Storms or
Assaults.

This City has three Gates with winding Entrances, raised of great blue
Stones, and was never Conquered by the Tartars, but delivered up by Colonel
Houbethetok, conditionally, That he should still possess the Place of Governor:
and likewise because of this free Surrender, the old Magistrates kept their
several Offices, and the City their ancient Privileges and Liberties: yet as a
sign of Conquest, the Tartars caused all the Steeples to be pulled down, except
the three beforementioned. Coxinga once laid Siege to it, but was forced to
leave it, and depart with the loss of many Men.

In the Morning about nine a Clock they proceeded on their Journey, The City
Engeling.
and at Noon traveled by the ruined City Engeling, and all the day long past
through, and in sight of diverse strong Castles built of Stone, and many Villages.

About the Evening, they came to two great Forts, called Twaia, distant from
Forts Twaia.
each other a quarter of an Hours walking, whose Walls built of Freestone,
were twenty five Foot high, and twenty eight thick.

The first of October, in the Morning, the Agents leaving these Forts, came
about three a Clock with their Retinue, which consisted of above a hundred
Persons, Hollanders, Chinese, and Tartars, to the City Tanwa; surrounded with
a Stone-Wall, and Fortified with high Bulwarks and deep Trenches.

Tanwa is accounted one of the most delightful and populous Cities of all
China; City Tanwa*
seated in a rich Valley, abounding with plenty of all things, so that many
Merchants resorting thither, take up their Residence, to enjoy the benefit and
pleasure of the adjacent Country.

Without the City are many stately Monuments, where the Towns men make daily
Offerings to the Souls of their deceased Parents.

Three grand Mandarins well Mounted, and followed by a great Train of Servants,
bidding the Agents welcome, carried them into a stately Inn, to which they
ascended by seven Marble Steps; in it were many Chambers, all the floors neatly
Paved, and furnished with Chairs and Stools, Benches, and costly Bedsteds, to
accommodate Persons of Quality when they traveled; with Stable-rooms for an
hundred Horse, and Lodgings for twelve hundred Men: Here the Agents choosing
one of the most convenient Chambers, took their repose that Night.

The second being Monday, about nine a Clock, the Agents with all their
Attendance left Tanwa, and passing a large Stone Bridge, saw several Ruined
Towns and Villages, besides others yet in their Splendour, but commanded by
Garrisons.

A little before Sunset, they came to a Fort on the top of a Hill, which
whilst they ascended, they were met and courteously welcomed by the Governor;
from whom they understood, that the Islanders of Eymuy and Quemuy were upon a
Treaty of Peace with the Tartars, but he feared, that it would come to nothing:
This Night they Lodged in the Castle, where they had good Entertainment for
their Money.

The third, being Tuesday, the Agents set forward about three a Clock in the
Morning, and traveled by and through many Villages, coming at last to a Stone
Bridge, at each side Guarded with a Fort.

In the afternoon, the Agents passed by several Pagodes, where the Chinesy
Priests seemed to show them great Respect, Presenting them with Sweetmeats and
Tee: After some stay, proceeding on their Journey, came at last in sight of
Sinksieu, whither they were sent, not far from whence, they were met by Come in
sight of the City Sinksieu.
three Mandarins with their Attendants, sent from the Viceroy Singlamong, and
the General Lipovi, to Complement and welcome them.

After the Ceremonies were past on both sides, the Agents were by the Mandarins
Are fetched in.
carried to a great Pagode, from whence after a short Treat, they were
conducted through the City into a spacious Court, the usual place of Reception
for their traveling Grandees. This House was of so large Reception, that it
not only afforded Stable room for above a thousand Horse, but also Lodgings for
as many Men; having diverse large and handsome Chambers, furnished with stately
Bedsteds, Stools and Benches. Here the Agents took their repose, several
Soldiers being sent to Guard the House, from the overpressing intrusions of the
common People, which by thousands out of curiosity came thither to see and gaze
upon the Hollanders.

The Agents immediately gave notice of their arrival by their Interpretors,
Make their Arrival known, and desire Audience.
Pedel and Lakka, to the Viceroy Singlamong, and General Taysing Lipovi, with
request to grant them Audience, and suffer them to speak with him, that they
might deliver the General of Batavia's Letters, that so time might not be lost
in employing so stout a Fleet, as lay at present in his own River. Whereupon,
the Viceroy and General replied, That they were come a great and long Voyage
by Sea and Land, and were weary with traveling, thefore they should stay till
the next day, on which they should have Audience.

Mean while, several Mandarins came to Congratulate their welcome, bringing
with them diverse sorts of Fruit, as Oranges, Nuts, Chestnuts, and Pears;
besides Hens, Geese, and two Swine, for which they returned them Thanks, and
gave their Servants Money.

The fourth in the Morning, the Agents made themselves ready to deliver Ride to
the Army.
the small Presents and Letters from Batavia, to the Viceroy and General in
the Camp. About eight a Clock, twelve Horses were brought to their Lodging,
which they and their Attendance Mounted, and with two Mandarins Rode through a
great part of the City Sinksieu, by many fair and large Triumphal Arches. A
little Southward from the City ran a River, which having crossed, they came
into the Army, which lay about a Mile and a half distant, consisting of sixty
thousand Horse and Foot; five grand Mandarins attended by a File of
Musketeers, conducted the Agents with great honor to the Secretaries Tent, who
hearing of their coming, immediately carried them to a great Pavilion, where
the Viceroy Singlamong sat in Council with the General Taysing Lipovi,
besides two other great Lords, the one being Santing Hou Bethetok, and the
other Haitankon, Governor of Sinksieu.

The Floors of this Royal Pavilion were Matted; had three public Gates or
Entrances close by one another; through the middle most and greatest the
Viceroy passes only, and his Attendants through the other two. Coming close to
the Viceroy and General, the Agents were ordered to sit down and deliver their
Letters, which they did with great Ceremony; the Presents also were presented
and delivered to the Lords; all which were received very courteously, but they
would not accept their Presents, before they had a Warrant for so doing, by an
answer from the Emperor at Peking. But they kindly accepted of the small
Presents which the Admiral Bort had sent them; being twelve Pound and two
Ounces of Amber-Beads, strung on a Thread, to the number of twenty five; one
Amber Hourglass, and an Amber Cup.

The Presents from the Lord General and Council of Batavia, sent to the
Presents for the Viceroy.
Viceroy, were these following:

One Piece of Scarlet Green Cloth. Blue Cloth. One half Piece of Red Cloth.
One Piece of Red Crown Serge. Grass Green Crown Serge. Blue Crown Serge. Musk
Color Crown Serge. Black Crown Serge.
One Musket, Gilt and Polished. One Fire-Lock, Gilt and Glazed. One pair of
Polished Pistols, Gilt, with Holsters. One pair of Pocket Pistols. One Sword
with a Golden Hilt. Twenty Ounces of Blood Coral, upon one String, in an
hundred and ten pieces. Sixteen Ounces of Blood Coral, in one Polished Branch.
One Pound and four Ounces of Amber Beads, in fifty five pieces. One great
Bengael A kind of Iapan Chest of Drawers.
Alkatiff. Ten pieces of fine white Linen. One Pikol of the best Cloves. One
Case of Rose Water. Two hundred and sixty Katty of Sandal-wood, in three
pieces.
The Viceroy and General falling in Discourse with the Agents, asked how long
they had been from Batavia? Whereupon they answered, about seventy days: Then
they asked, in what time they could come from Holland to China? Answer was
made, in about eight Months; at which they marvel'd exceedingly, and likewise
at their answer to the question, If there were any Horses, Cows, Hogs, Sheep,
Fruit, and Herbage? and they replied, By thousands, and more than in China.
Next they inquired, Why they came with such a Fleet on their Coast? Whereto the
Agents said, To serve the mighty Emperor of China, and to prosecute that great
Pyrate Coxinga, to do him all the damage they could, both by Sea and Land;
because, said they, He without ever giving any notice or reasons thereof, came
with an Army, in a Warlike Fleet, the last Year in April, and set upon the
Netherlanders in the Islands of Formosa and Tayowan, and in nine Months time,
not only made himself Master of the Country, but also took the Castle Zelandia
from them into his own possession; therefore we seek to unite with the Emperor
of China his Forces, and make a League with him, to Engage Coxinga, both by Sea
and Land, till we have Conquered and brought him under the subjection of his
Imperial Majesty: Whereupon the Viceroy and General Replied, The Islanders of
Quemuy, and Eymuy have already Treated on Peace, and made ready their
Ambassadors to come to the Court of Peking, to obtain the Emperor's
Ratification. Being asked upon what Articles, they began to smile, and
answered, they could not tell.

Then the Hollanders inquired, if they knew where their Prisoners were? and if
there was no likelihood to get them released? They replied, they were in
Quemuy, and that they would use their best endeavors in a short time to send
them to their Ships. Then the Ambassadors proposed, if they might not take
possession of some place on the Main Continent of China, or on some Island, for
the Harboring their Ships? They answered, you are free to choose any good
place, either on the Main, or any Island where you please, and to take
possession of it; and likewise to put into all Havens, Bays, and Rivers on the
Coast of China, to take in Water and Firing, buy Provisions, and in bad Weather
seek for a safe Harbor. To which purpose We will Command Our Subin all Havens,
Bays, and Rivers, to aid and assist you, which We doubt not but they will
perform.

The Agents asking them to Grant them leave for the disposing those few
Merchandise for Money, which were laden in their Ships, to pay and refresh
their Men with. The Viceroy and General answered, That they had no Power, but
they must have Order from the Emperor at Peking; but had they moved it before,
they might perhaps have had Authority to Grant.

After these Discourses ended, every one according to the fashion of the
Country, was placed by himself at a Table; viz. the Viceroy Singlamong, the
General Taysang Lipovi, the Admiral Santing Houbethetok, the Governor of
Zwamsifoe, the Vice Admiral Van Campen, Constantine Nobel, and Bodel the
Assistant, beside several Mandarins. Their Meat was all brought and set upon
the Tables in Golden Chargers; and their Drink filled out in Cups of Gold,
rarely Imboss'd; so that their Entertainment was very splendid. After Dinner,
the Viceroy carried them through his whole Army, and showed them his Forces,
making some of his Soldiers to be Exercised before them. Toward the Evening,
the Agents taking their leave, returning humble thanks for the Honor they had
received, they Mounted their Horses, and Rode toward their Lodgings, where the
remainder of the Feast and Banquets which they had left at Dinner was brought
after them; and according to the manner of the Country, they were visited and
Complemented by diverse Persons of Quality.

The fifth being Thursday, the Agents prepared themselves to deliver their The
Agents go to the General Lipovi.
Excellencies Letters from Batavia, to the General Taysang Lipovi, with the
Letter, and small Presents sent to the same Lord, from Admiral Bort; viz. One
Pound and four Ounces of Amber; one String of fifty five Corals; one Amber
Hourglass; with a tender of the other Presents sent from Batavia, which were
yet on board.

About eight a Clock, the Tartars brought eight Horses to the Agents Quarters,
with which, they Rode with their Attendants into the Field, about a Canon shot
from the Viceroy, to the General Lipovi.

Coming into his Presence, the Agents made their Obeisance, delivering the
Letter, and were commanded to sit down; with the Letter they also proffered him
the Presents, which were for the same reasons as the Viceroy Singlamong gave,
refused. The Contents of the Letter were thus.

John Maetzuiker Governor, and the Council for the Netherland States in the
Country of India, send this Letter with our kind Salutation, to Taisang Lipovi
General, and Deputy Governor of the Territory Fokien, for the Great Emperor of
Tartary and China.
SO soon as Our Governor of Tayowan, had received Your Highness's Letter, and
understood that You would in a short time March with a great Army against
Coxinga, that all means possible might be used thereto; so by Our Order, he
prepared five Men of War, which he sent to the Bay of Ingeling, to Engage with
the forementioned Coxinga; but the Ships were by unexpected bad Weather stopped
in their Voyage; after which We also had the Misfortune, that Coxinga after a
ten Months Siege took Our Castle of Tayowan; but had the Commander of it been a
Valiant Soldier, (who is to be sufficiently punished for his Cowardice) it
could not possibly have fallen into his Possession.

All these Accidents and Misfortunes have occasioned, that We have not been in
a condition to serve you, and satisfy Singlamong and Your Highness's Desires:
Therefore We entreat You not to take it ill, nor think that We have been
wanting in Our Endeavors; for We heartily Declare, jointly with the Emperor of
China, to seek and use all means to Ruin Coxinga and his Party; with this
Proviso, that We may put into all Harbors, and drive an unmolested Trade; and
also to take a place in possession on the Continent of China, without which We
should not be able to do Coxinga the intended Damage: So that We desire Your
Highness to be assisting to us in this Business, and We promise if that may be
performed, to clear the Chinesy Seas from that Pirate.

And to show that We on Our part, really intend what We Propose; We have at
present sent to the Bay of Hoksieu twelve Men of War, and a considerable number
of Soldiers, furnished out with all things fit for the Service, in whose sight,
We believe Coxinga will not dare to venture forth to Sea. The Admiral Balthazar
Bort, whom We have made Chief Commander of them, has Order to join with Your
Highness's Forces, and prosecute all such Adventures as shall happen; to which,
God grant a good and happy Event.

To Salute the Lord Singlamong, and Your Highness, in Our behalfs, and to speak
with You about several Affairs; We have expressly sent with these Letters, Our
Agent Constantine Nobel, whom We desire Your Highness to receive Courteously,
and Credit his Words; for all things shall be to Our Content, what he shall
Treat with Your Highness about; and as a sign of Our good Inclination toward
You, We send to Your Highness the underwritten Presents, with Request, that
Your Highness would be pleased to accept of.

One Piece of Green Cloth. Blue Cloth. Black Cloth. Half a Piece of Scarlet.
Half a Piece of Stammel, in one Case.
One Piece of Red Crown Serges in a Bale. Grass Green Crown Serges in a Bale.
Blue Crown Serges in a Bale. Musk Color Crown Serges in a Bale. Black Crown
Serges in a Bale.
One long Fowling-Piece. One pair of Pistols and Holsters. One Sword with a
Gilded Hilt, in a Case. Eighteen Ounces and a half of Blood Coral, in an
hundred and eight pieces. Three Pound and three Ounces of Amber, in four
pieces. One Pound and an Ounce of Blood Coral, in fifty four Pieces, in a Box.
Six Pieces of fine white Linen, in a Pack. Half a Pikol of Cloves, in a Bag. A
Case of Rose Water. An hundred eighty five Pound of Sandal-Wood in three
Pieces.
From the Castle in Batavia, June the 21. in the Year 1662. John Maetzuiker.


The Letter to the Viceroy was written almost after the same manner, viz. to
Request a Free Trade through the Empire of China.

After delivery of the Letters, and Complements from the Lord General and
Council, with Wishes of long Life to his Highness Lipovi, that he might Triumph
over his Enemies; they fell into Discourse about business concerning the
occasion of their coming thither; as in the Audience the day before, the
General had understood already: They Requested him that he would be assisting
to the Viceroy, in the releasing of the Hollanders, in number thirty nine,
thirteen Men, six Women, seven Children, and thirteen Slaves and Slavesses)
which were said to be Imprisoned on the Islands Euymuy, or Quemuy, and exchange
them for a Mandarin, and his Servants, being of Coxinga's Party, and came over
with the Agents from Batavia; whereupon General Lipovi promised to do his best
Endeavors, and send the released Prisoners aboard.

The General being also asked, If the Netherlanders might not Sail in and out
of the Bays, Havens, and Rivers on the Coast of China, to fetch Water and Wood,
and buy Provision for their Money, or in time of bad Weather, to come into any
Harbor. He answered, All Havens, Bays, and Rivers are freely open for you, to
fetch Water, Wood, and buy Provision; nay, that which is more, said he, We will
from this time forward, send to all Harbors, Bays, and Rivers, that are
inhabited by the Subjects of this Empire, to aid and assist you in all things;
and if you want Money, We will furnish you with it.

Lastly, being asked, If his Excellency could not assist the Netherlands in the
permitting of a free Trade through the Empire: He replied, That to promise such
a thing was not in his Power, but must be granted by the Emperor at the Court
of Peking; yet promised, that he would write in their behalf about it to the
Emperor, if possible, to grant them a free Trade, which was a business that the
Merchants in the City Hoksieu much Requested and longed for. But the General
Lipovi wondered extremely, that the Admiral Bort should go out of the River
Hoksieu with twelve Men, leaving only one behind with the Presents, when as,
said he, the Admiral Borts intentions are not known to the Viceroy nor my
self; which seemed very strange to the Agents themselves.

This Discourse ended, they were Treated and Served in Silver Dishes, Plates,
and Goblets, Embossed after the same manner as at the Viceroy's.

Dinner being ended, the Agents desired leave to depart, but the General Lipovi
modestly entreated them to stay, and be Merry a little longer; asking them
likewise if they had ought else to impart to him; whereupon they answered,
Nothing but what they had already acquainted his Excellency with, viz. the
releasing of their Prisoners; On which he made answer, that he would loose no
time, but do his best endeavor, and shorly send them aboard.

Then the Agents inquired about Coxinga's Death; to which the General replied,
That he had been Deceased a considerable time, and that those of the Isles of
Quemuy and Eymuy had Treated with them about a Peace, and were sending
Ambassadors to Peking, to get the Emperor to ratify it.

Lastly, Seeing their importunity for dispatch, he said, Why are you so hasty
in all your Business? every thing must have its time. About eighteen days
hence, I am to be at Hoksiu, with the Viceroy Singlamong, then We will consult
together with the Governor of Hoksiu, if you may sell those Commodities that
are in your Ships, which to my judgment may be done by the way of connivance.

The Agents having thus received answers, rewarding the Servants, took their
leaves, and Rode to the Inn, whither all the Meat that was left on their Tables
was brought in Chinesy That is, Baskets.
Suebas.

About the Evening, nineteen Jonks came thither from the Isles of Quemuy and
Eymuy, Laden with Pepper, Cloth, and other Merchandise; wherefore none of the
Netherlanders were permitted to go that day, nor the next out of their Lodgings.

Yet the Agents sent out Ships to enquire what those of the Isles Bartered
their Commodities for, who coming back, informed them, that they exchange Rice
and other Commodities; for the Inhabitants on those Isles, wanted Provision
extremely, because the Tartars had Burnt and Ruined all the Towns, Villages,
and Hamlets, which stood along the Shore, on the Main of China, leaving nothing
but heaps of Rubbish to testify their former being.

Neither were any People allowed to live within three Leagues of the Shore, for
those that were found in the forementioned Limits, were put to Death without
Mercy, so to prevent all manner of supply, either of Provisions or Merchandise
to go from those or the Main to their Associates, the public Enemy.

In the Evening came three Negro's, who could speak Portuguese, and running
away from Makou, a Factory of Portugal, were now in service amongst the Tartar
Horse; these entering the Agents Lodgings, fell upon the Hollanders with
reproachful Language.

The seventh being Saturday, the Agents Rode in the Morning with their The
Agents address themselves to the Viceroy, and General in the Army.
Attendants to the Viceroy Singlamong, and General Lipovi into the Army, with
Request to both, That they would be pleased to Sign what they had in words
promised them, that they might give it to their Masters, the Lord General, and
the Lords of the Indian Council, and to the Admiral Bort, viz. that they
promised to do their best endeavors, if it were possible, to send the Prisoners
aboard the Hollanders Ships; and secondly, that they may put into all Harbors,
Havens, and Rivers, on the Coast of China with their Ships, and to Sail to and
from all Islands, to get Water, Firing, and Provisions for Money, for their
Seamen; and in bad Weather, choose any good Harbor to secure their Vessels in.
Thirdly, That those Goods which were in their Ships, might be privately sold in
Hoksieu; whereto the Viceroy answered about eighteen or twenty days since, (as
I said before) I am to be in Hoksieu, then I will consult with the Governor, if
you may sell those Goods there, which you have brought in your Ships, which I
no ways doubt.

But as to what concerns the Journey of your Forces with ours, to Ruin Coxinga
and his Party, there is no more to be said of it, for those of the Isles are
now Treating with us concerning a Peace, so that the Admiral must be silent
therein; yet if he should chance to meet with any of their Jonks, or Vessels at
Sea, or in Harbors, Havens or Rivers, he may take and carry them away;
nevertheless, it would be better to let them pass, rather than to disturb the
Coast of China with such sudden Alarms.

Then the Agents made a complaint to the Viceroy, and General of the three
Negro's, that abused them the other Night; whereupon they were immediately
brought, and severely punished before them.

Lastly, The Viceroy desired the Ambassadors, that their followers would stay
and be merry with them, and show some skill in their way of Dancing, but they
making excuses for them, and taking their leave, went to Sinksieu.

The eighth being Sunday, in the Morning, the Chinesy Interpreter Lakka, with
the two Hoksiean Mandarins (belonging to the Viceroy's Mother) were sent to
the Viceroy in the Army, to request, that the Agents might return to Hoksieu.

After some stay, the Viceroy sent some of his Servants with fifteen Horses
Sadled and very richly furnished to their Lodgings, to carry them through the
City to the Army.

Having therefore made ready some small Presents, they mounted, and rode
directly to the Army, addressing themselves in an humble manner to the General,
and the rest of the Captains, giving them thanks for the Honor they had
received. Hereupon, according to order, the Interpreter Lakka appearing,
proffered the Viceroy, in the Vice Admiral John van Campen's Name, a great
Case with fifteen Flasks of Brandy, sixteen Rummers, sixteen Beer-glasses, six
handsome Knives, with a Bever Hat.

The General Taising Lipovi received from the Hands of the same Interpreter, in
the Admirals Name, a Bever Hat, a pair of Pistols and Holsters, eight Flasks of
Brandy, eight with Spanish Wine, three Knives, three Rummers, and three
Beer-glasses.

The Presents given to Haitangkong, Governor of Hoksieu, was a Castor, six
Dutch Knives, three Rummers, three Beer-glasses, six Flasks with Spanish Wine,
and six with Brandy.

The Lord Santing Houbethetok, Admiral of the Sea, and Governor of the City
Zwansifoe, was also presented with a Castor, five Flasks of Spanish Wine, and
five of Brandy, three Rummers, three Beer-glasses, and five Dutch Knives; all
which, though of a small value, were accepted with extraordinary kindness.

After this, the Agents had a long Discourse with these four Great Ministers,
who promised to assist them in all that lay within their Power, alleging, as a
proof thereof, That they had already sent their Generals Letter to the Emperor,
and written in their behalf; so that they did not doubt to get them License for
a Free Trade through the whole Empire: But at last the Viceroy added,

You Hollanders must not be too hasty; for We are not to be forced Viceroy's
Discourse to the Hollanders.
to grant any thing to you; much less can We join our Forces, and make a League
with you, against the grand Pyrate Coxinga, both by Sea and Land, before We
have Order from the Emperor at his Court in Peking.

We have (continued he) Power to perform what We have promised you; As, Freedom
to put into all Havens, Bays, and Rivers lying on the main Coast of China and
the adjacent Isles, to fetch Water, Wood, and buy Provision, and furnish your
selves with other Necessaries; nay, We will accommodate you with it upon a free
Account: Nay more, you have full License to take a convenient place in
possession, which is provided of a good Harbor, either on the main Coast of
China, or on one of the Islands in the River Hoksieu, or on one of these
Places, Tenhai, Sotiha, Kitat, or Onkia, every one of which have large and safe
Havens for the accommodation of many Ships.

As to what concerns your Prisoners, We will speedily send away Letters to the
Governors of the Islands Quemuy and Eymuy, to inquire if they be there? If so,
We promise to procure their Liberty, and send them aboard your Ships.

Lastly, The Viceroy and General caused the Interpreter Lakka to tell them,
That if they would stay four or five days in Sinksieu, they should have an
Answer of their Letters from the Governors of the Islands, and so hear if the
Prisoners be there, or not: But if they would depart, they must tarry sixteen
or seventeen days in Hoksieu, for the Viceroy and Generals coming thither,
because they were desirous to see their Forces and Fleet; mean while they would
consult with the Provincials of Hoksieu, and then give their Resolution by the
Governor, Whether the several Cargoes which they had in their Ships might not
be sold in private. Likewise the Interpreter being so commanded, further told
them, That it had been better that their Admiral had staid in the River
Hoksieu, and not gone to Sea, because he would effect little by so doing; for
along the Seacoast we have nothing but ruined Cities and Villages, where some
poor Fishermen, with their Vessels and Nets, with leave of the Governors, live
to maintain themselves, because all the greatest Towns and Villages in those
Parts were by the Emperors Order pulled down to the Ground, to prevent the
sending of Provisions and Merchandise to the Islands Eymuy and Quemuy, by which
means Coxinga and his great Forces being much straightned, he betook himself,
with all his Army and Jonks, to Formosa, and not only won that, but Tayowan
also, leaving only some small Garrisons of Soldiers on those Isles; yet if by
the Treaty now on Foot a Peace be concluded, the Hollanders may easily obtain
it of us again.

Hereupon the Vice Admiral Campen directed the Interpreter to tell the
Viceroy, That the Hollanders hoped, that now would have been the only time to
enter into a League with the Great Cham of Tartary, and Emperor of China, that
joining their Forces, they might reduce all under the Subjection of his
Imperial Majesty.

Whereupon the Viceroy returned, That is done already, and needs no more to be
spoken of: We are now at a Cessation of Arms with the Governors of the Islands;
but if the Emperor has or will accept of the Peace, We know not; yet it has
proceeded thus far, that young Coxinga and all his People will obey, and submit
themselves to the Emperor, by shaving off their Hair, except one Tuft, and also
become Tributaries; only they demand a peculiar Government, and Garrisons for
their own Soldiers; which whether the Emperor will grant, is much to be
doubted: However, you must stay sixty or seventy days for an Answer from the
Emperor at Peking, viz. If you shall have a Free Trade granted through all
China? Which We suppose may be done.

But Van Campen ordered the Interpreter Lakka to tell the Viceroy and General,
That in Peking were many subtle Jesuits and Priests, who bore great spleen to
the Hollanders, and sought to scandalize and make them seem odious to the
Emperor, because of their difference in Religion among themselves, and likewise
for the War maintained by the Hollanders against the two Mighty Kings of Spain
and Portugal, to whom these Jesuits and Priests were Confessors.

The Viceroy and General made answer, That for the same Reason must the
Tartars, who under their Emperor the Great Cham of Tartary, have by force of
Arms subdued and taken the whole Empire of China, be accounted a despicable
People by the Jesuits, because they had done the same thing with the
Hollanders; adding, That the Hollanders were the welcomer to them in China, and
that they would look to the Priests and Jesuits somewhat better than they had
done heretofore. Thus ended the Discourse.

Then the Viceroy and General, in the presence of many great Mandarins,
entertained the Agents and their Retinue, who sat every one at a particular
Table, furnished with variety of Meat, served in Gold and Silver Dishes, and
being very merry, drunk the Emperors, and the Hollanders General John
Maetzuiker's Health.

Then the Viceroy presented each of them with two Pieces of Silk Stuffs, and a
Silver Plate, whereon their Names were engraven in Characters or Letters Silver
Plates given by the Viceroy to the Agents*
of Gold: These Plates served them as a Pass, with which they might, without
danger, travel through all the Empire of China, and every where be acknowledged
as Lavyaes, that is, Lords.

The General likewise gave them each two Pieces of Chinese Silk Stuffs, and one
Silver Plate; for which the Agents humbly returned them both thanks, and
likewise for the Honor and Favor which they had been pleased to show them.

The Plate given by the General to Van Campen was the biggest and thickest,
weighing above twenty Ounces, and eight or nine Inches in Diameter: The
undermost or greatest part is quite round, and neatly impressed in the middle
with six gilded Chinese Letters; the Edges about it embost with Flowers, and
gilt. On the top, for an Ornament, was like a Handle, a piece Scallop'd, the
Edges gilt, and the middle wrought with Leaves and Flowers.

The other Plate, being the Viceroys, was much lighter, weighing not above six
Ounces, very thin, and no way so well gilded or flowr'd at the Edges, but only
on the Handle, having in the middle sixteen or seventeen Chinese Characters.

Besides these, every one of the Attendants had a Silver Cognizance given them;
but much lesser and lighter than the other.

Upon the Hollanders first arrival, the Viceroy sent a Letter to the Emperor,
informing him of their Intention; and likewise another to the Admiral Bort,
whom he desired to stay for his coming, because he was very desirous to see
their Fleet, and to that end, for encouragement, proffered to furnish them with
Provisions at his own Charge: But Bort being gone with the Fleet toward the
North, before the Viceroys Letter came to his Hands, and the Vice Roy coming
afterward in vain, it was resented very ill; yet at last he seemed pacified,
when told, That it happened through the mistake of not delivering the Letters in
good time.

And now the Ambassadors having leave to return, took their Farewell with many
Ceremonies, complemented by the Viceroy and General after the manner of the
Tartars, then wishing them a safe Return, they commanded seven Mandarins to
conduct them through the Army, beyond all the Guards: From whence they rode
over a great Bridge, into the City, to their Lodgings.

The City Sinksieu, lying eleven days Journey into the Country, is cut City
Sinksieu.
through the middle by a River, which takes its Original out of a Mountain,
about an Hours walk beyond the Fort Lantyn: It stands environed with a Stone
Wall, broad enough for a Cart and Horses to go upon, and set full of long
Poles, pointed with a sharp Iron like a Scythe, with which they can cut a Man
asunder at one stroke.

The City has handsome Streets* paved with Freestone, high Buildings, large
Pagodes or Temples of blue Stone, several Houses and Shops well furnished with
all manner of Silks, Pourcelan, Linen, and other necessary Commodities.

All the Windows of the Houses were filled with Spectators, and the Streets on
both sides crowded with thousands of People, who out of curiosity came to see
the Hollanders, many of whom, as they passed by, wished them all happiness, and
a prosperous Journey.

Being past through the City with all their Train, which consisted in seventeen
Hollanders, about a hundred to carry their Baggage, and fifty Horse and Foot,
sent by the Viceroy as their Guard and Convoy, they rode in four days to
Zwansifoe, from whence in the Evening they came to a great Village named
Chinhoe, where they were welcomed by three Mandarins, and conducted into a
spacious Pagode, wherein the Images sat on Stools and Tables, being there
kindly entertained and treated by the Priests.

The ninth the Ambassadors set forth very early out of Chinhoe, and traveling
all day, at night arrived at a strong Hold, where they intended to take up
their Lodging for that night; but they were carried into a Mandarins House, and
accommodated very generously, where amongst others they saw three Ladies, one
of whose Feet (with Shoes and all) were but six, another five and a half, and
the third five Inches long, occasioned from the straight swaddling of their Legs
and Feet in their Infancy, after the Chinese manner; for Women with great Feet
they account homely, and those that have little Feet, Beauties; so that the
bigger they are, the lesser they strive to make their Feet.

The tenth setting forward again, they traveled by several ruined Villages;
They saw also nine strong Castles, and many long*hair'd Chinese Heads, hanging
in Baskets on Trees; for all the Chinese of Coxinga's Party, which refused to
cut their Hair, were (when found) by the Emperors Command decollated, and their
Heads hanged up in that manner.

In the Evening they came to the City Tamwa, where they were received by City
Tamwa.
three Mandarins, conducted to a great House like a Court of Guard, and
entertained with variety of Meats.

The Eleventh in the Morning they left Tamwa, and proceeding on their Journey,
went through several other Villages and Fortifications; in the afternoon coming
to the Castle Tamhoe, they retired thither to rest themselves, Fort Tamhoe.
because Constantine Nobel was much troubled with an Ague, where the Governor
entertaining them with variety of Dishes, they made by several Presents a civil
Return.

The twelfth they left Tamhoe, and traveled that day by five great Villages,
and many Garrisons, and at Noon arrived at the City Zwansifoe, where met by
City Zwansifoe.
the Mandarins, and conducted into an ancient Building: After a little stay,
they passed on to Santing Houbethetok his House, a Man of great Quality, and
Governor of this City, whom they proffered the Presents sent him by the Admiral
Bort, viz. A pair of Pistols, five Dutch Else of Scarlet, and four Pieces of
fine Linen; but because they seemed to Van Campen and Nobel too little, they
added a Demy-castor, five Dutch Knives, three Rummers, three Beer-glasses, five
Flasks of Brandy, and five of Sack; all which Santing Houbethetok received, and
caused to be brought to him by his Servants; and having treated the Ambassadors
very splendidly, gave each of them two Chinese Rolls of Silk, and a great
Silver Medal, whereon with Golden Letters his Name was engraven, which was a
Pasport, signifying, That whoever bore it were Persons of Quality, and so to be
looked upon as no less than Lavyaes, that is, Lords, or Fathers. This done,
they began a long Discourse about the Dutch and Chinese Wars, and also that of
Coxinga. Lastly, they desired his Assistance in the procuring for them a Free
Trade in China; of which he seemed no ways to doubt, saying, Were your Ships
here hard by, or in the River, I would buy all your Commodities. Having
discoursed a little while, and been plentifully feasted, they took their
leaves, and rode to their Lodging, where diverse Mandarins, out of curiosity,
came to visit and speak with them, and bringing Fruit and Sweetmeats, kept
them company most part of the Night.

The thirteenth at daybreak the Agents left Zwansifoe, and traveled until
they reached Zwansehoo, a Place of very considerable strength, into which they
Fort Zwansehoo.
were received by three Mandarins, who gave them a very handsome Entertainment.

The fourteenth, being Saturday, they left Zwansehoo, and going on all day,
came toward Evening to a well-guarded Place called Enwacho, where they took
their Repose that Night in a Temple, in which they were nobly accommodated by
the Priests.

On Monday Morning, the sixteenth, the Agents set forward again, and that night
reached the City Enwa, into which being conducted by three great Mandarins,
City Enwa.
they were brought into a great Walled Pagode, wherein above fifty Chinese
Priests having their abode, gave them a welcome Reception.

Many Apartments were in this Pagode, every one furnished with various Images,
which being as big as the Life, sat clothed in rich Apparel, on Stools, round
about Tables: All the Priests offered Incense to these their Idols, before whom
also burnt many Lamps, with taboring on a Drum, and singing.

The next day the Vice Admiral Van Campen presented the Priests with twenty
Crowns of Silver Coin, for which they returned him many complemental Thanks,
after the Chinese manner.

The same day proceeding further on, they passed a most delightful and rich
Country, which had not been wasted by the War, but remained still in its full
Glory: Here they saw diverse well built and walled Villages, and likewise many
ancient Structures, and beautiful Tombs, each of which had a convenient
Entrance, and within that an arched Passage leading to the Grave, where they
burnt Offerings to the Dead. There were also Tombs on which lay great Turtles
carved of blue Stone, and others adorned with Columns, and arched above.

In the Evening they arrived at Fort Lantongzwa, standing on Mount Tishoo, Fort
Lantongzwa.
into which they were introduced by three Mandarins, and conducted to the
Governors House, who entertained them nobly, and had a long Discourse about the
Dutch, Tartar, and Chinese War.



The eighteenth they began their Journey about Noon, not able sooner to get Men
to carry them and their Goods, and traveled toward the Evening through a
great unwall'd Village, where they were invited to a civil Treat by a grand
Mandarin.

Here the Agents found five Chinese, which a few days before were fled with a
Jonk from Tayowan, amongst which was one who smatter'd so much broken Dutch,
that Van Campen could understand when he told him, That Coxinga, and the
General Bethekok, two such Leaders that China afforded not the like, being
overpowered and straightned by the Tartars, both despairing, ended their days
in Tayowan, where since happened such a Famine, that many died, suffering by
extremity of want.

At the Evening arriving at the City Hokzwa, three Mandarins led them to a
spacious House, whereto all Governors, when they travel about Public Affairs,
are conducted; for these Houses, as we said before, have many large Chambers*
furnished with good Beds, and all manner of Furniture, both for their Lodging
and Diet, with large Out-rooms for Servants, and Stables for Horses. The
Governor of the Town sent the Agents good store of fresh Provisions. After
Supper many Grandees of the City, and two Mandarins that came lately from
Peking, visited them, who told them, that all the News there was, that the
Peace between the Emperor and Coxinga would not be concluded, because the
Islanders of Eymuy and Quemuy would have their own Governors and Soldiers. They
also acquainted them of the sudden Death of Coxinga's Envoy in his Journey to
Peking, and that there was no News of sending another in his stead.

Thursday, being the nineteenth, a great Train of People rode through the City,
that came from Hoksieu, and were going to Sinksieu, to the Viceroy, with
Clothes and other Goods, and also with News of his Wives Mothers Death, which
forced the Agents to stay for Men to carry their Necessaries. Mean while the
Vice Admiral Campen went to view the City, and walking along, met with a Slave
that was run away from Macaw, and served now in the Chinese Army as a Soldier,
who leading him out of the City, showed him a Christian Temple, where,
according to the Slaves Relation, Father Martinius, famous for his Writing of
the Chinese Atlas, and other remarkable Antiquities of that People, died thirty
seven days before.

Anno 1653. this Martinius came with a Portuguese Frigate from Macasser to
Batavia, Martinius Hist. of China, published in 1653.
after having been ten or twelve Years in the Empire of China, where he
preached the Gospel, and converted, as they say, above two thousand Souls, and
went the same Year from Batavia in the good Ship the White Elephant, commanded
by the forementioned John Van Campen, to Holland; but the Ship running into
Bergen in Norway, Martinius traveled from thence through the Sound to
Amsterdam, where he published the forementioned Works.

At Noon leaving Hokzwa, and proceeding on their Journey, in the Evening Leave
Hokzwa*
they entered a Village, and according to custom went into a great Pagode,
where they were courteously entertained by the Priests, and took repose that
Night.

On Friday Morning, being the twentieth, setting out very early, they rode
through a Village abont an English Mile and a half long, which the Night before
was the greater part burnt down by Thieves, and in the Fire about a hundred
Men, Women, and Children consumed to Ashes, or otherwise murdered.

About Noon having passed the Village, they were brought to a great House where
the Chinese kept Watch. Here was but one Mandarin, who received the Agents
very friendly, and seemed heartily to rejoice that they had not shared in the
last nights Calamity. In the afternoon they took their leave, and went, being
guided by the Mandarins, to the Shore of an Inland River, where they and their
Retinue Embarked themselves in a Vessel that lay ready for to carry them to
Hoksieu. Toward Night they came to Lavyit, or Anlavja, a Stronghold, Fort
Anlavja.
built on the top of a Mountain: Near which was a Ferry for the ease of
Travelers.

The one and twentieth, being Saturday, in the Morning they came to Lamthay,
belonging to Hoksieu, where they were kindly received by diverse Mandarins, and
the Governor of the City Engeling, who nobly entertained them. After Dinner
they were conducted through the City, and showed may ancient Edifices, and
spacious Pagodes, or Temples. At Night they returned to their Vessel,
notwithstanding the Governor of Minjazen proffered them his House for their
Lodgings.

The two and twentieth they sent the Chinese Interpreter Lakka, with two
Mandarins, to the City Hoksieu before them, and prepared themselves with some
Presents of Scarlet, Crown-Serge, and Bays, to give to Hanlavja the Governor of
Minjazen, and likewise to the Ruler of Hoksieu: who hearing of their arrival by
the Interpreter Lakka, sent them fifteen Saddle-Horses: But Van Campen not
being very well disposed, staid in the Barque, ordering Constantine Nobel to
take the Presents, and ride with all their Attendants to Hoksieu, where after a
kind Reception, toward Evening he returned to Lamthay, to the Vessel.

The next day, being the twenty third, the Mandarin of Lamthay invited the
Agents to Dinner, which they would willingly have put off; but fearing his
Displeasure, they granted his Request. Many great Mandarins, besides the
Governors of Minjazen and Engeling, were present at this Feast, which was ended
to the general satisfaction of all, with great jollity and good cheer. The
Chinese Lords advised the Agents to stay seven or eight days longer, to
congratulate the Viceroys Return, and for the farther accomplishing their
Business; promising them their Assistance in their Request, for selling those
Merchandises that were in the Ships.

The twenty fourth, being Tuesday, in the morning Van Campen and Nobel rode
both to Hoksieu, to complement the Governor and other Mandarins, and likewise
to present them with five Else of Scarlet, a piece of Crown Serge, and a
Demy-Castor; which the foresaid Lords received very courteously, promising to
be assistant to the Agents in the procuring a Free Trade for them, provided
they were not too hasty.

About Sunset the Agents took their leave, and mounting their Horses, rode
through a great Throng of People out of the City, and came at Night to their
Vessel, lying at Lamthay, where they took their Repose.

The City Hoksieu, otherwise called Changcheu, has many stately Buildings of
blue Stone, and several great Pagodes or Temples; being environed with a high
Wall, fortified with Bulwarks and deep Ditches, and the Streets well paved.

The twenty fifth the Governor of the Fort Engeling, accompanied with several
very eminent Mandarins, came to visit the Agents in their Jonk, where they were
welcomed by the Hollanders with Spanish and Rhenish Wine, which having drunk,
they spent some time in discoursing about the War.

This Fort of Engeling stands on the Seashore, before which is a safe Harbor
for Ships: Near the Bay stood formerly a great Town of Trade of the same Name,
but was quite ruined and razed by the Tartars.

But during the Mandarins* and Agents Discourse together in their Jonk, came a
Tartar, a Soldier of Hanlavia, with a Letter from the Admiral Bort, to the
Agents John Van Campen, and Constantine Nobel: The Contents thereof to this
purpose.

THis Morning I have understood of your coming back to Hoksieu, from Our
Secretary John Melman, sent from Us to the River of Hoksieu to inquire for you,
and deliver a Letter to the Governor of Minjazen. Since that being informed, as
likewise by your Letter written in haste, That the Tartars have concluded Peace
with those of Eymuy and Quemuy, from whence We may suppose that they will begin
nothing with Us to their prejudice, but rather prevent it (if they have but any
opportunity) and to make Satisfaction for all Damages (because with this Peace
they are become their Subjects) done already, and which hereafter we may do
them: To prevent all, We wish that We had the Domburgh Frigate here with us.

Yet nevertheless, We give no such Order by these Presents, that by such sudden
alterations we may create no suspicious thoughts in them: But We do hereby send
you Our good Sailer the Sea-dog Frigate, that upon the receipt hereof you may
come to us. This we desire you to observe, that We may hear your Adventures,
and what you have effected in your Business, that then We may consult and
resolve one with another, what is best to be done in this Affair, for the
Benefit of the Public, and prejudice to the Enemy.

From aboard the Naerden Frigate in the Fleet before Tinghay, October 25. 1662.
Balthazar Bort.


The Governor of Engeling, with the Mandarin of the Fort, at the Agents
Request, provided instantly thirteen Saddle-Horses, whereon they rode to
Hoksieu, to obtain License to return to their Ships; whither they came about
Noon, and went to the Governor and Mandarins, of whom they desired leave to
depart to their Fleet; whereto the Governor replied, Why so hasty, when you are
still weary of your Journey? It is better for you to stay till the Viceroy
Singlamong and General Lipovi come hither: Your Business has a good face, and
We have writ to the Emperor, at his Court in Peking, on your behalf; and in all
likelihood We shall have an Answer back in fifty or sixty days; and in nine or
ten days, at farthest, the Viceroy and General will be here: It will be
requisite that you stay so long, and be present to fetch in the Viceroy, which
he will take as a great Kindness: Mean while you may come daily to visit the
Mandarins, which will much promote your Desires. We do certainly believe, That
the liberty of a Free Trade will be permitted you, and likewise to dispose of
all those Goods in your Ships. Whereupon the Agents returned their humble and
hearty Thanks, but told them by their Interpreter Lakka, That their Admiral had
writ to them to make what haste they could to the Fleet, which lay near the
Cape of Tinghay. Whereupon the Governor made Answer, Will they go? Let them do
what they please: But first we will eat. Upon which, Meat being brought, every
one was set at a distinct Table, according to the fashion of the Country, and
served in Gold and Silver Chargers. Dinner being past, they had a long
Discourse concerning the Chinese and Dutch War; which ended, the Agents took
their leaves; then mounting, they rode through the City, and came at last to
Lamthay to their Barque, where having given the Governor and Mandarin of the
Fort a Visit, they went aboard their Jonk.

The twenty sixth, being Thursday, the grand Mandarin, Hanlavia, Governor The
Agents Treatment with Hanlavia.
of Minjazen, came in the Morning to the River side, and fetching the Agents
with great Ceremony out of the Jonk, invited them to a Treatment: They fearing
to incur his displeasure if they refused, accepted of his kindness, where they
were courteously welcomed, and saluted by the Servants with loud Acclamations,
crying out, Fueet, that is, Long live; a peculiar Ceremony of great Honor in
this Empire, and used by none but Persons of great Quality, which generally
command their Servants to do it. The Feast ended, they began a long Discourse
about the War in Holland and China, which last continued twenty Years, in which
Hanlavia always performed great Service for the Cham of Tartary, and was a main
Assistant in his Conquests.

He also told them, That he prepared himself to bring that grand Pyrate Coxinga
under the Emperors Subjection; to which purpose (said he) I am by the Emperors
Order sent toward the Sea, not seeing any hopes at all of a Peace between the
Cham and Coxinga, who by Ambassadors sent to the Emperor in Peking much desires
it. I also understand, That the Hollanders coming into the River Hoksieu, is
very acceptable to the Great Cham; so that to obtain liberty for a Free Trade
for you through all China, is not to be doubted: Why then (proceeded he) are
you so hasly to be gone? You ought rather to have stayed in the River Hoksieu,
till the Viceroy and General Lipovi were come, since the Peace with Coxinga
will come to no effect.

This Discourse and their Entertainment being ended, the Agents took their
leave of the Governor Hanlavia, and other eminent Mandarins, who, according to
the manner, wished them a Boon Voyage.

Whilst they were sitting at Table, they heard the Word Fueet several times
repeated, whereat some of their Attendance bowed, and others fell flat on the
Ground.

The Tartars being asked if the Word Fueet signified Holy, they answered, No,
but it was a Word of Ceremony, by which they partly expressed how their
Servants obeyed them, and partly how welcome their Guests were.

The Vice Admiral Van Campen having gratified the Servants for their
Attendance, went immediately with his Jonk aboard the Sea-hound Frigate,
Commanded by John Hendrikson, who the next day, being the twenty seventh,
weighed Anchor, and fell down with the Ebb to the Mouth of the River, that so
he might with the first fair Wind sail to the other Ships at Tinghay, where he
arrived the following day in the Evening, when the Vice Admiral and Nobel
caused themselves immediately to be put aboard the Admiral, in the Naerden
Frigate, there to give him an account of their Affairs and several Adventures,
and especially deliver him the Letters sent him from the Viceroy Singlamong
and General Lipovi; the Contents of which consisted most in the Promises
already mentioned by the same Lords to Van Campen and Nobel, of their kind
proffer of Friendship, License to put into all Bays, Havens, and Rivers on the
Coast of China, with their Ships, either in foul Weather, or otherwise; and
likewise to take Water and Wood, and buy Provision for their Seamen.

The thirtieth, about Noon, Constantine Nobel was sent with the Sea-hound
Frigate, and Ter-Boede Pink, from the Fleet to the River Hoksieu, there to
promote the Business, and strictly to observe all Passages.

The one and thirtieth the Vice* Admiral, though surprised with a Pestilential
Fever, and great Sickness, was commanded to Sail about the East with six Ships.

The second of November, being Thursday, the Finch went from Tinghay to the
River Hoksieu.

The third, by the Admirals Order, two hundred Soldiers were put ashore to
drive the Chinese out of Tinghay into the Mountains; but finding them in a
good posture of defense, they retreated without effecting any thing.

The fourth the Sea-hound Frigate came again from the River Hoksieu to the Fleet
at Tinghay, as also the Finch the next day; and then all the Ships took in Wood.

The sixth the Breukelen Pink set Sail for Batavia, with the Goods that had
been taken at Sea, and Letters of Advice concerning the Agents Adventures at
Sinksieu, being conveyed beyond the Islands by the Sea-hound Frigate, and
Ter-Boede Pink, who on the next day came again to an Anchor with the rest of
the Fleet near Tinghay.

The eighth in the Morning Van Campen put to Sea with the Zierikzee, Ankeeveen,
and Loenen Frigates, to Cruise Northerly; but being hindered by a Storm and
contrary Tides, came to an Anchor again about Noon in ten Fathom Water.

Friday, the tenth, the Vice Admiral weighed Anchor again, to steer Northerly,
but came back without any effect; yet soon after they spied fifteen or sixteen
Chinese Jonks in the South-West, at a great distance, to chase which, they
presently sent the Sea-hound and Calf Frigates, with the Zierikzees Boat, and
those of the Ankeveen, full of armed Men; but the Chinese escaped by their
nimble Sailing, only one Champan, with a few Fish, was taken by the
Vice-Admirals Boat near the Shore; and another larger Vessel, deserted by all
her Men, was sunk by the Hollanders.

The eleventh, being Saturday, Van Campen went out again with his Frigates, to
sail toward the North; but being driven Southerly by a strong contrary
Current, he cast Anchor in fourteen Fathom Water, near one of the nethermost
Islands of Pakka*

On Sunday Morning, being the twelfth, they saw two Jonks in the South-West,
seeming to steer toward Tinghay, which Van Campen chasing, endeavored to get
to the Northwards; but labored in vain, because of contrary Winds and Tides:
at last he was forced near the Islands of Pakka, which although Islands of
Pakka.
pretty large, yet are for the most part waste and untilled, and inhabited by
none but Fishers and poor Rusticks: Nevertheless there is good Harbor for
Ships, and Refreshments of Water, and Provisions to be had.

The thirteenth, being Monday, Van Campen with the Ebb set Sail Northwards,
between the Islands Pakka, in eighteen, nineteen, and twenty Fathom Water; but
came, after the Tide spent, to Anchor in thirteen Fathom Water, under the
Eastermost Island.

About Noon the Fleet weighed to get more toward the North, and against the
Evening Anchored in eight Fathom Water, about half a League Nor-Eastand-by-East
from the Eastermost Isle before Pakka.

The fourteenth Van Campen set Sail again with a Nor-Nor-East Wind, in six,
seven, and eight Fathom, between the Isles of Pakka* and about Noon, forced by
contrary Tides, came to an Anchor in seven Fathom: Toward Evening weighing
again with the Ebb, he let fall his Drag about midnight in eighteen Fathom,
gravelly Ground, not far from the place where the Coast of China has many high
Mountains, and broken Land; yet behind them very pleasant and fertile Meadows
and Rice-Fields.

The fifteenth setting Sail again, he Anchored about Noon under an Isle, in
thirteen Fathom Water, gravelly Ground, about Cannon-shot from Shore, whither
he sent his Boat to see for Water.

From hence setting Sail, he came into a Bay behind Campens Point, so called
John Van Campen's Bay*
from himself, where he dropped Anchor in five Fathom Water, there being a
convenient Harbor, and safe Retreat against hollow Seas and turbulent Winds. On
the North side of this Point, lying in twenty six Degrees and fifty one Minutes
Northern Latitude, may be seen the Ruins of the City Tikyen, or Tykin,
formerly a place of great Trade, but lately destroyed by the Tartars. Here the
Zierikzee's Boat was sent ashore, with the Pilot Auke Pieters, and thirteen
Men, to fetch Water. Near the Shore, between the Mountains, appeared a pleasant
Valley, flourishing with Rice, Carrots, and all manner of Fruit. You may
freely, without fear or danger, sail between the main Coast and these Isles;
yet not without some care, because diverse Shoals lie near the Coast.

The eighteenth, being Saturday, Van Campen set Sail with his Squadron, the
Wind Nor-Nor-East; and laveering it between Campens Point and the forementioned
Isles, between seven and thirteen Fathom Water, gravelly Ground, they
discovered the old Zajer Isle East-Nor-East, four or five Leagues distant, in
twenty seven Degrees and fifteen Minutes Northern Latitude, and about Noon came
to an Anchor in ten Fathom Water, gravelly Ground. In the Night setting Sail
again, they ran the next day about Noon behind Campens Bay, where they were
forced to lie till Friday the twenty fourth, by contrary Winds, Tides, and
Calms. Toward Night the Finch came also to an Anchor there.

Friday the twenty fourth the Ships went to Sea together, and with a
Nor-Nor-East Wind endeavored to sail Easterly; but being driven back by the
Tide, they came to an Anchor in eight Fathom, and had the North Point of the
Island with Breasts, South-West, and the old Zajer* East and by North. At Night,
in the second Watch, when the Tide was almost spent, they weighed Anchor again,
and the next Evening rode in eight Fathom Water, having the Chinese City Samzwa
Nor-East and by East, and the Isle Old Zayer Sou-Sou-East, and Sou-East and by
South, and the Isle with Breasts Sou-Sou-West.

The City Samzwa seated on the hanging of a Mountain, and planted round City
Samzwa*
about with high Trees, was ruined by the Tartars: It boasts a safe Harbor for
Ships, to defend them from the Southern and Northern stormy Seasons. The
Hollanders going ashore here, found one Pagode or Temple, with diverse Images,
about fifteen Leagues from Tinghay.

The twenty seventh the Point of Samzwa bearing Westward two Leagues from them,
they descried a white Cliff in the Sea, about three Leagues from the Shore, and
three Isles in the East-Nor-East, and by Observation found themselves at Noon
to be in twenty seven Degrees and thirty nine Minutes Northern Latitude.

In the Evening Van Campen came to an Anchor with the Ankeveen Frigate in eleven
Fathom Water, gravelly Ground; but the High-land and Meliskerk Frigates, with
the Loenen and Finch, went behind the Isle of Good Hope. Van Campen in the
Night, the Tide favoring him, set Sail again, and was followed by the Ankeveen
Frigate only, the other four lying still behind the Isle, without making the
Reason thereof known.

The next day, forced by Storm to come to an Anchor again in ten Fathom Water,
he was driven from two Anchors, toward the seven Rocks a little Southward of
Zwatia, not without great danger of Shipwreck.

The City Zwatia, lying in the mouth of a River near the Sea, and also ruined
City Zwathia*
by the Tartars, is inhabited by mean and poor People, which are very slow in
rebuilding the same. Opposite to the Nor-West side of the River lies a Village
called Zwatho, whither most of the Citizens fled, it being not laid waste by
the Tartars.

The first of January, Van Campen concluded, upon Advice of the Ships Council,
by force of a Storm out of the Nor-East and by East, to set Sail again, to get
from the Shore; so that he drove down Sou-West and by South, to Brest-Island,
and in the afternoon came to an Anchor in the Bay behind Campens Point in nine
Fathom.

The other Frigates, and the Finch, lay still at Anchor, contrary to their
Orders.

The third, the Ankeveen Frigate, commanded by Jacob Swart, having been busied
about getting his Anchors aboard, came and rode by the Vice Admiral.

The fourth in the afternoon they spied in the Sou-Sou-West between seventy and
eighty Fisher-Jonks, and other Vessels, standing toward the North, which they
let all pass: About the evening they stood to and again, yet were got out of
sight next Morning, on which the Captain Auke Pieters was commanded to go
ashore, with fifty Men, to gather Sallad-herbs and Potatoes to refresh their
People.

The sixth in the Evening the four other Ships came to an Anchor near Van
Campen, having before lain behind the Isles Northward of the River Zwatia.

The eighth in the Morning they spied six Jonks fishing in the Sou-East and by
East, behind the Breast-Isle; and in the afternoon, two Ships in the Sou-East,
in the Bay of Pakka, and also heard the Report of several Cannon* shot from
thence; whereupon a Council being called, Harmans Symonsz, Commander of the
High land Frigate, was sent thither, with Order, That when he came to them, he
should fire five Guns one after another, if he needed Van Campen's Assistance;
if not, to fire none, but come back to the Fleet.

Against the Evening the High-land Frigate came to an Anchor South-West and by
South, three Leagues distant from the Fleet.

The ninth in the morning they saw above twenty Fisher-Jonks near the Shore of
Pakka, who were putting to Sea to fish; but not being able to get out, were by
the Current driven toward the South: Van Campen chased them between the
Islands; yet the Jonks by their swift sailing, escaped him.

In the afternoon the Hollanders came again to an Anchor behind Campens Point,
in nine Fathom Water, about a small Cannon-shot from the Shore.

The tenth they saw two Frigates in the Bay of Pakka, viz. the Sea-hound, in
which the Admiral Bort was, (as they understood the next day) and the Highland,
which on the eighth was sent thither for Intelligence.

The eleventh in the morning the Admiral Bort came in the High-land Frigate to
an Anchor about half a League from the Vice Admiral.

Mean while the Admiral Bort had by Storm taken the Fort Kitat, lying in Fort
Kitat taken by the Netherlanders.
the Bay of Pakka, and with it plundered all the Towns, Villages, and Hamlets,
being twenty in number, belonging thereto: All which he had written to the
Vice Admiral Van Campen, the tenth of the said Month, from the Bay of Pakka;
adding thereto, That had he not been detained eight days by tempestuous
Weather, he had been with him before that time, to find out Zwathia, lying
about the North, in hopes there to find several Trading Jonks.

The same day Harman Symonsz went aboard the Vice Admiral, being sent thither
by the Admiral from the Bay of Pakka, with the Letters beforementioned,
bringing also with him a small Supply of fresh Victuals, which was equally
distributed amongst the Ships.

They found in Kitat nothing but a little Rice, Salt, and a little Lumber,
besides twelve Women, and fifteen Youths, which were transported for Servants
to Batavia.

The Hollanders fell upon this Place, because some of Coxinga's Party resided
there.

The twelfth they descried three Jonks and a Fishers Boat in the North-East,
one of them being without a Mast: Van Campen, by the Admirals Order, set Sail
toward them with five Ships: That Jonk which had lost her Mast was only
taken, the rest escaping by the advantage of the Tide. In the taken Jonk they
found no more but only Salt, Rice, and Wood. Toward Evening the Frigate came
again to the Prize-Jonk, and about eight at Night towed her along with them to
Campens Point.

In the afternoon the Sea-hound and High-land Frigates, and Ter-Boede Pink, came
up to the Vice Admiral, and at Night Anchored South and by West about a League
from them.

Wednesday, being the thirteenth, the Ter-Boede was sent from the Fleet to the
River Hoksieu, there to stay till Van Campen's Squadron came back from the
North.

Against Noon the Overveen Frigate came out of Kitat-Bay, near the Fleet, and
turning up Northerly, in the afternoon was forced by contrary Winds to lie in
seven Fathom water.

About midnight the Fleet weighed Anchor, and hearing several Cannons fired,
and Van Campen fearing some of the Frigates to be run ashore, sent his Boats
thither, and found the Calf to be drove very near the Shore, on which the
High-land Frigate had also been fast, but was got off again: whereupon Van
Campen returned.

Ysbrant, Pilot to the Admiral, and another, were sent aboard of the
Vice Admiral, to enquire how many healthy persons he had in his Ship, of Seamen
and Soldiers; and what number of Seamen he could be able to send ashore fit
for Service: whereupon he replied, about thirty.

Thursday about Noon the Fleet was in twenty seven Degrees and nineteen Minutes
Northern-Latitude, two Leagues and a half from West and by North from Zwamzwa
Cape.

In the afternoon about two a Clock the Fleet weighed Anchor again, and in the
Morning were within four Leagues North and by East of Zwatia, three Leagues
East Nor-East from Cape Elephant, and three Leagues and a half West and by
South from Zwamzwa. About Noon the Fleet, forced by contrary Winds and Tides,
cast Anchor in eleven or twelve Fathom Water, about three Leagues Nor-West, and
Nor-West and by West from the River Zwatia, and two Leagues and a half
South-east and by East from Cape Elephant; where Riding all Night, they Sailed
next day toward the North, and soon after turned Westward up the River of
Zwatia, where the Vice Admiral had Cruised with six Sail the twenty eighth and
twenty ninth of the last Month.

The Marks whereby Seamen may know this River, are toward the North a great
white Shelf, and on the Shore many Cliffs.

A little more to the Northward of it lie two Islands, behind which is a safe
Harbor.

About Noon the Fleet found themselves in twenty seven Degrees and thirty five
Minutes Eastward from the South-Point of the River Zwatia, from whence Sailing
West-South-west into the River, they had from six to twenty three Fathom Water,
being the shallowest gravelly Ground; and with the same Course they came before
Zwatia, where they cast Anchor in seven Fathom Water, about a Musket Shot from
the Shore: on which the short-hair'd Chinese stood with Red Flags, (a sign of
Peace by them, as the White is with us) in great companies, expecting the
Netherlanders, without any offering to come to their Ships. This continued a
whole hour, when the Admiral Bort Commanded the Guns to be fired upon the Town.
The Chinese thus rudely saluted, immediately let fly their White Flag in sign
of War, and shooting with Muskets and Blunderbusses, flourished their
Faulchions and Scythes over their Heads, yet betook themselves with all their
Movables which they were able to carry out of the City, to flight toward the
Mountains; others with their Vessels ran up the River; whereupon the Admiral
Bort Commanded the Vice Admiral Van Campen to go ashore with eight Boats and
seven Shallops well Manned and Armed, which Bort himself promised to follow. Van
Campen Landing without any resistance on the Shore, found the City Rebuilt,
and the Houses furnished with Tables, Chests, Stools, and Benches, besides
abundance of Thrash'd and Unthrash'd Rice, called Bady, Salt, great store of
dried and Salt Fish, and also Nets: There appeared seven large Temples, every
one apart in a pleasant Grove, Walled round about, and within Paved with Blue
Stone, where stood many Humane Figures, Clothed in all sorts of Stuffs, Caps,
Coats, Breeches, Shoes, and Stockings, all, as alive, about Tables on Waxed
Benches or Stools, Gilded; on each Table stood two large square Vessels, or
Pots, wherein the Priests burn Incense to their Idols, with perfumed Calambak,
Agar, and Sandal-Wood, which yield a most fragrant smell. On the Tables also
lay four pieces of Wood, each a large half Foot long, round on the top, and
flat at the bottom, which, to know future events, they throw three times one
after another before the Idols.

Toward Evening Van Campen leaving the Shore went aboard again with all his
Men, laden with the best Plunder, and many Images not spoiled by the Tartars.

Here it is to be observed, that many Native Chinese are to be understood by
The Conquered Chinese wear their Hair short as the Tartars.
the Name of Tartars, viz. those who by shaving off their Hair, leaving only a
long Lock, have yielded themselves to the subjection of the Cham of Tartary.

The seventeenth, being Sunday, in the Morning the Ankeveen Frigate, and the
Loenen and Finch Commanded by Ysbrant, Pilot of the Naerden, besides four Boats
and a Sloop, Manned with Armed Soldiers and Seamen, Sailed up the River to
surprise five Jonks laden with Goods, and said to lie for their safety a great
way up the River, and if possible to bring them to the Fleet; but if not worth
the trouble, to burn them. About Noon they came up with seven Jonks and three
Coya's (which are a kind of Vessels lesser than Jonks, as our Mackrel-boats,)
which Boarding, many Chinese with their Coats of Mayl, Helmets and Arms,
leaped overboard and swam, and others escaped ashore in their Champans, and
the rest, being most of them Women and Children, were taken by the
Netherlanders; but all soon released, except five Women. Toward Evening the
Master of the Finch went aboard the Naerden Frigate to the Admiral, with Tidings
that their Vessels had conquered three great, and five small Jonks, amongst
which some carried seven Guns of a side; whereupon he was again sent withthe
Meliskerks Boat and Pinnace, well Manned and furnished with Tackling, which he
said was wanting for the taken Jonks; all which having aboard, he left the
Frigate, and Sailed up the River again in the Night.

Monday the eighteenth about Daybreak they heard a great Cry, made by the Men
of the Meliskerks Boat, which was over-set near the Shore: whereupon Van Campen
and the Master of the Sea-hound Sailing thither, found five Men sitting on the
Keel of the Boat, so benumbed with Cold, that they were not able to give
account what was become of their Fellows; but Rowing up farther where the Boat
had been over-set, they found another Man sitting on the Shore, which had been
driven three times that Night into the River by the Chinese: He told them that
he had not seen one of his Fellows; so that ten Men (they having been sixteen
in number) were either drowned or killed. At Night the Finches Pinnace went
aboard the Naerden to the Admiral with a Letter of Advice, that they had taken
eight Jonks, of which they had burnt four, and brought away the other four.

The nineteenth, being Tuesday, the Chinese made a Sign, by setting up their
red Flag, inviting the Netherlanders to come to them: Whereupon Van Campen and
the Master of the Sea-hound went ashore to know what they desired, and Landing
found a great number of Chinese with five red Flags of the five neighboring
The red Flag among the Tartar-Chineses signifies Peace, as the white Flag War.
Villages, with the chief Governor from every Village, and five Chinese Priests.

These being carried aboard to the Admiral, begged and entreated, that he would
save their Houses and Temples, that they might make Fires, and shelter
themselves from the cold Winter; and likewise not to spoil their little
Champans and Fishing-nets; which if it might be granted, they would serve him
in all things possible, and within four days bring him out of every Village
twenty five Porkers, one hundred twenty five Hens, fifty Ducks, and as many
Oranges, Raddishes, and other Herbage as they could gather: whereupon, in
consideration they would keep their Promise, he assured them to save their
Pagodes, Houses, Champans, and Fish-nets; after which three only returned
ashore, for the other two were kept aboard, as Hostages till the three returned
in four days with the Provisions before-nam'd, and all things else they could
get out of the five Villages. Those Chinese which stayed aboard being asked by
the Admiral, If no Jonks were expected that Season from Japan to Zwatia? they
replied, That not one had Sailed thither that Year; which afterward he found
to be true.

The twentieth, being Wednesday, the two Pinks and Ankeveen Frigate, sent up the
River the seventh with four Boats and one Sloop, came to an Anchor with the six
taken Jonks, viz. two great and four small: in which they found a little Rice,
Pady, or unthresh'd Rice, Saltpeter, Indigo, several Priests Coats, Helmets,
Swords, Scythes, ten Blunderbusses, besides several Chinese Men, Women and
Children, whereof five young Women, and four young Men were kept aboard, and
the rest released. Seven other Jonks were also set on fire and sunk in the
River, out of which many Chinese leaping were either drowned and killed. The
next day two of the small Jonks were broke up and used for fuel, but the
biggest of them were new Trimmed.

The two and twentieth they had a general Thanksgiving in all the Fleet for
their Victories over their Enemies. The day after the Admiral by putting out
the Companies red Flag, commanded all the Officers of the Fleet aboard, where
the Ships Council (for certain Reasons) proposed, yet did not conclude, that
the Vice Admiral Van Campen with his Frigate, the Zierikzee, accompanied with
the Highland, Meliskerke, Ankeveen, and the Loenen and the Finch, should Cruise
out at Sea before Zwatia, to see for the Iapan Trading Jonks which come from
thence, till the middle of February, and the Admiral Bort should put to Sea the
twenty sixth with the Naerden, Calf, Overveen, and Sea-hound Frigates, besides
the five Jonks, two great and three small, and cross over to Kitat and Tenhay,
and from thence Sail to the River Hoksieu, there to enquire how affairs stood.
It was also judged convenient, that the Ankeveen Frigate, and the Loenen and
Finch, should immediately weigh their Anchors, and Sail to the Mouth of the
forementioned River, to look for some Jonks that were daily expected; but these
Proposals never were put into execution.

The twenty fourth in the Morning, Van Campen was by Borts Order sent ashore
with a hundred and ten Soldiers, and fifty Seamen, to burn Zwatia. No sooner
was he Landed, but they saw five Priests, with a great many Chinese standing
about a red Flag, which all fell down at his Feet, and humbly begged him to
save their Temples, Champans, and Fish-nets, which if he did not, they should
perish with Cold and Hunger; and promised against the next Morning (according
to their first Proposal) to bring them the Porkers, Hens, Ducks, Oranges,
Raddishes, and Pot Herbs: Van Campen moved with compassion, was persuaded to
forbear.

The twenty fifth, being Christmas Day, Van Campen going aboard to the Admiral
in the Naerden Frigate, asked him what was best to be done with Zwatia?
whereupon Bort replied, That he should lay it in Ashes: which said, Van Campen
went ashore with three Boats and three Sloops well Manned, where he found lying
on the Shore five Hogs and fifteen Baskets of Oranges, brought thither by five
Priests and fifteen Chinese: two of the Hogs, and five Baskets of Oranges were
by Van Campen carried aboard to the Admiral, who remitting somewhat of his
anger, gave him order to do with Zwatia what he pleased and thought convenient:
But before Van Campen came ashore again, the Houses were all in a Flame,
occasioned through the wilfulness of the Seamen. Out of the Houses and Pagodes
came diverse sick Men and Women creeping on their Knees to escape the Flames.

The same day the Admiral leaving Zwatia, according to their agreement in the
Council, with the Naerden, Ankeveen, Calf, and Sea-hound Frigate* two great and
two small taken Jonks, went to the Bay of Kitat and Tenhay, to go from thence
in some of the Frigates to Hoksieu, as was before designed.

The twenty sixth Van Campen put also to Sea with four Frigates and two Pinks,
wherewith steering about the Shore toward the North, they came to an Anchor in
the Evening near an Island (by them called The Good Hope,) three Leagues
Northerly from the River Zwatia, in twenty four Fathom Water, gravelly Ground,
about Cannon-shot from the Shore.

The Admirals Order to Van Campen, was to keep that Course, or to Cruise for
the Chinese Jonks that Traded to Iapan, till the middle of February, and then
to fall down Southerly to Tenhay.

The twenty seventh the Council in Van Campens Squadron Consulted, whether
according to Bort's Order they should keep at Sea, or lie still near the Isle
of Good Hope, and to place six or seven Men on one of the highest Hills, there
to spy what Jonks were out in the Offin: To which last Proposal they all
agreed, from thence Sailing early the next day, with intention to get up
higher, yet were by contrary Winds and cross Currents forced back to their
former Road.

The twenty eighth, being Thursday, seven Men were sent ashore, as they had
before agreed, up to a rising Ground, there with their Glasses to descry what
Traffickers that Sea afforded. In the afternoon six Chinese came in a Champan
aboard the Vice Admiral, bringing with them a fat Swine, nine Hens, twenty four
Ducks, eleven Baskets with Oranges, and fourteen Pumpeons, not having a greater
store: Amongst them were two of their Priests, which they kept aboard till they
should return with more Provisions, which they promised in three days; but they
failed, not coming the third day, yet Van Campen set the Pledges ashore on the
twenty sixth, who afterward returned to inquire for one Chilo, a Chinese
Merchant, whom they feared was slain, or their Prisoner: Van Campen answered,
That he knew of none such, but would enquire of the Admiral, and if he found
him alive in the Fleet, he should be set ashore at Tenhay; they humbly thanking
him, and having received satisfaction for their Provisions, departed.

The twenty ninth some of the Vice-Admiral's Men went ashore for Wood and
Water; where also they Shot a great Heart, and therefore called it Harts-Isle.

The one and thirtieth, being Sunday, they espied two Fishers-Jonks in the
East, which Van Campen chasing took, with thirteen Chinese, some fresh and
salted Fish, which were taken out, and carried aboard the Vice Admiral. The
Chinese Prisoners being examined in the presence of the Commanders from whence
they came? replied, From Zwatia: If they had seen any Holland Ships? answered
No: and being demanded if no Jonks were expected that Season from Iapan at
Zwatia? they also replied, No: and being farther asked if none went that Year
from Zwatia to Iapan, and if some Jonks about two days before had not Sailed
from Zwatia toward the North? they again answered No: so that the
Netherlanders could get nothing out of them: whereupon they were ordered to be
kept aboard the Vice Admiral, till he thought fit to send them out a Fishing
for the Fleet.

After the Admiral's and Vice-Admirals parting at Zwatia the twenty fifth of
December, the Admiral arrived before Hoksieu the twenty seventh of the same
Month, having in his Way, especially in the Bay of Succor, otherwise called
Siang, in the Rode of Pakka, and likewise in that of Good Fortune, seen and met
several Jonks, which all escaped from him by flight, except five. But at
Sothun, a Town which Bort sent out a Party against, having one Man killed, and
five wounded; yet the next day with better success Charging the Enemy out of
Town, he Commanded that, and likewise all the Houses in Tenhay to be burnt.

At the earnest Requests of those of Hoksieu, and the Agents Letters to the
Admiral, he went thither the seventh of January, Anno 1663. with the Overveen,
Seahound, and all the Prize-Jonks; but the Calf and Naerden Frigates had Order
to stay at Tenhay, and not upon any occasion to go ashore, for the prevention
of all Mischiefs; yet in fair Weather they sometimes sailed to the neighboring
Isles, to see for the Enemies Jonks, especially those that come from Iapan: all
which the Admiral gave advice of to the Vice Admiral by the forementioned
Letters, adding that the small taken Jonks were fitted and made ready to Sail
with News to their Excellencies the Lord-General and Council at Batavia: to
which purpose he had given a Packet of Letters to Captain Barrents Iochemse,
which he had Order immediately to send away by the Jonks, and then come to him
with all speed. But if upon the Tartars desire he should re-deliver the Jonks,
he intended to make use of the Ter-Boede; and to that end at his coming into
the River of Hoksieu, where it now lay, he would send it away to the other
Ships.

The sixth, being Tuesday, Van Campen summoned the Commanders of all the Ships
in his Squadron to come aboard, where after Consultation they concluded, if
that day, or early on the next, they had no News out of the River Hoksieu, to
send the Highland Frigate to the Admiral in that River, there to enquire how
affairs went, which they were very desirous to know, because they had received
no Advices, nor heard from them since the twenty fifth of the last, to the
seventh of that Month.

The seventh they resolved (the time to Sail back to Batavia drawing near) to
send the Loenen and the Finch to fetch Water, as well for themselves as for the
other Ships, which were to carry their empty Casks aboard them, and at their
return when filled to fetch them again: Mean while the Boats of those Ships
that stayed should go ashore for Fuel, that when part or all the Fleet should
put to Sea, there might be no want.

The same day the Terr-Boede coming from the River Hoksieu, in the Evening
anchored behind Van Campen at Tenhay, from whence according to Bort's Order he
was to go by Siam to Batavia, but first to speak with Van Campen at Tenhay.

The tenth, being Saturday, the Ter-Boede set Sail, being sent as an
Advice-Boat, under the Command of Nanning Claesz to Batavia, the same day the
Highland Frigate, Commanded by Harmon Simonse, and the Ankeveen by Jacob Black,
went to the River of Hoksieu, according to the Admiral's Order, Dated the
seventh.

The eleventh they saw four Sail in the River Hoksieu: and now the Cruising up
and down with the Frigates for Jonks that Traded to Iapan was laid quite aside
by reason of bad Weather, and till further Order from the Admiral, which Van
Campen by Letters of the seventh of January advised him of from his Fleet lying
before Tenhay.

The fourteenth in the Morning the Ankeveen Frigate came out of the River
Hoksieu, into the Bay of Linkun, to turn about the North to Tenhay, but the
Tide being spent he could not get forward; which being seen by Van Campen, he
immediately sent the Pilot, John Cortz, with a well Manned Sloop thither to
enquire after affairs, before whose return seven Glasses were run; yet at last
he returned with Jacob Black, Master of the Ankeveen, who brought a Letter with
him from the Admiral, Dated the seventh of the same Month in the Ankeveen,
then Riding in the Channel of Hoksieu; the Contents were these: That Nobel with
all his Attendants were detained in Hoksieu, and not permitted to come aboard;
That himself was come with all the Ships down to the Mouth of the River, where
stopped by contrary Winds from coming to him, he had lay'n three days, but
would have come in stead of the Letter, had not the Night before three Vessels
come down the River with Melman, two Mandarins and Letters from Nobel and the
Viceroy Singlamong and General Lipovi, who still desired the stay of all or
some of the Fleet fifteen or twenty days longer for an Answer from Peking;
which if he would not do, Nobel and all his Retinue must be forced to wait
there, and mean while Trade in private, selling some of their Merchandise, and
buying others; about which he was to resolve the next day with the two
Mandarins that were sent to him, therefore he desired Van Campen, on receipt of
the Letter, to come to him with all speed in one of the Frigates that least drew
Water, that he might consult with him about it, and resolve what was best to be
done: Bort desired Van Campen also to leave Order with the Ships to store
themselves plentifully with Water and Firing at Tenhay, that when the other
Ships came to them, they might furnish them also, that then they might proceed
on their Journey to Batavia without any hinderance. Whereupon Van Campen went
in his Ship aboard of the Ankeveen Frigate, lying at Anchor about half way at
Sea, between the River Hoksieu and Tenhay, and came about four hours after
Sunset West and by North right against the Pyramids, but being forced by a
contrary Tide to cast Anchor in fourteen Foot Water, happened to be aground; yet
soon after was by the Tide put afloat again, and the same Night came to the
Admiral; who being fetched aboard the next Morning, he understood that the
Secretaries Clerk, or Interpreter, John Melman, was the Night before gone to
Hoksieu, from whence he was to come the eighteenth of the same Month, with the
Merchant Constantine Nobel, and that then all things would be in readiness for
them to put to Sea. Five Tartar Jonks came with three Mandarins, and cast
Anchor near Van Campen, sent thither by the Viceroy Singlamong and the General
Taysing Lipovy, with two hundred Picols of Rice, twenty Porkers, and twenty
great Vessels of Chinese Beer, which were sent to be divided as a Present
amongst the Seamen.

The sixteenth the Ankeveen set Sail out of the River to the Ships at Tenhay,
and came thither again the next day with some Goods for the Admiral, and a
Chest for the Secretary of the Naerden Frigate, who was to stay ashore in
Hoksieu. The same day Van Campen Embarq'd himself with his Necessaries.

The eighteenth in the Morning the Domburgh and Overveen set Sail out of
Hoksieu to the Ships at Tenhay: In the afternoon the Admiral received a Letter
from Constantine Nobel, containing, That the Admiral should stay ten days
longer for the Emperors Letters from Peking, and that they required also two
Hostages, viz. the Vice Admiral Van Campen, and the Captain with one Eye, not
knowing his Name, which was Ysbrant Builder: but neither the Admiral nor
Vice Admiral thought this advice fit to be followed.

The twentieth the Deputy-Secretary, John Melman, came in a Tartar Vessel from
Hoksieu to the Ships, but it was so foggy, that those of the Fleet, being not
able to see him, but hearing him Row, haled him aboard: Van Campen also Rowing
in his Sloop to meet him, was three hours before he could either find the
Tartar Vessels or his own Frigates again, notwithstanding they were very near,
and had it not been for the sound of the Trumpets, it had been impossible to
have found one another that Night.

The one and twentieth Van Campen hoised Sail, and with a gentle Gale out of
the North North-east came to the Channel of Hoksieu, where he lay by the
Admiral in five Fathom gravelly Ground.

The two and twentieth in the Morning the Sea-hound Frigate set Sail with a
fresh North-east Wind; but Van Campen, advised by Jacob Swaert, and the chief
Pilot Claes Johnson, who told him that in such blustering Weather their Ships
could not be ruled, because of their fresh experienced Seamen, and that they
had better stay for fairer Weather, stirred not: In the afternoon, the Wind
blowing very hard out of the same Quarter, and the Sea growing very rough,
drove the Ankeveen toward the Pyramids from her Anchor, and enforced them to
cast out another; which done, they weighed the first Anchor, supposing it to be
encumbered; then the Frigate dragged the other; and being engaged among the
Rocks, had neither time nor distance to drop another; whereupon the Master
loosned his Fore-sail and Mizzen, so bearing up to the wind to keep her from
what they were almost upon, the Rocky Shore; but all endeavors were in vain,
for with the headiness of the Stream, the violence of the Wind, and hollowness
of the Sea, she was driven upon the cruel Shore, and carried where she was
hemmed in with Rocks; when to prevent the mischief they sent a Boat from the
Ship with Tackling; but that also not able to keep off, was with the Frigate
driven among intervening Rocks beyond the Ship, while she bilging against the
Pyramids was split: when to save the Men a Seaman was ordered to swim to Shore
with the Plumming-line, to which they fastened a stronger Rope, by which help
they might betwixt swimming and wading get ashore; but he was so bruised and
beaten by the Billows upon the Rocks where he Landed, that he was not able to
draw the Halser to the Shore: but about two hours after Sunset the Sea did
with her impetuous Waves so batter the Frigate, and she rolling so much, that
they looked every Minute to be stav'd, they were forced to cut down their Masts
by the Board for the preservation of their lives. About two hours after Sunset
Van Campen sent one or two ashore on the West Side of the Pyramids, to make
fast a Halser on the Rocks for the purpose beforementioned: after that Van
Campen Sailed up the River Hoksieu to look for his Boat, but could not find her.

The twenty third, being Thursday, Van Campen went ashore with a Sloop on an
Island lying close by the Pyramids, to see if any sweet Water was to be had
there, which they found in a Pit or Well. A Tent also was carried ashore and
set up, into which they brought Rice, Beef, Pork, and fresh Water for those
that were Ship-wrack'd, where two by Cold and drinking of Brandy, miserably
lost their Lives in the Night.

The twenty fourth in the Morning some Chinese coming to a Jonk by Van Campen
on the Island, proffered to carry him to the Fort Minjazen, saying that the
Governor Hanlavia would entertain him nobly; for they supposed the Fleet to
have been gone to Batavia: they also gave him some fresh Pork, Eggs, and Rice,
and showed him other Civilities.

The Admiral by Letters advised Van Campen the same day, that all his
expectation and stay was for him, that they might set Sail together, but
supposed that the bad Weather had hindered him from coming out; and that in the
Morning when he heard him Shoot, he was about weighing Anchor with all the
Ships that were with him at Tenhay, of which he had sent him the Finch and
Sea-hound, and desiring him, that if any more Tidings came from Hoksieu, that
he should Fire three times, and for a little while keep in his Flag.

The same day the Sea-hound Frigate and Finch came to an Anchor near the Wreck
in the River of Hoksieu, whither Van Campen went immediately with his Boat, to
see what Goods could be saved; which to do was almost impossible, because of
the raging Billows, which beat so violently that no Boat was able to come near
her. In the interim the Fleet which lay at Tenhay also setting Sail, fell down
toward the Wreck; yet afterward changing their purpose, Tacked about, lying
Northward.

The twenty fifth the Admiral's Sloop, with his chief Pilot, went aboard the
the Vice Admiral in the Sea-hound Frigate; from whence after midnight he was
sent again to the Fleet with News concerning the Wreck. Little was performed
that day, no Vessels being able to lie near the foundred Ship: but the next day
they recovered some Cordage, Lead, Tin, and Sandal-Wood, which was put aboard
the other Frigates.

The twenty seventh, fetching the last Cables that lay on the Deck, they
carried them aboard the Sea-hound in the Night; and then likewise saved the
Guns and some Shot.

The next day seven Tartar Jonks came to an Anchor near the Wreck; to which Van
Campen Rowing, put one Mey aboard to look to the Pepper, and other Goods that
were yet remaining; which at last being given to the Tartars, was by them
esteemed a great Prize.

In the afternoon the Sea-hound and Finch weighed and set Sail to get out of
the Channel of Hoksieu, and came toward Evening to an Anchor by the Fleet in
the Bay of Linkun, where Van Campen immediately went aboard of the Naerden to
the Admiral Bort; to whom having given a Relation concerning the loss of the
Ankeveen, he Rowed aboard the Zirickzee.

The first of March, being Thursday, the Admiral at Daybreak fired a Gun, as a
Signal that the Fleet should all weigh Anchor, and putting to Sea, proceed on
their Way to Batavia. In the Evening about Sunset they came up with the
South-Point of the Isle of Crocodiles, which bore South-west about five
Leagues, and the South-Point of Carellos Nor-Nor-east about six Leagues from
them, their Course West-South-west.

The second they saw several Fishers Jonks near the Coast, and about Noon came
into twenty four Degrees and fifty three Minutes Northern Latitude, and had the
Southern Island Makau North-west and by West about five Leagues from them, they
steering South-west, and West and by South.

Saturday, being the third, the Fleet at Sunset was about three Leagues and a
half from another Isle; and on the next day at Noon in twenty two Degrees and
thirty eight Minutes Nor-Nor-East, about four Leagues from the Sandy Banks; and
against Evening came up with the Black Hill on the Coast of China, about four
or five Leagues from them, their Course being South-west and by West, and
West-South-west.

The fifth the Fleet was about five or six Leagues from Ilhas dons Viedos; and
at Noon in twenty one Degrees and twenty nine Minutes; the next day in twenty
Degrees and thirty Minutes; and the day after, being Wednesday, at Noon in
nineteen Degrees and fifty Minutes.

On Thursday Van Campen was got out of sight of the Fleet in nineteen Degrees
and thirty six Minutes; and the next day reached nineteen Degrees and twenty
Minutes.

The tenth in the Morning he came up with the East-Point of the Island Ainan,
but at a great distance from him, and found himself at Noon in nineteen Degrees
and twenty four Minutes Northern Latitude, the East Point West and by South,
and West-South-west, about four or five Leagues, and Poele Tayo, North-west,
about three or four Leagues distant: The East-Point of Ainan appears like two
Isles as you come about the North.

The twelfth about Noon Van Campen was in eighteen Degrees and twenty seven
Minutes, three Leagues from the South Coast of Ainan, which is found to be six
or seven and forty Minutes more Southerly than it is placed in the Maps; and in
the afternoon coming near the Shore, he espied the Fleet standing
South-South-east; and the next Morning he descried the Admiral Bort with seven
Sail, to lie a little to Leeward on his Larboard. About Noon being eighteen
Degrees and thirty two Minutes, the Mount Tinhosa bore West and by North, about
four Leagues from him, appearing like three Isles, whereof the middlemost is
the biggest: More into the Country are two other Hills to be seen; and in the
South-west and by West many Highlands: The South-west Shore was seen in the
South-west and by South, about four or five Leagues from him. This Country is
not rightly placed in the Maps, neither in its due Latitude nor Longitude; for
it lies forty six or forty seven Minutes more Southerly in the Maps than it
stands.

The fourteenth in the Morning the Admiral Bort with all the other Ships were
behind in the Channel East-North-east, and about Noon in eighteen Degrees and
seventeen Minutes Sailed Northerly up to the Fleet, which in the Evening came
up with Tinhosa: The next day at Noon they came to seventeen Degrees and fifty
nine Minutes, and the day after to Fifteen Degrees and forty Minutes
Northern-Latitude, their Course South.

The seventeenth about Daybreak they espied the Coast of Champan, which is
very high Land, lying South-west and by West from them: Six hours after they
discerned the Isle called Round Holm, near the Coast of Champan, and about Noon
were in the Latitude of twelve Degrees and ten Minutes; and Sailing along the
forementioned Coast, in the Evening they past by the Bay called Bagerang, and
about Sunset they descried Poele, or the Isle Cicier de Terra, Westwards about
a League from them.

The eighteenth Van Campen being about midnight separated from the Fleet, found
himself about Noon in nine Degrees and nine Minutes, and about Sunset saw Poele
Candor West-Nor-West, five Leagues from him, his Course South-West and by South.

The nineteenth he came into six Degrees and twenty nine Minutes; the
twentieth, in four Degrees and thirty Minutes; and on the one and twentieth, in
the Morning seeing Poele Tymon South-west and by South about three Leagues
distant, he made toward it, and dropped Anchor at the South-Point eighteen
Fathom Water: and soon after the Admiral Bort with all his Ships, coming also
to an Anchor, put their Pennon under their Vein, except the Loenen Pink, which
after a little stay steered her Course for Batavia. In the after noon the whole
Fleet setting Sail again to proceed onward of their Voyage, steered South
South-east.

The next day about Sunrising Panyang bare about four Leagues to the South
South-East from them: At Noon the Fleet found themselves to be in forty six
Minutes Northern-Latitude, and saw Panyang West and by North; and about Sunset
they saw Pismires-Isle in the South-west about four Leagues distant, and the
Island Lingen South-west, and South-west and by South, about six or seven
Leagues off: and about Noon the next day Van Campen was with the Fleet in six
Minutes Southern-Latitude, and saw about Sunset Poele, or the Island Saya,
South and by West, and the Cape of Lingen Nor-West and by West, three or four
Leagues from them.

The twenty fifth they discerned the Seven Islands, or Poele Toutyons, in the
South-east and by South, and Poele Saya in the Nor-West, and Nor-West and by
West: about Noon the Poele Toutyons were Eastwards four or five Leagues from
the Zirickzee.

The twenty sixth they descried the Mountain Monapin about Sunrising to lie
South-east and by East, about five Leagues distant, and at Noon about three
Leagues from thence they were in two Degrees and nine Minutes South-Latitude:
At Night about Sunset they saw the third Point of the Island Sumatra
South-South-east, two Leagues from them, and Poele Nanko East and by North,
about three Leagues from the Zirickzee; and Monapin in the Nor-West, and
Nor-West and by North, all lying along the Coast of Sumatra.

The twenty seventh at Sunrising they descried the first Point of Sumatra
South-east, and South-East and by East, about two Leagues and a half from the
Zirickzee, who at Noon was in three Degrees and five Minutes South Latitude;
and having the Island Lucipar South-east about three Leagues from him, Sailed
close along the Coast.

The next day about Noon the Zirickzee was in four Degrees and twelve Minutes
Southern Latitude, and on the twenty ninth in the Morning coming up with the
Thousand Islands, which lay Westward from him, he espied the Admiral Bort with
seven Sail in the Nor-East and by East, and one lying at an Anchor near the
Island Agnietes. At two a Clock in the afternoon the Fleet came to an Anchor
before Batavia, where they found the following Frigate and Pinks, viz. the
Stadthouse Frigate of Amsterdam, the Holland Remedy, the Nightingale Pink, the
Arms of Batavia a Frigate, the Griffin, being the Reer-Admiral of the Harbor.

The thirtieth, being Friday, the following Ships arrived there from Holland:
the Kennemerland, Orange, Rhynland, and the Kogge.

The next day the Flushing Frigate came also to an Anchor from the Coast of
Malabar, with News, that Rykloff van Gouns had taken the City Coessien, and
likewise the Rising-Sun Frigate from Rekkam.

On Tuesday the third of April a Thanksgiving Day was kept for the Conquest of
the City Coessien, and in the Evening Bon-fires were made, and all the Guns
fired from the Fort, and round about the Walls of the City Batavia, and
likewise from all the Ships.

The eleventh the Ter-Boede Pink came also to an Anchor before Batavia from
Sian; and the Agents related their Adventures to the Lord-General.

A CONTINUATION OF THE Second Embassy;
Being a Journal of the Adventures that happened to the two Fleets sent from
Batavia to the Isles of Formosa, Tayowan, and the Coast of China, under the
Command of Balthazar Bort, as Admiral, and General of the Landforces, since
the Year 1663. June the 27. until Anno 1664. March the 21.

THe great Damage which the Netherlanders suffered, Anno 1661. by the loss of
Tayowan and Formosa, taken from them by the Pyrate Coxinga, not only staining
their Honor, but also damnifying their Estates, and prejudicial to their Trade,
was not satisfied by the Fleet and Land-Soldiers, sent out the last Year, as
was expected, because the Tartars were not only wanting to join their Forces
for the Defeating of the common Enemy, but also detained them most of the time
idly at Hoksieu, feeding the Admiral with fair Promises, without any
performance, although a fit opportunity seemed to be presented to the
Hollanders, because the Enemy by the death of their General Coxinga were all in
confusion; yet notwithstanding, as our former Relation mentions, the Hollanders
Fleet at several times took thirty three Jonks, besides many lesser Vessels
which they burnt, and also the strong Fort of Kitat, leaving whole Towns and
Villages in Flames, whose Inhabitants fled to the Mountains, whilst the Tartars
took not the least Cognizance thereof, although they knew that Coxinga's Party
made Overtures of Peace, and had to that purpose sent Ambassadors to their
Emperor at Peking, as it was reported at the departure of the Fleet; though his
Majesty having put them off with dilatory answers, signifying altogether, that
they should show the first Point of their Obedience, by wearing short Hair, as
himself and all his Subjects did, which (as the Hollanders supposed) might
procrastinate the business; and besides all this, the Tartars did not perform
what they promised concerning the enlargement of the Dutch Prisoners, yet
confined in the Isle Eymuy, although they showed all outward Civilities in
their Entertainments, still Complementing their Ambassadors, yet would not
grant them a free Trade before they had full Orders from the Emperor, with
which they held so long in suspense so long, that they would not any longer
attend with their whole Fleet such continual delays; but having done little or
nothing, set Sail from thence the first of March, and came safe on the twenty
ninth of the same Month before Batavia, leaving the Ankeveen Frigate behind
them, which suffered Shipwreck before the Channel of Hoksieu, as before
mentioned; and the Merchant Constantine Nobel, with eight Netherlanders which
were kept by the Tartars; and as their Governors pretended, in kindness to
them, that they should not return until they carried from the Emperor what
should give satisfaction to their General Maetzuiker; all which cast up
together, amounted to more Jealousy, than Hopes, so that Ballancing their
Actions, they could not positively say, that either they were Friends or
Enemies whom they Treated with: Yet howsoever, let them be what they will,
whither against the General Maetzuiker and his Council in Batavia, pitched
resolutely upon, that with all their Forces they would prosecute those that had
done them their Injury, viz. the Coxingans, and would never hearken to any
accommodation, until by reprisal or otherwise, they had fully satisfied
themselves of the Damages sustained in Tayowan and Formosa. Which Decree of
theirs was luckily confirmed by Letters from their Masters at Amsterdam,
bearing Date October the 22. Anno 1662. Whereby they were informed, that a
Peace was concluded between Holland and the Portuguese, which giving them more
liberty, they prepared to equip their Navy with greater speed and diligence,
and send forth once more, under the Command of Balthazar Bort, to the Coast of
China; and if by Treaty with the Tartars they could not obtain their desires,
they would try what they could do by force of Arms, and look upon both as one
Enemy.

In this their great Expedition, sixteen Ships were appointed, and fitted out
with Men and Arms according to the following Schedule.

Names of the Ships. Mariners Land-Men Volunteers had no Pay Reformadoes Iron
Guns Brass Guns Nut-Tree 151 139 17 1 32 10 Tertolen 106 96 2 3 27 4
Ulaerdingen 95 94 4 30 Mars 112 106 1 28 3 Naerden 92 102 3 28 8 Flusshing 105
96 4 30 3 The Arms of Zealand 100 117 1 28 Kogge 90 105 3 30 2 Sea-Hound 62 69
1 1 19 2 Zierikree 107 93 1 1 28 4 Overveen 75 74 1 26 Ionker 77 41 2 26
Meliskerke 64 55 1 18 3 Buiksloot 64 51 20 New Dam 48 24 16 Finch 34 22 10 1
Together 1382 1234 41 6 399 44

Which make in all 16 Ships, bearing 2653 Men, and 396 Iron, and 44 Brass Guns.

All which Vessels were Victual'd for twelve Months, and furnished with
Necessaries of War accordingly.

At the same time, four Merchantmen, viz. the Venenburg, Pepper-Bag,
Grave-Land, and Amstelland, all Laden with rich Cargo's, and Bound for Iapan,
were ordered to go and continue with the Fleet, till they came in sight of
Formosa.

The Soldiers in Batavia were divided into twelve Companies, which had three
Captains, twelve Lieutenants, twelve Ensigns, thirty eight Sergeants and
Corporals, every Company according to the Councils Order, consisted at first of
an hundred Men, that afterward if need required, they might be divided into
fifty or seventy in a Company, and then choose new Officers for them.

The several Commissions to the Officers of the Fleet, were first given them
ashore in the presence of all the Militia in Arms, by the Lord General, and
afterward by the Governor of the Company, Charles Hertsing, accompanied aboard
by the Lords Adrian Vander Moyden, and Jacob Hutzaerd, where their Commissions
and Orders were publicly read before all the People.

The chiefest Orders in their Letter of Advice, given in Writing to the Admiral
and his Council, from the Grand Council at Batavia, consisted in the following:

AFter you have furnished your self with Water and Wood, at Laver and Tymon,
Orders from the grand Council of Batavia.
you shall Steer your Course directly to Formosa.

Your first place of Rendezvous shall be at the Isle of Pehoe, otherwise called
Piscadores, about twelve Leagues Westward from Formosa.

If any Ships run beyond the Piscadores, they shall Sail on to Hoksieu, lying
on the Main Coast of China, and there expect the Fleet.

Coming in sight of Formosa, five or six Ships shall Sail to the South Shore of
Tayowan, to enquire how Affairs stand there, and bring a speedy account of it
to the Piscadores.

If the present Possessors should proffer freely to deliver up Tayowan and
Formosa, do not refuse, but make the best advantage of the opportunity.

You shall Sail with the whole Fleet from the Piscadores first to Hoksieu, and
put all other affairs aside, till such time as you have made inquiry, in what
Posture our business stands with the Tartars.

Let the absolute knowledge of the Tartars well meaning, or otherwise, be a
guide to the Admiral and his Council, what seems fit to be done.

Take all Chinese Jonks which you meet with by the way, or on the Coast, not
regarding from whence they come, or whither they go; neither make any
distinction, whether they belong to the Tartars or Coxinga.

Send peculiar Ships to Cruise up and down for those Jonks that Trade to Iapan,
and let them not Sail to the South of Cabo de Sumber; but to the Northward of
it toward the Gulf of Iapan.

When it is convenient, let them put into the Isles of Meaxima, Gotto, and
Coray, lying to the Westward of Iapan; and if it may be done without any
considerable hinderance, to make Inspections, and enquire what convenient
Harbors there are for Ships.

If two or three Jonks be taken, send them with the Cruisers.

To use no Hostility to the Portuguese, because of the concluded Peace.

Let the Merchandise which are distributed in the Fleet, if the Tartars will
not permit a free Trade, be sent to Iapan; and likewise keep the four Merchants
Freighted thither in your company, till you come within sight of Formosa, then
let them proceed on their Voyage, except the Amstellant, which shall Sail with
you to Hoksieu, to take in the Merchandise for the Chinesy Trade, out of the
several Ships (but if they will not allow it) then carry them to Iapan.

Make your first coming at Hoksieu known to the Governor of the Fort Minjazeen,
and sending a Chinesy ashore, ask for the Merchant Constantine Nobel, desiring
him to come aboard.

If all things stand well in Hoksieu, send their Excellencies Letter by some
person of Quality to the Governors, and desire their Answer to it.

If the Tartars are united with the Coxingans, and would persuade you not to
use Hostility, by no means condescend, except they will consent to make good
the Damage which the Hollanders had suffered in Tayowan, and Surrender up
Formosa and Tayowan, with all the Forts and Castles; and also procure the
Emperors Letters to forbid the Chinesys to Trade with any, but with our People
in Tayowan: Neither should any Chinesys Sail with their Jonks Southward of the
Isle Ainan, nor to Iapan; and that those which were found there, might be taken
by them; and also to release the Netherland Prisoners.

The Chinesys shall be permitted to Sail to Batavia and Malakka, provided they
have our Pastports, if the Article of their not Sailing to Iapan be too hard
for them, pass it by.

But all the other Proposals must be performed, which if not, no way to agree
with them; and that they should also get the Articlrs concluded upon Signed and
Sealed at Peking.

If they should request an Embassy to be sent to the great Cham, and there to
make our Addresses; by no means agree to it, but promise them, if satisfaction
be made of all things, to send a Honorable Embassy in recompense to his Majesty.

If the Tartars and Coxingans are joined in a League, and do not regard the
Netherlanders as much as formerly, neither will make satisfaction, declare them
both Enemies, and use Hostility to one as well as the other, by Burning and
Ruining all places on the Main Continent of China: Then also Steer to the
Chincheu Isles, and there endeavor to destroy the two Towns, Que and Aymuy. If
there be a convenience there for a strong Hold that might be kept by a small
Garrison, to take it in Possession; for which purpose the Isle Kolong lies very
convenient, and likewise the Piscadore's, but barren and unfertile, where also
a Fort might be erected for our better Guard.

Not to accept to take any other place in possession, if you can get Tayowan
again.

Endeavor to Conquer Formosa and Tayowan by force of Arms, if it cannot be done
by Peaceable means; yet take not so much Ground in possession as formerly.

The lower Castle of Zelandia being a good Garrison, would be a sufficient
Defense against the Assaults of the Chinese.

The upper Castle shall be Dismantled, and left ungarrison'd, that afterward
on farther Order it may be pulled down, and build a strong Redoubt in its place.

To keep the Fort Provintia, and Garrison it with a hundred Men; as also that
of Quelang.

To begin somewhat in more safety in Tayowan, the Forces ought to be brought
ashore through the Straights of Lakge Moey on the main Land, and there first to
Attaque and win the Fort Provincia, and likewise endeavor to get the
Inhabitants there, to join with our People; to which purpose it will be
requisite for you to take flat bottomed Vessels from the Chinese, because our
Boats cannot carry so many Men in those shallow Waters; neither could the
required Forces be brought ashore together; and if they wanted those Vessels,
it would not be convenient to attempt any thing on that side, but be better
behind Tonkoya, about six Leagues Southward of Tayowan, where in the Northern
Mouson the Water is very smooth, and a higher Shore to break off the Winds.

From thence they should March up in two or three days by Land to the Fort
Provincia at Sakkam; and besides the convenient Landing there, the Inhabitants
of the South might perhaps join with the Hollanders, which if they should, all
the Chinese in Formosa would not be able to withstand them.

If the Tartars should deny the Trade, and that those of the Isles Ay and
Quemuy live apart from Formosa and Tayowan, and are in friendship with the
Tartars, and also inclined to agree with you, do you likewise seem willing to
it, nay, seek to join with them, provided they procure us those Articles
demanded of the Tartars, and use their assistance toward the regaining of
Formosa and Tayowan; nay, to fall upon the Tartars themselves, if occasion
should require.

No time is limited you to come with the Fleet from the North to Batavia, but
is left to the Discretion of the Admiral and his Council.

After the Admiral Balthazar Bort had on June the 30. Anno 1663. been conducted
by several Friends aboard his Ship, he set Sail the next Morning three hours
before Day, with all the Fleet, consisting in sixteen Men of War, and four
Merchants, bound for Iapan, out of the Haven of Batavia, with a South East
Wind, and running between the Isles of Hoorn and Edam, they stood to the
North-East. At Noon, the Fleet had the Isle South-Wayter South West and by West
three Leagues from them, in five Degrees and thirty Minutes Southern Latitude;
in the Evening about Sunset they had the Isle North-Wayter, about
West-North-West, four Leagues distant.

The second at the usual Signal of a White Flag, and firing of a Gun, all the
Commanders and Chief Officers of the Militia, came aboard the Admiral, who
according to the Lord General, and Indian Councils Order, chose out of them all
for his Privy Council the Persons under written, which the rest were to follow
in Order, viz. next to the Admiral Balthazar Bort, who is to be always Chief:
was

Huybrecht de Lairesse, Vice Admiral.

William Volkersz, made Commander of those Ships that were to go to Iapan, and
Rere-Admiral as long as he stayed with the Fleet.

Bartholomeus Verwei, who at Volkersz departure was to carry the Rere-Admiral's
Flag; and in that Degree take place in the Council.

Peter Coker, Master of the Admiral's Ship.

Ernest Van Hogenhoek, Merchant in the Kogge.

And the first Captain Christian Poolman, Commander of the Nut-Tree.

These having taken their places, the Fleet was by them ordered to be divided
into three Squadrons, as had already been considered by the Admiral, and
approved of by the Vice Admiral; and the Orders which the Fleet was to follow,
being read were also affirmed, and likewise the proportions of Diet was agreed
on.

At Noon the Admiral was in four Degrees and five Minutes Southern Latitude,
and had the High Island with the Trees, West-North-West, about seven Leagues
from him.

The third about daybreak, they spied the Coast of Banka; at Noon they Sailed
Eastward of the Isle Lucipa; and in the Evening past within two Leagues and a
half by the first Point of Sumatra, South and by East from them.

On Thursday, being the fifth, they saw the Mountain Monapyn, and were within
two Leagues of the Shore of Sumatra; toward Evening, they Sailed by the River
Palimboang, and between Poele Tousjou, and Poele Sayo.

The sixth, they saw the Isles Tousjou, and were at Noon in one Degree and
sixteen Minutes South Latitude.

The seventh, the Fleet found Poele Sayo North-West and by West, about three
Leagues and a half from them, in nineteen Minutes Southern Latitude; and in the
Evening descried in the North the Isles which lay near Lingen.

On Sunday they discovered Dominies Island, West-South-West, four Leagues from
them; and crossing the Line, saw the High Isle of the Box-horns, about seven
Leagues distant.

The ninth at Noon, the Admiral was in fifty four Minutes Northern Latitude,
and in sight of the Isle Pangang, West and by North, about three Leagues and a
half from him.

On the tenth appeared the Isles Tinghy, North-West and by West, and Laver
North and by West from them; in the Morning, the Fleet being near Laver, cast
Anchor on the West side of it. Tymon has no Wood, neither for Firing nor any
other use, with which Laver is plentifully supplied: This Isle is pretty high,
and has two rising Promontories, one on the South, and the other at the North
end, which make a Plain in the middle.

The twelfth about Noon, five Ships upon the Admiral's Order set Sail from
Laver to Poele Tymon, to take in Water, Fuel, and other Wood; and likewise to
Barter for Provision, according to their agreement of the eleventh.

The Bay on the South-East Point of this Island lies very convenient for the
fetching and taking in of fresh Water, Firing and other Wood, which is to be
had ashore in great plenty; but Provision is somewhat scarce here, because the
People of this Country have their Habitations more toward the South-West
side; and also that which is to be had, is much dearer than at Poele Laver.

The nineteenth, the Admiral about Sunrising set Sail from Poele Tymon, and
came in the afternoon to an Anchor, with the whole Fleet, by those Ships that
were sent out before from Laver.

The Fleet thus furnished with all Necessaries, Weighed Anchor on the twentieth
about Daybreak; and in the Evening had the Isle Poele Tymon, about four
Leagues Southerly from them.

The one and twenty, they kept a Fast.

The twenty two, twenty three, twenty four, and twenty fifth, nothing happened
of any remark.

The twenty sixth, the Isles Candor bore Easterly about seven Leagues from the
Fleet.

The twenty seventh, and twenty eighth, nothing happened, only a strong Gale of
Wind blew from South-East out of the River Cambodia.

The twenty ninth, the Finch Sailing before, made a sign that she saw Land,
which was afterward found to be the two Sand Hills on the Coast of Champan,
about six Leagues Northerly from the Admiral; who in the Evening descried Poele
Cecier de Mare, three Leagues in the South-South-East; and Cabo Cecier in the
North-East and by North, three quarters of a League from them.

The thirtieth, the Bay of Padaran bearing West-North-West, they came by
Avarella Falso about Noon, and were in twelve Degrees and seven Minutes
Northern Latitude; their Course North and by East.

The first of August, Poele Cambir was East and by North from the Admiral, and
in the afternoon the Isle Canton, North-North-East, about six Leagues.

The second, the private Iuncto being assembled, the Admiral read to them some
peculiar Orders, chiefly about the putting in at the South of Tayowan with four
or five Ships, and the manner how they should best get knowledge concerning the
condition of their Enemies, according to his Excellencies Order in Batavia; and
also in what time it was best to Cruise for their Jonks, that Sail richly Laden
to and from Iapan; and likewise how they should dispose of those Jonks which
they should take on the Coast of China, Manilhas, Makkaw, Tunking, Quinam,
Ciam, Ligoor, Patany, and other places; and also of those which they might find
in the Haven of Tayowan, and in the Piscadores.

Lastly, It was judged best to refer it till the next meeting, and in the mean
time to give every one a Copy of it, as was performed by the Secretary on the
fourth of the same Month; who also put in what was considered beforehand, and
concluded on, That William Volkers, before his departure to Iapan, might see
their resolution chiefly concerning the Cruising for Iapan Jonks, and giving an
account of it to the Netherlanders there, they might make use thereof when
occasion served.

The fifth and sixth they saw the Isles Tinhosa, and Ainam; though Tinhosa lay
five Leagues distant from the Admiral.

Mean while on the sixth, according to their last Intentions, an Order was made
in the Council, concerning the written Proposals, and newly added Observations,
taken by the Admiral and Council at that time; of which every one had a Copy
given them: which the better to understand, it is requisite that we also give a
Transcript thereof, as follows:

The Admiral according to Order, when he came in sight of Formosa, sent four or
five Ships to the Southermost Harbor of Tayowan, that there they might enquire
some News; and first proposed what Ships and Persons out of the Fleet might be
fittest for that purpose; and if the Chinesys did not come aboard of their own
accords, whereby they might attain to the desired Information, they should put
out a White Flag to invite them, or fire now and then a Gun; but if they could
not attain their desire by these two means, they should send one or two
Hostages, which they had brought with them from Batavia, (which if they did no
good, could do no harm;) and there ask the Governors for whom they kept the
Forts and Castles on Tayowan and Formosa, whether for themselves, or together
for those of Ey and Quemuy, or for the Tartar, as being his Subjects? and
whether it were best to be done in writing or by word of Mouth?

If they should make answer to the foresaid Demand, and desire to know our
Intention, whether it would not be convenient to entreat them to send some of
their People with us to the greater part of the Fleet at the Piscadores,
promising there to acquaint them with our Design. If they should be thereto
inclined, leaving them Hostages, whether they should consent to it? Also how
many days the Ships should stay on the South part of Tayowan? likewise if
during that time, they should use any Hostility, as taking of their Jonks and
other Vessels, because the Indian Council had Commanded them to use none till
they knew how they stood affected to the Tartars; but on the contrary,
Commanded again, That nevertheless all Chinesy Jonks (from whence soever they
came, and whither soever Bound) which they met withal in their Channel, they
should endeavor to take without any distinction, whether they belong to the
Tartars or Coxinga.

And in regard the Intentions of their Excellencies in Batavia are declared to
us, that we may take all Chinesy Jonks coming from other Countries, if it would
not be convenient to take out the Goods, whether Skins or ought else, and
sending them for a trial to Iapan, to see how the Iapanners would refent it,
whether well or ill; and whether it relate only to the Jonks, on the Coast of
China, or also to those which they might find on the Coast of the Manilhas,
Makkau, Tunking, Quinam, Cambodia, Siam, Ligoor, Patany, Iohoor, and Formosa,
which if they should not be set upon at our first coming thither, might easily
escape from us.

On the contrary, they considered that the Enemy by such harsh actions might
alter from their good Resolution, if perhaps they had any before, and then not
suffer the Netherlanders to speak with them, much less freely proffer to
surrender up Tayowan and Formosa into our possession again, as their
Excellencies would willingly have it: and to that purpose Commanded to take
hold, and make good use of such an opportunity; otherwise, if the Enemy should
make fair Promises, and thereby detain us from taking their Jonks, or doing
ought else; when perhaps, being forced by sudden Invasions, they might sooner
come to an agreement, and do what we should demand of them.

Therefore it was Proposed, if they ought not to take all the Jonks and Vessels
which they should find in the Piscadores, at the Admirals coming thither.

Secondly, Since their Excellencies had commanded to send peculiar Ships to
Cruise up and down for the Jonks that Trade to Iapan, without expressing in
what time it is best to be done; nay required, that according to their Order,
it should be done before William Volkerts went from the Fleet to Iapan, to
carry News also thither concerning it, that in case ought should happen there
he might govern himself accordingly; therefore the Admiral Proposed, if it were
best to be begun in the Southern or Northern Mouson; if in the Southern, the
only time would be about the latter end of August, or the middle of September,
to get to the Northward of the Cape Sumber; and moreover, in the Iapan Sea, in
which the forementioned Jonks were best to be taken.

But then again was to be considered, the Cruisers would be forced to spend
three or four Months, without any likelihood of meeting with any Jonks; and
likewise to consider, that the Ships aforementioned would not be able to endure
there long, if they should be surprised by Northerly Winds, want Water or Wood,
and their Men happening to fall sick and die, which would force them to put
into some Harbor or other; and also, that it was very uncertain, if by their
Cruising they should meet with any thing, because that the Netherland Ships
could not always Sail in that Channel, for the Reasons aforementioned, which
the Chinese use: Nay, if they should keep there continually, they might let
them pass by in dark or misty Weather; and though the Netherland Ships did
perhaps see some Jonks, yet they might loose them by their nimble Sailing:
Adding moreover, that their Excellencies in this concern had thus expressed their
opinion in the Orders which they had given to them: viz.

As We are informed, there may be more assurance made of those Trading Jonks
that Sail to Iapan, than when they return in the Northern season, at which time
it is very uncertain to wait for them, because they generally return late in
the Year, and Our Ships can scarce stay so long there. But on the contrary, it
is also to be observed, that if the Netherland Ships do not go at the
forementioned time, but later, they cannot get beyond the Cape de Sumber, and
no likelihood to meet with any Jonks to the Southward of it, whereby we should
be deprived of those rich Booties, that is to be had out of the Iapan Jonks; of
which their Excellencies make mention in their Orders, saying,

And since the richest Prizes are to be had out of the Trading Jonks which Sail
to, and from Iapan, therefore it is requisite that you use your chiefest
endeavors about them, and send out expert Cruisers to frequent the North
Passage, and not the South of Cabo de Sumber, Sailing quite to the Iapan Sea.
Provided this Cruising thus ordered, with hopes to take something, could be
performed; yet there are no reasons to persuade us to it, for the
uncertainties, if it must be performed by our Ships only, their Excellencies
make mention of in these words:

We put it to your consideration, if it would not be convenient to take two or
three Chinesy Jonks that are good Sailers (which perhaps may fall into your
hands on the Coast of China) along with you thither, thereby to deceive the
Chinese, and the easier take their Trading Jonks, which Our Frigates, because
of their sluggish Sailing, are scarce able to do, since We know the Chinese
commonly out-Sail them. About this the Council ought chiefly to consider, if We
had best undertake so uncertain a Design this Year, because the Fleet would not
only be much weakened thereby, but also abated in its Power and Forces, when it
should go against the Enemies; neither would they esteem nor regard us so much,
as if we had all our Forces together; and we should also thereby be bereaved of
our nimblest and best Ships, which would be more assisting to us in all
Affairs, than the biggest.

It may also happen, that falling on so many things together, nothing might be
effected; therefore it ought to be considered, that all uncertain Designs which
cannot be performed, without separating the Fleet be laid aside, and see what
could be done to the Enemy with our whole Fleet together, and accordingly defer
the sending of Ships out to Cruise up and down the Coast; the rather, because
in October, November, and December, it is better to get along the Shore to the
Northward, as it happened to us the last Year; besides, their Excellencies
themselves have little hopes this Year to get any Jonks that come from Iapan,
as by these following words more plainer appear, speaking of this concern in
their Advice and Orders.

And to be ready so soon, that We may take them in their going thither, is not
to be done from hence; by which We should understand, that all other Designs
ought to be laid aside, and begin first with Cruising; therefore to consider
what number of Ships We shall send out to that purpose, and how they shall be
Manned; and also if they shall put into the Isles of Meaxima, Gotto, and Koray,
to enquire if there be no safe Harbors, Bays, and other conveniences for
Ships, that in time of need, they might make use of them according to their
Excellencies Order, if it may be done without prejudice or hinderance. But it
is again to be considered, that this Enquiry and Cruising cannot be done both
in one season; and likewise to be suspected, that our Cruising Ships might be
kept in the Havens aforementioned by the Chinese; yet this might be excused in
Stormy or Tempestuous Weather; however, We ought not to trust our Forces in
their Hands; also that Cruising from Hoksieu, they might by Sailing along the
Shore run beyond Cape de Sumber, nay, to Nanking, to see for convenient Havens
and Bays, for the getting of Wood and fresh Water, of which in bad Weather,
they might also make use, and at once take all those Jonks which they could
meet with: On all which Proposals, they resolved and agreed as follows.

First, That the Admiral in person, according to his request, should go to
Tayowan, with the Nut*Tree, Vlaerdingen, Kogge, Sea-Hound, and Ionker, there to
enquire concerning all Affairs, that on all accidents he might give speedy
Order: If the Chinese do not come aboard of their own accords, he shall fire
some Guns leasurely one after another, and also set up a Chieuw; if nothing be
effected that way, to send the two Chinese Hostages, brought along with them
from Batavia, (if they can get no Prisoners) ashore with Letters; by whom some
Questions should be asked, viz. For whom they kept their Forts and Castles in
Formosa and Tayowan? whether for themselves, or jointly with those of Ey and
Quemuy? or for the Tartars, as being their Subjects? with promises, if they
should truly answer them, that then the Netherlanders would also declare their
Intentions; if thus they obtained their desire, the Admiral shall ask them to
send some of their People along with him to the rest of the Fleet at the
Piscadores, with promise, there to declare his Design, without leaving any of
our Men as Hostages in their custody. If they are not inclined thereto, the
Admiral shall do what time and convenience shall advise him to: For the
performance of which, he shall only spend two or three days, in which time no
Hostility shall be used ashore; but nevertheless, not only endeavor to make
Prize of all Vessels there, but also in the Piscadores.

Concerning the second Proposal about Cruising for the Jonks in the Iapan
Channel, It is thought fit that it be undertaken after the business be done at
Hoksieu, if they are not prevented by receiving satisfaction for their
sustained Injuries. But if they should not, then to wave their Cruising so long
in the Southern Mouson, but return to the Enemies chief Towns and Places; and
Sailing to the North with the whole Fleet, do all the Damage possible, both by
Sea and Land, and then against the time comes, to send the Merchant Ernest Van
Hogenbook as Admiral with three of the best Sailers, Manned as they were at that
present, and three nimble Jonks (if they could be Masters of so many betwixt
that time) to Cruise beyond Cabo de Sumber, nay, if possible, as far as
Nanking, that in their way thither, they might seek for some convenient Bays
and Harbors wherein Ships might be safe in bad Weather, and be furnished with
Water and Wood. Moreover, to fly up and down in thirty two and thirty three
Degrees, and seize on all Ships they could light upon. They should also for
that purpose, put in at the Isles Meaxima, Gotto, and Koray, provided they
could do it without prejudice, according to their Excellencies Order in
Batavia: In performance of which also, the Cruisers should again come to the
Fleet, either at Ey, Quemuy, or Formosa in February, that then with all their
Forces they might undertake such Adventures as should be thought convenient.

The two chief Articles aforementioned thus agreed on, it was also thought fit,
after their former refusal, to Sail with the forementioned Ships from Pedro
Blanko to Formosa, toward the Cape of Tankoya, so to reach the South Harbor of
Tayowan, and Anchor there; and likewise although William Volkerts, Admiral for
the Iapan Merchants, had purposed with his Ships to proceed on his Voyage from
Pedro Blanco along the Coast of China to Iapan; yet the whole Fleet consisting
of twenty Sail should first appear in sight of Formosa* and that then three of
the Iapan Ships should go on without the Ankeveen, between Formosa and the
Piscadores, and the Vice Admiral with the remaining twelve Ships, should
immediately Sail to the Piscadores, and there stay and expect the Admiral with
his five Ships; but if bad Weather, all the Men of War should go to the
Piscadores, and the three Vessels that were bound for Iapan, without staying
any longer by the Fleet, proceed on their Voyage.

The same day, according to agreement, the Admiral set Sail with his five
Ships, the Nut-Tree, Vlaerdingen, Kogge, Sea-Hound, and Ionker to Formosa,
toward the Cape of Tonkayo, from thence to steer for the South Harbor of
Tayowan, and there drop Anchor.

The eighth, the Sea-Hound and Ionker returned from their fruitless chasing of
a Jonk, since the sixth, which in calm Weather had escaped them, taking only a
Chinese Champan, in which the Ionker had five Men wounded, and the Sea-Hound
one.

The Politic Chinese first set adrift a Pot with Arak in a Tub* and
afterward a Chinese Water-Vessel, on which stood a Cane with a Letter; and
lastly, the aforementioned Champan, which was taken by the Netherlanders, but
the Pot with Arak the Commanders would not permit the Seamen to take up.

Whilst the Sea-hound and Ionker were yet busy chasing the forementioned Jonk,
they spied another under Sail, toward which, accompanied with the Vice Admiral
and his whole Squadron, they made with all the Sail they could possible; and
soon after the Admirals Sloop was put out Armed with six Blunderbusses, and
other Necessaries of War, and Manned with the Boats Crew, being twelve Soldiers,
one Ensign, and a Corporal, all Commanded by his Pilot.

In the taken Jonk, which on the tenth was brought close aboard the Admiral,
they found seven small Guns, Sythes, Pikes, a parcel of Fireballs and Arrows,
and likewise good store of Gunpowder and other Ammunition; the rest of the
Lading consisted in several kinds of Wood.

The Admiral first caused some of the Chinese to be mildly examined, then
threatening, that if they would not speak the truth, they should die for it; to
which purpose a Soldier was put behind one of them with a naked Sword, and then
asked, To what intention they plied there, yet (partly supposing, that they
would not confess, and partly, because the Interpreters could not well
understand what they said) they could get but a slender account from them; but
that which they agreed in most was, that they belonged to the Tartar, and with
twenty Jonks had carried Tartar Soldiers from Canton to the Island Ainan, to
reinforce the Garrison, and had now been in company with five of the same Jonks
in their way toward Canton; besides, they made mention of their Pass, which
the Viceroy of Canton had given them to that purpose, and delivered it to the
Netherlanders, which were not able to understand it: At this time the Admiral
was about the Craeke Deep, off from the Makaw Island.

The eleventh, the Council being assembled by the Admiral, caused the two
Commanders of the taken Jonks, named, Onghing, and Ongkeeyn, to be brought
before them and examined; but could learn nothing from them, but what agreed
with that which their People had told two days before, viz. that they had
carried Soldiers from Canton to Ainan, and were now on their return; and
replied when asked, That Coxinga had been dead a year, and that his Son Kimsia
had the chief Command in Tayowan and Formosa; but how it was with the Wars
between the Tartars and Chinese they knew not. When asked if they knew the
Champan taken by the Netherlanders of the second instant, and now behind the
Admiral's Stern; they answered, after having see it, Yes, and that it belonged
to Canton; but if the Jonk to which it belonged came along with them from
Ainan, they could not resolve.

The Letter which they found also in the said Jonk was given them to read; but
they gave another construction than the former: Neither could the Hollanders be
rightly informed of the Contents, because their Interpretors could not explain
it; so that in stead of satisfaction, they found themselves more perplexed than
before.

Hereupon the Admiral desired the Council to consider if these shaven Chinese,
with their Jonk and Cargo, since they had showed no manner of Hostility to the
Netherlanders, ought to be cleared and discharged, or if it were better to be
sure by taking them along with the Fleet to Hoksieu, and put their freedom to
be judged by Singlamong and Lipovi Chief Governors there; or if by tortures,
they should make a farther examination.

Which being consulted on, it was supposed that by tortures they might perhaps
draw from them the truth, and what the Netherlanders expected, viz. That they
were of Coxinga's Party, and Sailed with false Passes, and yet be sent out by
the Tartars, and be under their jurisdiction, whom by the taking of these
Jonks, they ought no ways to displease; the more, because their Excellencies
Order in Batavia, concerning the taking of Jonks, was not specified to relate
to those which Sailed to places that belonged to the Tartars, but those that
drove a Trade to Iapan: But because this Jonk thus prepared for Piracy was much
suspected, and also the rough entertainment which they had from the small
Vessel, six of their Men being Wounded, they resolved after consideration to
declare the Jonk with the forementioned Goods, and all her Men free Prize, and
carry them to Hoksieu, there to make further inquiry concerning the truth. This
being told them, they seemed to be satisfied, only fearing at their return to
be taken by Coxinga's Jonks.

In the Morning about Daybreak, the Fleet had the North-Point of Ilha dos
Viados, or the Island Lemas North and by West, two Leagues and a half from them.

About Noon, the Nut-Tree, Cogge, Zierikzee, Overveen, Naerden, and Mars, came
at the firing of some Guns, from the Admiral to an Anchor, on the North-side of
Lemas, within Cannon shot of the Shore. A good distance behind the Admiral,
they saw the Bucksloot and Nieuwendam also lying at Anchor. So on the twenty
ninth, the Admiral came with ten Ships safe to an Anchor, in the Road of
Hoksieu; the rest of the Fleet were ordered to Sail to the Bay of Tenhay, and
the Good Fortune soon after sent notice of her arrival by Letters to the
Governor of the Castle Minjazeen, lying at the Mouth of the River Hoksieu; and
likewise to the Viceroy Singlamong, and General Lipovi.

The twentieth of October, after long stay, and many Consultations, concerning
the Commencing the War against the Coxingans, the Vice Admiral Huibert de
Laresse, and Hogenbook came aboard the Admiral again at Soanchefoe, with a
Letter from the Viceroy Singlamong, containing these words.

Singlamong's Letter to the Admiral*
YOu are come hither from a remote Country, with mighty Ships, to serve Our
Emperor, which is a certain Sign of your good Inclinations. How shall We return
Kindnesses sufficient to such your Deserts? It is needless to show Thankfulness
for the small Trisles sent you. You write to have it Sealed, what has passed
between us: But how can I possibly do it? because you (if it be only Written
in Our Language) cannot understand it. Therefore I desire you to let the
Business of the War be written in Paper, both in the Dutch and Chinese Tongues,
and send it to Me, that I may also rightly apprehend it.

When We together shall have regained the Isles of Ay and Quemuy, We will join
Our Ionks and Forces to your Ships, to set upon Tayowan, and so utterly root
out their whole Party.

It is most true, that Our Emperor will requite the good Service which you have
done to this Empire, by permitting you a free Trade; for I and the General
Lipovi will write expressly about it to his Imperial Majesty.

The Ionk which you desire to carry News to Batavia, shall be sent you, when
you please to advise Us, whether you will have it Manned with Tartars or
Hollanders: We desire you to employ none of your Ships in it, that your Forces
may not be weakened, because they will be wanting in the War. If you please, We
desire you to stay a little longer before you depart; for I expect an Answer
from Lipovi, which so soon as I have, We will appoint the day. This is in short
an Answer to your Letter; for all things cannot so well be expressed on Paper.

Written in the second Year of the Emperor Conghi, the ninth Moon, and the
nineteenth Day.

The one and twentieth, according to the Viceroys Request, the Articles and
Agreement were written in Chinese and Dutch, on Flowered Paper, and both Signed
and Sealed by the Admiral and Secretary, with the Companies Seal in Red Wax,
and sent ashore about Noon by the Merchant Ernest Hoogenhoek, who was also
commanded to request, That the Viceroy would in like manner Seal that for the
Netherlanders with his Seal, and return it with him. The Articles were these.

I. There shall be an inviolable League between us and the Subjects of his
Imperial Majesty of China and Tartary. II. Faithfully to assist one another
against the Coxingans, our Enemies, till they are brought under Subjection.
III. That Writings shall be delivered on both sides concerning the Flags and
Colors, whereby to distinguish each other from the Enemy. IV. That the
Expedition against the Enemy shall be hastened on both Parties. V. That the
Emperors Ionks and Vessels shall be under Our Flags, and as Ours divided into
three Squadrons, shall keep under them, till their coming to Eymuy and Quemuy,
that when Our Ships, which draw more Water, cannot come near the Shore, We may
run with the Ionks into the Havens; to which purpose, We desire Chinese Pilots.
VI. That We Land and set upon the Enemy together. VII. That the East India
Company shall drive a Free and unmolested Trade in China and Tartary, and all
other his Imperial Majesty's Countries, for ever; but the disposing of those
Goods which We brought along with Us, shall be referred till with joint Forces
We have conquered Eymuy and Quemuy. VIII. That when We have subdued those
Isles, upon Our Request We may take Possession of one of them, or any other
thereabouts, which may be convenient for Us, to keep a Garrison, to defend Us
from Assaults of the Pirates. IX. That on the Conquest of Eymuy and Quemuy,
your Highness Ionks and Forces shall Sail with Us to Formosa and Tayowan, and
upon Conquering of those Places, deliver them with all the Forts and Castles,
and what is found in them, into Our Possession, that We may inhabit that
Country, as formerly. X. That the Viceroy shall accommodate Us with a good
Ionk, which we may send with Information to Batavia. XI. That his Highness also
take care that all this be approved of, and confirmed by the Emperor in Peking,
and a Grant thereof procured under his Imperial Majesty's Signet, to the
Hollanders.
About these Articles, as the Admiral was informed by Letters of the twenty
third from Nobel and Hoogenhoek, the Viceroy made great scruple, saying, That
he could not sign them, before he had made the General Lipovi, and the Emperors
Deputies in Chinchieu, acquainted with the seventh and eighth Articles, and had
their Approbation concerning them, which at farthest within two or three days,
on the Word of a King, should be performed; to which purpose he had already
sent the forementioned Articles, written by the Netherlanders in form of an
Agreement, by Post to Chinchieu. And likewise the other Articles, especially
that of Tayowan and Formosa, which upon the taking of it with joint Forces,
should be left in possession of the Netherlanders, was already granted without
contradiction by the Viceroy. Nay, he had protested to them, That upon the
taking of Ay and Quemuy, the free and unmolested Trade through all the Empire
of China should not only be granted to the Hollanders for a few years, but for
ever, for which he would stand obliged; only he desired them to stay the
forementioned three or four days, as we said; when they answering, told the
Viceroy, That in that Point they could not satisfy his desire; but that one
thing or other thereof must be Sealed: He again repeated what he declared
before.

The twenty third the Admiral sent Lairesse, and the Rere-Admiral Bartholomew
Verwei ashore, with Order to go with Nobel and Hoogenhoek to the Viceroy, and
desire him to Sign and Seal the Covenant for performance of all those
forementioned Articles, and also for that of the Free Trade, which his Highness
had granted; and then declare to him, That the Hollanders would at present be
satisfied with it, and stay the limited three or four days for the granting of
that Article concerning Eymuy and Quemuy; but that in the mean time he would be
pleased to hasten the sending of the Jonk which was to be dispatched for
Batavia.

The twenty sixth the Vlaerdingen, Nut-tree, Tertolen, Naerden, Mars,
Zierikzee, Flushing, and the Cogge, being under the Rere-Admiral Bartholomew
Verwei his Squadron, set Sail from before the River Soanchieuw, steering
directly for Cape Tsombou.

The twenty seventh a Servant came with the Interpreter Melman from his
Highness Singlamong, who had himself been with the General Lipovi, and brought
the long-expected Sealed Agreement; as also two Letters, one from the Viceroy,
and another from the General. The Conditions aforesaid were to this effect.

SInglamong Chief Commander, and King of the Territory of Fokien, has
concluded in his Council as follows.

Singlamong's Jonks shall carry a black Flag, in the midst of which shall stand
a red Full-Moon.

Matthithel'avia, Governor in Soanchieuw, a yellow Flag with a white Pennon:
The Jonks under his Command, a white Flag, and a red Moon: His Mandarins, a
green Flag, with a red Moon, and a white Pennon.

Tonganpek, a black Flag, and a white Pennon: His Officers, a black Flag, with
a Silver Moon.

Soensinpek, a black Flag, and a red Pennon.

Iantoetek, a black Flag, with a yellow Pennon.

Loylavia, a green Flag, with a Silver Moon in it: His Officers, a green Vane,
with a red Moon, and a white Pennon.

Thelavia, a green Flag, with a red Moon, and a black Pennon: His Officers, a
green Flag, with a red Moon, and red Pennon.

Yoejoeng, a green Flag, with a red Moon, and a white Pennon.

The Holland Ships shall set Sail from hence with Our Jonks: The smallest, and
those that draw least Water, coming before the Enemies Country, shall run up
into the Harbors; and the greatest Ships, as likewise Our biggest Jonks, shall
follow. If the Holland Ships, or Ours, be in any danger, they shall not desert,
but each be ready to assist the other as much as possible. We promise therefore
to be faithful, as People of one Heart ought to be; and from hence forward no
Hostility shall be shown on our Part to the Hollanders. Tonganpek shall also
set out two convenient Vessels, furnished with experienced Seamen, which shall
sail before the Holland Ships, and be at their Service. Likewise he shall
furnish the Hollanders with three good Pilots, that understand and know this
Channel, which also shall serve the Hollanders. When they set Sail from hence
with Our Jonks, they shall keep together, till they see if the Enemy with his
Sea-Forces will come out to meet Us: If not, Our Ships shall with the
Hollanders come to an Anchor at the Cape of Laetjen, which shall be the Station
where the Jonks of Our Kingdom shall meet, and from thence besiege the Enemies
Forts and Islands by Sea, when Singlamong shall give Order what his People are
to do when they come ashore. The Hollanders shall the day before receive a
Letter from Singlamong, when they shall set Sail from hence. After the
Conquering of Eymuy and Quemuy, the Hollanders shall by Our Emperor be accepted
as Subjects, and his Imperial Majesty shall acknowledge their faithful
Assistance, and grant them their Requests, which I and Lipovi promise with all
speed to procure, when once We have seen the Valor of the Hollanders.
Furthermore, you may sell those Merchandises which you have here aboard in that
Ship which lies in the Hoksieu: But since the time is short that the Ships must
Sail against the Enemy, it will be better that the Goods be reposited in
Hoksieu, and the sale thereof deferred till We shall have conquered Eymuy and
Quemuy: Yet if you will sell any thing before, you may, it being freely
permitted.

Our Tartar Jonks shall all have a black Circle in their Sails, in which shall
stand a black Character.

This We have Sealed with Our Royal Signet: In the second Year of the Emperor
Conghi, the ninth Moon.
The Letter writ to the Admiral by the Viceroy Singlamong was to this purpose.
THe last Year you were sent hither from the King of Batavia, and came with
your Ships before Hoksieu, and have acquainted by Letters and Word of mouth,
That you come to serve Our Empire, and assist Us against Coxinga, which We have
already made known to his Majesty at Peking.: And seeing you resolve to be
fully satisfied and revenged to the height for all the Losses you have
sustained, and never to desist until you have utterly extirpated those Pirates,
therefore We have been the more earnest in Our Solicitation: And since you are
come hither again this Year to the same purpose, to join with Us, We have read
your Letter, which We received some days since, concerning the War, with the
Government and Order thereof, which We shall observe when We come to engage
with the Enemy; but We find thereby, that you make more Proposals than the last
Year, and those such as I and Lipovi (though Chief Governors of this Territory)
cannot conclude on, before we have made it known to the Emperor, and received
his Approbation. As to what concerns those things for which We have received
Orders and Command from the Emperor to conclude with you heretofore, We have
sent you in this Letter, and they shall also be strictly observed by Us.


The Letter from the General was to this purpose. Lipovi General of the Tartars
in the Territory of Fokien, to the Admiral of the Hollanders, sends Greeting.
TWo days since I received Singlamong's and your Letter concerning the
Agreement to be concluded between you and Us, which I have strictly perused;
but finding some weighty Articles in it, I thought it not convenient to answer
your Proposals. It is true, I am placed by the Emperor here as Chief Commander;
yet I am not empowered to treat about such Affairs, according to my desire; but
must first acquaint his Majesty with it, and expect his Confirmation: But I
have very well understood your desire, and you must expect an Answer to your
Business from the Court at Peking, whither I have already sent a Letter. As to
your going with Our Ships to Eymuy and Quemuy, Singlamong will acquaint you
with Our Intentions, and give ^ou order concerning all things else. You have
enclosed in your Letter the Agreement We have mentioned, viz. That after the
Conquering of Eymuy and Quemuy, Our Fleet and Forces shall sail with yours to
Tayowan; and likewise that here in Hoksieu, or elsewhere, a Place shall be
granted wherein you may drive a Trade; I have also written about it to the
Court at Peking, from whence We expect a sudden Answer, which so soon as We
receive, We will send you, together with the Emperors Pleasure concerning your
last Articles. You request also three Pilots, which Singlamong will dispatch to
you. Here enclosed I send you an Express of the Flags in those Ships which
shall go out of this River, to Eymuy and Quemuy, by which they may be
distinguished.

Santokquon, Lipovi's Admiral, shall carry a blue Flag, with a black Moon, and
a white Pennon.

Cheytinquon, a black Flag, with a Moon Argent.

a green Flag, with a red Moon.

Schuluwan, General of the Militia, a red Flag, with a black Moon.

Captain Yoeloewan, a white Flag, with a sable Moon.

Captain Ian Sumpin, a green Flag.

Captain Goo Sumpin, a black Flag, and a blue Pennon.


This Sealed Writing, being compared with that sent by the Netherlanders to his
Highness, to be Sealed by him, was found to differ in the principal Articles,
viz.

The taking possession of the Isles of Eymuy and Quemuy, was not mentioned, but
left out.

No mention was also made, That if they conquered, then they would go with them
to Tayowan and Formosa.

Concerning the Free Trade through the whole Empire, and also to get the
Emperor to ratify their Agreement, they expressed thus: That upon the
Conquering the Isles of Eymuy and Quemuy, the Hollanders should be received
into the Emperors Subjection, and that his Majesty should acknowledge their
Assistance, and grant their Request, to which Singlamong and Lipovi would be
means that it should be performed.

Besides, although the King and Councils Writing agreed for the most part with
that of the Hollanders, yet they had inserted many new things, about the
carrying of their Flags, and other unnecessary Matters.

The last Exception was, That the Viceroy Singlamong's Letter was signed with
his Seal; but Lipovi's was not.

The Admiral Bort, in Answer to their Highnesses Singlamong and Lipovi, writ
back, with an Account of what Flags and Colors the Netherlanders used to
carry, and should carry in that Expedition, as follows.

BEsides the Letter from your Highness and the General Lipovi, I also received
yesterday the Result made in your Highness Assembly about Our Business, in
which we are permitted to sell those Commodities at this time only which We
brought along with Us, being but few, and such as Captain Nobel can at any time
give your Highness an Inventory of: We accept of this Grant, provided it may be
forthwith published, as well here in Soanchieuw, as Hoksieu, and made known to
the People by divulging the Proclamation; and that Captain Nobel may go about
it to Hoksieu, and there at his coming open his Cargoes, and expose the Goods
to sale. And though this be but a small Requital for the great Service which We
intend to do, yet We will firmly hope and believe, That his Imperial Majesty
hereafter will not refuse to grant us a Free Trade for ever, through his whole
Empire, it being only what agrees with his Royal Bounty, to requite all such
who to their great Charge come to his Service. We declare, That Our Fleet of
Ships stands Our Masters in above a hundred thousand Tail to fit out, and
forty thousand Tail a Month to maintain: That Fleet which returned last Year
with ill success to Batavia, cost also a great Sum of Money, which your
Highness must needs be sensible of, and likewise what damage We sustained by
the loss of two Ships that came to his Imperial Majesty's Service. If therefore
the Sale of those few Goods which We have brought along with Us, can make any
satisfaction for the great Charges which We have already been at, We leave to
your Highness consideration. Therefore We cannot but be still importunate in
our first Request, That the Free Trade may be ratified to Us for ever through
the whole Empire, and Writings sealed in confirmation thereof.

But as concerning Eymuy and Quemuy, upon whose Conquest We desire some
adjacent Isle to plant in; and also about your Sailing with Us from thence to
Formosa and Tayowan, and surrendering that Country upon the retaking of it to
Us, your Highness makes no mention; neither of the Article to procure Us
Letters from the Emperor for the confirming all things.

Yet We are confident that your Highness will be so favorable as to procure
what We so often and so long have requested; upon which account We are ready and
willing to venture Our Lives and Fortunes for the Emperor, and use Our
uttermost Endeavors to ruin that avaritious and insulting Pyrate, so We stand
ready to join Our Forces with yours, desiring all celerity in the Expedition,
and that the time for Our setting Sail from Eymuy and Quemuy may be appointed
and published, because the time limited for Us to be there, by Our General and
Council, is already past.

There are yet some Prisoners of Ours, whom We desire your Highness to
remember, and to send them to Us, if you hear where they are, or find them. In
Canton, as We understand, are two of Our Men, that went over to the Enemy,
which We desire may be sent fettered to Us, because such as are unfaithful to
their Trust, as the worst of Men, should suffer by condign Punishment.

The Flags and Colors which your Highness Fleet shall carry in this Our
intended Expedition, We are sufficiently informed of their differences by your
Highness* Ours also you may be pleased to take notice of, here enclosed.

From the good Ship the Nut-Tree, the twenty seventh of October 1663. from
Soanchieuw. Balthazar Bort.


The Hollanders Colors, when joined with the Tartars, shall be as follows.
First, All the Vanes and Flags which constantly flow from their Ships, are
Red, White, and Blue.

When a white Ensign appears on the Stern, and a Gun is fired, it signifies the
calling of a General Council: This Ensign also signifies Peace, as the Red War,
and the beginning of a Fight.

At the putting on of a red, white, and blue Pennon from the Admirals Ship, all
the Ships must follow him.

The Admirals Captain shall carry a green Flag, in which on the upper end near
the Staff stands a gilded Lion with a Bunch of Arrows in his Paws.

The several Inferior Officers shall be distinguished by their several Colors
of Red, Blue, Yellow, and Green.

The Rere-Admiral shall carry a blue Ensign, with a Lion near the Staff; and
his Inferior Officers Watchet, Blue, White, and Yellow Colors.

All other Martial Officers shall carry their Colors mingled, by which,
together with their Sails and Yards, they may very well be distinguished from
the Tartars.

The second of November, Constantine Nobel came from Soanchieuw aboard the
Admiral, and brought an Answer from the Viceroy Singlamong, in which the time
of their setting Sail, and all other things were mentioned, as appears by the
following Contents.

IN the tenth Moon, the first day, I have given Order to the Agent Nobel to
tell the Holland Admiral, That Our Tartar Jonks shall set Sail out of the River
Soanchefoe on the ninth of this Our tenth Moon, and shall ride close by the
Hollanders in the Haven of Schoeni, and if Wind and Weather serve, to set forth
with your Ships the same day, and set Sail to the Bay of Wettauw. Let five of
your best Sailers, that draw least Water, go before with Our nimblest Jonks,
and so run into the Haven of Wettauw; and the remaining ten Ships, with Our
great Jonks, Anchor in the Mouth of the Harbor. If We should meet with any of
the Enemies Jonks in the Bay of Wettauw, as also in the Haven of Kinsakia, as
We may expect, let us jointly assail them.

Concerning your Landing on the Enemies Coasts, Bethetok and I have resolved
about it, which must be known only to us two; but We will give you timely
notice thereof.

I have ordered the Agent to bring me the List of the Merchandises which you
have brought along with you, and I will send them by him to the Governor of
Hoksieu, with Orders to him to sell them in Public, to which purpose the An
Officer belonging to the City.
Conbon will be very serviceable.


Nobel also brought a Letter from the General Lipovi, in answer to that which
the Admiral had sent to him, containing the following Lines.

THe twenty ninth of this ninth Moon I received your Letter, and perused the
Contents of it, taking notice of the several distinctions of the Hollanders
Flags and Colors, which We have approved, and at this instant acquainted Our
Officers with, and ordered them to govern themselves accordingly.

You are here sent from your King in Batavia, with your Ships, to assist and
sail with us to Eymuy and Quemuy: Therefore We believe that you will show your
Valor, in setting upon the Enemies Countries and Vessels, that when they are
Conquered, you may return with Honor to Batavia, and there give an Account of
your Adventures to your King, That here you have obtained your long wished for
Desire of Free Trade, for which you have come hither two Years.

You write that We should send you Letters of Assurance, that you might for
ever Trade through all this Empire, besides the appointing you convenient
Houses and Places; which is not possible to be granted, till we are empowered
from his Majesty at Peking, to whom I have already writ concerning it, who by
this time understands your Requests: But as for those Wares which you have
brought with you, you may dispose thereof at your pleasure. But after the
Conquest of Eymuy and Quemuy, when you shall return with Us again to Hoksieu,
We shall by that time have, We hope, a pleasing Answer to all your other
desires, from the Emperor.

You propose also, That if any of your Contrymen, being Prisoners with the
Enemy, should fall into Our Hands, we would not kill them; which We not only
promise, but further also, that We will send them to you; and to that purpose I
have already strictly commanded both My Officers and Soldiers. The day on which
the Ships shall set Sail with Our Jonks, Singlamong will privately advise you.


The eleventh the Admiral Sailed out of the Mouth of the River Soanchieuw, and
with three Ships, viz. the Nut-Tree, Cinnamon-Tree, and Yonker, he came to the
Cape of Sombou, although not followd by the Tartar Jonks. The Rere-Admiral
Verwei, who had since the twenty sixth lain in the River Soanchefoe, set Sail
also from thence with three Ships, the Vlaerdingen, Naerden, and Sea-hound.

The thirteenth the Admiral was informed by Letters from Tonganpek, That his
Jonks were the day before come out of the River of Soanchefoe, into the Bay of
Schoeni; and that Morning a Letter was brought to him from the Admiral Matitoe
(who three days before was gone to the Cape of Wattauw) in which he was
advised, That he should be with all the Jonks of the Realm at Wattauw on the
fourteenth day of that Moon, and also acquaint the Holland Admiral with it,
that he might Sail thither with his Ships.

According to this Advice from Tonganpek, and also perceiving the Jonks sailing
before, the Admiral set sail with fourteen Ships from the Cape of Sombou to
that of Puthay, behind which he came to an Anchor about the Evening, in nine
Fathom Water.

Here Jacob Gommers, Commander of the Zierikzee, came aboard the Admiral,
bringing with him one of the Dutch Prisoners, called Maurice Ianzen Vis, born
in Mauritius-Isle, who not long before was taken by the Enemy Coxingans, and by
them sent to the Netherlanders: He also delivered the Admiral a Letter from the
Enemy, dated the tenth Instant, written by Summimpesiou, otherwise called
Sioubontok, the second or next Person to the young Coxin Kimsia, who had the
Supreme Command over the Isles of Eymuy and Quemuy, and other Islands lying
thereabouts. The Letter was to this effect.

Summimpesiou, alias Sioubontok, Commander and Governor of Quemuy, sends this
Letter to the Chief Commander of the Holland Fleet.
YOu have understood and know, that Coxinga two Years ago conquered Tayowan,
which formerly was his Native Country.

This was done because he was forced to provide a Settlement and strong
Fortress for his Soldiers, which he used in his War against the Tartar.

And two Years since Coxinga coming to Formosa, at Sakkam, Jacob Valencyn
surrendered upon these Articles, That the Hollanders should be allotted a Place
in Sakkam, or elsewhere, to go on with their Trade, and settle their Factory in.

As to what concerns the Tartars, they are very much disabled, and their Forces
so broken, that they have lost the Territories Huquan and Nanquin; therefore
they have desired you to make War upon Us with your Ships, as We are informed;
which We fear not, having Soldiers enough, all indisputably valiant: As for
your Ships, they are very large, but draw a great deal of Water; so that they
cannot penetrate the River, but must always live at Sea. You also know very
well, that when We were in Tayowan We were stored with Soldiers, and
Ammunition; therefore have a care of your selves, that these Eastern Tartars
deceive you not; for they are cowardly and deceitful, as you perhaps will find
too soon, when you shall see, that in the Battle, and in the greatest need,
they will forsake you, shifting basely for themselves: But admit they should
stand stoutly, they will always be cavilling; sometimes they will pretend, that
you have not assisted them as you ought, but that in all their Engagements they
were forced to resist Coxinga's Forces alone: Nay, if you should conquer us,
which we no ways fear, they will never grant you a settled Factory; for
Singlamong and Lipovi have assured Us, That the Hollanders should never obtain
a Free Trade in China, if We would come in. And besides, the Emperor in Peking
has not so much as once heard of your Business; for if he did, he would never
put you upon a War against Us; therefore I advise you in good time to look to
your selves, nor Engage for a false Friend against so potent an Enemy: for your
Ships, of which you boast so much, are rather for Burden than War: and if you
come to Traffic with us, then know, that the Coasts you intend for have many
Rocks, Sands and Shelves, where your Ships may easily suffer. But in Tayowan we
have Sugar, Deer-skins, and other Merchandises which you desire, in far greater
abundance: therefore if you will turn your Business to a friendly Commerce,
intimate your Intentions to Kimsia, and he will provide a Place for your
Merchants, and a Harbor for your Ships. I have with yours sent some of our Men
to you to know further your Mind; and if you desire to Treat with me about any
thing, send three of your Men to me, and we will first consult: we will send
you aboard Valencine's Wife, your Minister Leonard with his Wife, and all the
other Prisoners. What we Write is plain, but serious, not ambiguous, and free
from all dissimulation. The Hollander Assam was Interpreter two years since in
Sakkam to Jacob Valencin, therefore I have sent him with this Letter to declare
to you all things, and to acquaint you with the condition of our Affairs.

In the 17th Year of Yunlie, the 10th Moon and the 9th Day.

The Commander, Jacob Gommers-back, sent in Writing by the same Champan which
brought Maurice, an Answer to the young Coxin, That neither he nor his Officers
could give any Answer upon it; but that they must first acquaint their Admiral
with it, and have his Order: therefore it would be requisite for his Highness
to send a Coya with Oars to him, to carry the Messenger (by the Chinese called
Assam, and by the Netherlanders, Maurice) to receive his Answer on their
Proposals.

This Maurice Ianzen Vis informed the Admiral and his Council, as well of his
own accord as by Examination, That the Enemy was five or six thousand strong in
the Island Eymuy, and that there were no other Castles or strong Holds, but one
round Stone Wall, without Batteries or Guns: That the Island Lissoe was
inhabited only by Rusticks, and that the Enemy had no Fortifications there;
but on the Island Goutsoe was a small Castle: That Anpontek Commandded in
Formosa and Tayowan, yet lived on Sakkam, which was no way fortified: That in
the Castle there were no Soldiers, nor any but Coxin's Wives and Children: That
the Militia were Quartered all about the Country, yet much decreased by diverse
running away, and many cut off daily by the Formosan King Middag; for neither
he nor the People of the Mountains would submit to the Chinese Government; but
all the Villages did: That before Eymuy and Quemuy lay about eighty great, and
twenty ordinary Jonks with Soldiers; moreover, above two hundred and sixty
Jonks Unarmed, in which their Women and Children, and Housholdstuff, had their
abodes: Lastly, that the Towns on Eymuy and Quemuy were most of them deserted,
and the Chinese preparing to fly to Formosa.

Upon this Intelligence the Admiral and his Council conceived, that their
dilatoriness about the Islands would strengthen Formosa, all the rest flying
thither, which by all means ought to be prevented. Hereupon it was thought
convenient and concluded, to send the Vice Admiral and Captain Poleman as
authorized Persons, to Tonganpek, General of the Tartar Fleet, lying at the
Cape of Pathany, to demand of him peremptorily, If he did not intend with all
his Jonks and Forces that very day, to join and set Sail with them, and so
together fall upon the Enemy: which if he refused, then tell to him, That they
would undertake the Work themselves. And that it might appear they dealt
uprightly, Maurice Ianzen was sent with the two Captains to acquaint him, That
they had Overtures of Peace from Summimpessiou, yet they would not desist from
their Intentions.

But they returning told the Admiral, That he was very unwilling to Engage till
he heard from Singlamong and Lipovi, and therefore desired three or four days
respite, alleging that it was not according to the Agreement, which was, That
they should assail the Enemy together: but if they would go, then to leave two
or three Ships for their Convoy to follow them.

The fifteenth he sent a Mandarin with Letters to the Admiral, persisting in
his former Desire, that he would please to tarry but two days longer. But the
Admiral suspecting delays, and the change of their Councels, and that the time
expired they might have other Orders, pitched upon the next day to set forward
with eight Ships to Quemuy, and to leave seven small Frigates to conduct them;
of which they sent him word by his own Mandarin; desiring also, that for the
more easy Landing of their Men they lend them twenty five of their Coya's, or
small Boats.

In the Evening the Hollanders espied fifty or sixty little Tartar Jonks and
Coya's to stand directly for Quemuy, to whom the Admiral immediately sent his
Lieutenant Hendrick van Dalen, with the Interpreter John Melman, to demand the
reason thereof, and why they Sailed thither? to which they returned answer,
That the Tartars had that Night taken a Coya with three Men from the Enemy, who
informed them that there were many more at Quemuy, therefore they had sent out
those Coya's to watch their motion; adding moreover, that the next Morning they
were to come again to the Fleet.

The sixteenth about Daybreak they saw the same Vessels according as they told
them, returning from Quemuy, but seemed to be a greater Fleet; to meet whom,
upon a Signal, many more Boats set out from the Tartars by fifteeen or sixteen
in a Company, which might easily be discerned very much to decrease the Fleet;
and observing they went all of them thither full of People, and returned in a
manner empty, they were jealous that the Tartar either had, or would privately
agree with the Enemy: whereupon they changed their intention, and resolved to
wait another day for the Tartar Fleet, whilst they sent to them to be better
satisfied concerning the former Passages.

In the afternoon a Mandarin, chose by Tonganpek, brought the twenty five
Coya's to the Dutch Fleet, with a Letter to the Admiral, desiring some farther
delay; but he not altering his resolution, distributed the Tartar Vessels
amongst his Fleet as he saw fit: and immediately the Admiral and the Council
agreed, that the next Morning he should Sail from thence with eight Ships to
the South Point of the Island Quemuy; and in the mean time the Rere-Admiral
Bartholomew Verwei should with his Ship and the other small Frigates, being
seven in number, stay with the Tartar Fleet, and Sail with them toward Quemuy;
but if the General Tonganpek did not follow the Admiral with all his Forces
within five days, that then the Vice Admiral, no longer delaying, should follow
to join with the Admiral, that so together they might fall upon the Service,
the better to endamage the Enemy. Mean while came another Letter from
Singlamong the Viceroy, to the Admiral, by all means desiring him to tarry a
little longer; but he persisting, and not enduring delays, the next day with
his Ships reaching to Erasmus Bay, the twenty five Coya's running in, lay
behind the North-Foreland: the Admiral not doubting but that the Tartars would
follow him, Sailed nearer the City; and about ten a Clock the next Morning
anchored before the great City Quemuy: where after some difficulty in choosing
their Ground, the rest of their Fleet being now joined with the other seven,
Rode as near the City as they could: then the Admiral sent some Boats to
discover fit Landing-places, with Orders also, that if they saw any convenience
to Land a Party; which Coker their Captain performed, putting ashore fourscore
Men; but the Chinese coming out of the City gave them a smart Camisado: yet
the Hollanders behaved themselves so well, that they put the Enemy, though
twice their number, to flight with the loss of one Man, and some few wounded.
During this Skirmish, the Hollanders having gotten some Ground, and the
Chinese retreated, the one was recruited from their Ships, and the other from
the Town, who after a while facing each other, came to a second Engagement: but
these also, as the former, were repulsed, and forced to retreat with loss; and
had the later Landed Hollanders been drawn up and settled in a Body, they had
probably, by a total rout in their confused flight, broke in with them into the
Town; but they seeing the Hollanders advance no farther, fled not in, but lay
sculking behind a natural Breast-work of Rocks that lay before the Town, whence
they gawl'd them very much with continual flights of Arrows. The Admiral from
Sea observing the difficulty of the Service, sent Order that Captain Poleman
should Command in chief upon the Shore to prevent all disorders and confusions,
ordering them to stand upon their Guard, and not venture too near the Town,
while he should Land and plant some Cannon to facilitate the Storming thereof:
But whilst the Hollanders made good their Ground all that Night, next Morning
the Admiral himself Landed; then consulting what was best to be done, or
whether they should Storm the City that day, Letters were presented them from
Singlamong, Matithelavia, or Bethetok, Tonganpek, and other Commanders, in
which they advised, That the Tartar Forces would set forth with their Fleet
that very day, therefore they desired them to forbear Storming till their whole
Force were conjoined, that they might first together set upon the Enemy at Sea,
and having routed them there, attended with Victory, next assault the Town,
alleging, That when they had taken the City, all the adjacent Places and Isles
would of themselves surrender. The Admiral, though well satisfied by this, that
the Tartars were punctual to their Promises, yet thought it better not to lose
time by suspending their Motion (which would ask some days) resolved to give
them a present Assault: whereupon it was unanimously agreed, with two Companies
of Soldiers and some Seamen with Hand-Granado's, to draw near, having a good
Reserve upon all occasions: this no sooner concluded, but they marched up to
the Walls, where while some plied the Defendants The City Quemuy Stormed.
with Volleys of Shot, that they could not peep over the Wall, and others threw
Hand-granado's, some set up Scaling-Ladders, on which they mounted very
resolutely; but they being made of Canes, and over-burden'd with the
Assailants, broke when they had in their hopes swallowed the City; which the
Admiral observing, and that they were like to do no good at present, sounded a
Retreat; and so they drew off in some confusion, though with no considerable
damage.

This Design falling out so unfortunately, the Admiral commanded all his Men
aboard, and the next day set Sail to meet the Tartars, and the remainder of his
Fleet, according to Singlamong's Desire, having sent Letters before him to that
purpose.

Whilst the Admiral made these Dispatches, and went with the Vice Admiral went
aboard the Ionker Frigate, a Chinese Messenger arrived with a Letter from
Somminpesiou, in Coxin Kimpsia, Coxinga's Son's Name, who had the chief Command
over his Forces. The Letter being interpreted, was found to be of the same
Contents as that of the tenth instant, which we mentioned before. Besides this
was another written by a Dutch Prisoner, John Ianse of Bremen, who also desired
them to agree with the Chinese, who, if the Netherlanders were inclined to
Trade, were best able to serve them; and to that end they might choose a Place
where they pleased, and it should be given them; and also that their King
Kimsia did with the first opportunity expect the first Messenger Maurice, who
he hoped would bring him news, that they would agree with him; in hopes of
which they intended to send them their Prisoners from Tayowan.

Whereupon the Admiral sent word again to Tsioubontok, That he had received his
Letters too late, because the Netherlanders had entered into a League before
with the Tartars, by which they were obliged to maintain Wars against them,
unless the Tartars gave any new occasion of breach; but as concerning Assam, or
Maurice, he intended to send him by some other opportunity.

All things being now ready and in order, they weighed Anchor, and had not
Sailed far before they descried behind the Point of Quemuy two of their other
Ships at an Anchor, by which they absolutely concluded, that the Tartars whole
Fleet was there with them, because they also saw a great many Jonks Sailing
behind the Island Lissoe; but in stead of coming on they dropped Anchor: when
in the Evening the Admiral received another Letter from Tonganpek to this
effect:

THe eighteenth of our tenth Moon eight of your Ships Sailed about Quemuy,
which is very well done. This day I have received Letters from Singlamong to
set Sail with your and our Ships on the one and twentieth of the tenth Month,
from Wetauw to Tathaen: wherefore I and Matithelavia have set forward with the
remainder of your Ships to the West Point of Quemuy, that on the twentieth in
the Morning they might be at Tathaen, Wind and Weather favoring: You mention
in your last Letter, that the Coya's which were sent to your Service did not
perform as they ought; the Business shall be examined, and their Officers shall
suffer condign punishment. On the closing of this Letter we came with our Ionks
and two of your Ships, to the Point of Osatauw, where we have taken some of the
Enemy's Vessels, and with the slaughter of a few put the rest to flight:
nothing now remains, but that we may* conjoyn Forces at Lissoe, hoping there to
meet you, that the next morning we may fall upon the Service.

Which the Admiral presently answered, and sending Orders to his Reer-Admiral
to be in a readiness, prepared for the Rendezvous at Lissoe.

The nineteenth he received other Letters, both from Tonganpek and his
Reer-Admiral, giving an account only of some small Actions, and a little
jealousy of his Reer-Admiral concerning the Tartars; which he answered no
otherwise, but that he would meet them at Lissoe.

About daybreak the Admiral received a Letter, brought in a Coxingan Vessel,
from Tsioubontok, or the second Person to Kimsia; in which, in Kimsia's Name,
was written to this effect:


Summimpessiou sends this Letter to the Holland Commanders in their Ships.
YOur Letters which I received yesterday I partly understand, viz. that you
have made a League with the Tartars; in so doing you have done well: for we
know by experience, that you Hollanders never break your Words, and inviolably
observe all Covenants and Promises. Whereas the Tartars were ever a perfidious
and treacherous People: for it is common with them, after Articles of Peace,
and Acts of Oblivion, whom they receive under their subjection, and should
honorably protect, they without mercy murder, butchering in a manner, whole
Provinces; and those great Persons that were able to withstand them, after they
had invited them with golden Baits of Promotion, having once got them in their
power, have first laden them with Fetters, and after murdered, witness my
Grandfather Equon and others, whereof we have had woeful experience these twenty
years. They have threatened to destroy us and our Fleet with Fire and Sword, and
take in Eymuy, and those Isles we stand possessed off, but never durst look us
in the face, till by the like dissembling arts they have drawn you in to their
assistance; for which they promise you (if you will believe them) a free Trade
for ever through the whole Empire: But they are only pleasant with you, and
intending no such matter. Besides, whenever you with your Ships shall Engage
ours, they will, to keep up their character of cowardice and treachery, leave
you singly either to be overthrown, or work out a hard, and at the best, a
disputable Victory: but if by your sole Prowess and Power you subdue us, which
we little fear, yet they will not only take into their possession what you
have won, but assume the whole honor of the Victory unto themselves: but we
will not insist further on this Point. Your Nation we have a kindness for,
because we know you to be honest, therefore we, as an honorable Enemy, hoping
our selves to be sufficient enough to fight you, advise you to beware of Rocks
and Shoals, whereof there are many in our Harbors: yet if upon better advice,
and surer, you will come in to us, we have in Formosa at present twenty
thousand Chinese, which make abundance of Sugar yearly; for which your Ships
may come into the Haven of Tayowan, and there Traffic: to which purpose we
will give you Tamsuy and Kelang, formerly inhabited by the Hollanders, and
provide you with a good Harbor for your Ships: If these please you not, you may
take Lamoa, or any other. We therefore desire you speedily to send a Person of
Quality with Assam, with whom I may Communicate and Treat concerning the whole
Affair, who, if we Assam is a Hollander, otherwise called Maurice, and brought
the first Letter from Summimpessiou.
come to a right understanding, shall bring you all your Prisoners, of what
quality soever. The Heavens, Sun and Moon, are witnesses, that what I offer is
truth, and desire Peace^; but if it must be War, let us know your
determination: for we have a Fleet five hundred strong, besides two hundred
Fireships, with which we shall put you to it, try your Valor, and know how
well you Hollanders can fight, not doubting when we come to trial, but to sink,
rout, and burn you all.

In the seventeenth Year of our Emperor Iunglie, the tenth Moon and the
nineteenth Day.

The Admiral only answered, That he was engaged already to assist the Tartars,
and they never made any breach with their Allies without many and just
Provocations: therefore he could serve him no otherwise but by returnning
thanks for his kind proffers; and that they would continue their civility to
their Prisoners, as he had done to theirs.

About nine a Clock in the afternoon the Admiral set Sail with his eight Ships
to Engage with the Enemy's Forces, which consisted in a thousand as well great
as small Jonks, and the day before anchored near the Island Lissoe: Then he
Sailed to the Southward of Quemuy, where he met with the remainder of his own
and the Tartar Fleet: about Noon they fell in with some of the Enemy's Jonks
between Lissoe and Quemuy; and although they endeavored to hinder them from
running away, yet some of them made their escape, creeping close under the
Shore, and steered their Course to Eymuy: however, they hemmed in about fifty
great Jonks of War, which after some resistance, and the sinking one of their
biggest, used all means possible to break through, and to fall upon the
Tartars, which lay without Shot, and not once offered to Engage; which after
some difficulty they effected, and immediately Boarding them, before the
Hollanders, by reason of a Calm, could come to their assistance, behaved
themselves with so much courage, that after a little resistance the Tartars
were forced to fly up to the Netherland Ships, and leave two of their Jonks
behind, one Commanded by the Admiral Bethetok, Governor of the City of
Soanchieuw, and the other by the General Iantetok, which the Enemy took and
plundered, but were afterward by the Netherlanders regained, which the Enemy
could not prevent, because upon the Hollanders approach they had enough to do
to secure their own Jonks by flight; for their nimble Rowing (the Ships not
being able by reason of the calm Weather to follow them) was their
preservation, only one running on the Shore of Quemuy, was forsaken by her
Men. Against the Evening the Enemy being much scattered, Tyded toward the
South; but part of them chased along the Coast of Quemuy by the Rere-Admiral
late in the Evening, made their escape. The Enemy thus fled, the Battle ended
for that Night. The Tartar Jonks went to the North from whence they came, but
the Hollanders anchored at Lissoe; whereupon search he found himself no way
damnifi'd, but only in his Sails, having but one Man killed, and about sixteen
wounded.

The Hollanders were now fully satisfied of the Tartars cowardice, for that
with their whole Fleet, which was four times as strong as the Enemy's, they
durst not Engage with seven or eight Jonks, but fled, as we said, for safeguard
under the Netherlanders Guns, leaving their Admiral Bethetok, and the General
Iantetok, which last was killed: whereas the Enemy, when he came near the great
Ships, defended himself with Bows and Arrows, and Darts, which in great
abundance they shot and threw into the Sails, and likewise with small Shot and
fiery Darts, yet did little damage.

In the Evening the Interpreter Melman was sent aboard Tonganpek, to enquire
how it happened that his Men had not defended themselves better? whereto he made
this Answer: That a sudden fear had surprised them; but desired him that he
should be pleased at the rising of the Moon, to Sail between the Isle of
Goutsoe and the other small Isles thereabouts to Eymuy, where he would meet him.

The twentieth, two hours before Day, the Admiral with his whole Fleet set Sail
for Eymuy, and Rowing along to the Southward, so passing by Goutsoe; not far
from whence they spied Coxin'gas Fleet: whereupon the Hollanders made up
toward them, as they on the other side did toward the Tartar Jonks, and about
ten of the Clock came into the Channel between the Westermost Island of Toata
and the Northern, or third of Goutsoe: but the Hollanders, because the Current
was against them in that Straight, spent two hours in approaching the Enemy; by
which time they had Engaged the Tartars: but at the Hollanders coming in they
quitted their Design, and shifted for their safety; which, though the
Hollanders had them as in a Pound, that either they must be taken, sunk, or run
ashore, they performed with such activity, skill and courage, that they broke
through the midst of them, running their low-built Vessels close under their
Guns, so fighting their Way, that of a hundred and eighty Ships of War, three
only were taken, the rest all entering with small damage into Quemuy and
Goutsoe.

Lipovi, greedy to hear of the Success, came down the River Chinchieu, and sent
a Batsiang, or Messenger aboard the Admiral, to know the news and advise
concerning the Landing of the Tartar Horse at Eymuy: to all which he returned
an Answer in Writing by the same Batsiang, relating at large the whole
circumstances of the Battle.

In the afternoon the Netherlanders saw four Chinese Jonks coming from Quemuy,
which designed passing by them to go to the Tartars, but they were prevented in
their Course by the Guns, and forced to Anchor near the Ships, of which the
Commanders that lay nearest, went aboard, and according to the Admirals Order
brought them into the middle of the Fleet; who being examined by the
Commanders, told the Admiral, That they had only six Families aboard, and
Provisions for their Voyage: Whereupon he declared the Jonks to be free Prize,
and gave all what was in them to be distributed amongst the Seamen.
Notwithstanding, some Tartar Mandarins came to entreat the Admiral to let them
be discharged, alleging, that they had an Invitation by Letter from Geitonkok,
Governor of Chinchieu, to make an escape over to them: but he having a Letter
from Soanghieu, to spare none upon any pretense, but to make all Prize and
Prisoners, made seizure, sending two of them, and keeping the other two for
himself.

But Lipovi not long after sent another Letter to the Admiral, acknowledging,
that though he desired to be informed from his Excellency, yet he had seen the
Fight, though at great distance from a Hill, and acknowledged the honor of the
Victory belonged only to his Ships. His Letter Translated was to this effect:

Lipovi, Chief Commander and General of the Tartar Forces in the Territory of
Fokien, and Admiral of the Fleet before Eymuy, by this Letter sends kind
Salutations to his Excellency the Admiral of the Hollanders.
THe one and twentieth in the Morning, from a Mountain I saw the coming of your
Ships, and with joy beheld the driving away of the Pirates Jonks with the
Thunder of your Cannon. Now I see the integrity of your Nation, and that you
mean as you say, and perform what you promise. I will not be negligent with the
first opportunity, to signify to my Master the good Service which you have
done to his Imperial Majesty, and how bravely you have behaved your selves in
the Fight, routing yours and our Enemies. Soanghieu's Supplies will be ready to
join with us to morrow. What I have more to write, I hope ere long, Sir, to
deliver by word of Mouth.

To which the Admiral returned in brief, That he was much rejoiced that he was
pleased to present their Business to the Emperor with such favor, that he
should be the better prepared to requite their good Service.

With Lipovi's Letter, Bort also received one from Admiral Sitetok, who sent
him four fed Oxen which he had taken in Eymuy.

The same day the Rere-Admiral brought John Ianz, one of the Dutch Prisoners
aboard the Admiral, who had written the two forementioned Letters, and was
come in a Champan with four Chinese aboard the Rere-Admiral the day of the
Fight, having on purpose misconstrued the Admiral's Letter to the Chinese
desire, as if he had granted what was but in Proposal, viz. That the
Netherlanders would Charge their Guns only with Powder, and that he must go in
Person to acquaint the Rere-Admiral with the Design: By which means he got his
Liberty, and the rest were taken Prisoners.

Mean while, the Enemy being dispatched at Sea, the Tartars under Lipovi having
Landed their Horse, which put the People under great consternation, they
suddenly took the City of Eymuy by Storm, slaughtering the Inhabitants, and
plundering their Houses.

The same day a Mandarin came with a Letter from the General to the Admiral,
expressing his joy for having taken the City Eymuy, and desiring that on the
Morrow he would be pleased to favor him so much as to come thither and speak
with him. The Admiral congratulated his Victory, but excused himself as to
waiting upon him, because of the distance of the Place.

The one and twentieth he received Missives from Tonganpek to this effect:


TWo days since I saw with great admiration, how valiantly your Ships behaved
themselves in the Engagement against the Enemy, which will so amaze the Pyrate
himself, that he will never dare to look you in the Face. I for my particular
part humbly thank you for such kind Service, in dissipating the Enemy. About
three days since I sent you the Viceroy's Order, wherein he commands us to
Sail with all our Fleet to Eymuy; but being on my Way thither, I was by another
Order detained at Liutien. Now in regard his intentions are to come in Person
to Eymuy, I humbly desire you, according to his Request, that you will please
to send five of your Ships to Liutien, and with the other ten lie at an Anchor
before Eymuy, to prevent the Eenemy from making an escape, and in so doing you
will oblige me. At present I have little of fresh Provision to send you; yet be
pleased to accept this small Present, viz. five Porkers, fifty Capons, fifty
Ducks, five Pots with Liquor, some Crabs, and ten Picols of Radishes.


To this Letter he answered, That on Singlamong's Request, to secure him and
his Jonks from the Enemy, he would command eight of his Ships to Sail to
Lissoe; and that they would not fail with the rest of their Fleet to come to
the Tartars assistance.



No sooner was this Answer on Shore, but Lipovi sent a second Request, and that
he need not trouble himself, for he was sufficiently Guarded by Tonganpek with
his Forces: therefore if he would be pleased to come ashore, he and his
Mandarins would entertain him in the fairest House in the Island.

Upon which Invitation, first choosing two Jonks for his own use out of those
which he had taken, he went ashore, accompanied with the Vice Admiral Huibert
de Lairesse, and Captain Poleman.

The General being assembled with his principal Mandarins in young Coxinga's
House, received the Admiral with great courtesy and real joy. Lipovi also
ascribed the honor of the Victory to the Netherlanders, telling them, That it
was not themselves, but they that had put the Enemy to the rout; that he had
seen the Engagement at Sea before Eymuy, and sufficiently heard of that at
Quemuy: for which much rejoicing, he highly extolled their Valor. Whereupon he
assured the Admiral, That though he was not able to make satisfaction for the
Service which they had done to his Country, he would endeavor that the Emperor
should.

Lipovy having ended his Discourse, the Admiral returned in like manner, how
glad he was for his Victory at Eymuy, wishing him many more, not doubting but
he should scowre the Sea, and clear the Port and Harbors from the Coxingans,
that Pyratick Rabble.

After this the Admiral made three Requests to the General:

First, That he would be pleased to write a Letter to the Konbon in Hoksieu,
and give Order in it, that the Goods which Captain Nobel and the Merchant
Hogenhook had in Hoksieu, might be sold off.

Secondly, That they might not stay long there, but prosecute the Enemy on
Quemuy and the other Isles.

Thirdly, That the Tartars should then go with the Netherlanders to Formosa,
and assist them in driving the Pirates from thence.

The first and second Request Lipovi absolutely granted the Admiral, promising
more, That he would not fail to get them what they so much desired, a free
Trade through the Empire, and that within two days they would Sail together to
Quemuy. But concerning the third Proposal of going with the Netherlanders to
Tayowan, he made no promise; but said, That perhaps would follow, after the
rest of their work was finished.

Then Lipovi recounted to him what purchase they had upon the Isle, consisting
only in a few Cattle and Sheep, of which he sent forty Oxen and some of the
Sheep aboard the Netherland Ships; promising them the whole Plunder of the
other Isles, that his Men might not be discouraged, but might venture their
Lives for something.

Whilst the Admiral was ashore, three Champans with Chinese Rusticks came
amongst the Fleet, which dwelt on the Main Land near Goutsoe, with Request to
the Netherlanders, to grant them a Pass to go to the Tartars, and submit
themselves to his Subjection, by cutting their Hair like the Tartars, and
paying of Tribute, which the Admiral so soon as he came aboard granted them; in
requital whereof, they gave him four Hogs, and five Pots of Chinese Beer.

The Rusticks being asked concerning the condition of the Chinese Enemies,
declared, That they were all fled away from thence in the night, none knowing
whither they were gone.

The two and twentieth, the Admiral received a Letter from his Highness, and
the Viceroy Singlamong, in Thanks for his gotten Victories over the Chinese,
with Entreaties, that he would Sail with the Fleet to the Isle of Goutsoe.

The same day Captain Poleman and the Secretary were sent ashore to deliver to
the Viceroy and General, what so long had slept, and would not be at first
received, the Letter and Presents from Maetzuiker and the Council at Batavia,
and to request of Lipovi, that he would be pleased, according to his promise
the day before, to write to the Conbon, and with it send a Letter, which the
Admiral had given to Poleman and the Secretary, and directed to Constantine
Nobel at Hoksieu.

The Agents having received their Orders, went in two Sloops to the General,
whom they found on the Main Land, opposite to Colongsoe; and after a kind
Salutation to him from Maetzuiker, they delivered him the Letter, which the
General having perused, declared, that their Excellencies Letters were very
acceptable; yet it seemed strange, that they should send Presents, when they
knew it was not his Custom to receive any; but if they were useful in War, he
would accept of them; to which being soon persuaded, he required them as they
were brought before him, and commanded them, without opening, to be carried to
his Tent, only returning the Complement of Thanks; promising also to unite to
the Conbon in Hoksieu, in the behalf of the Hollanders there: After this, the
Agents having been nobly entertained by Lipovi, took their leave and departed.

The three and twentieth the Fleet having fired three Guns, set Sail to the
Isle of Goutsoe, accompanied with the Tartars; and about Noon they came to
Anchor, a League and half South-West from the Island, not being able, by reason
of a calm and contrary Tide, to double the North Fore-land, while the Tartar
Jonks Anchored before Lissoe; from whence, the Admiral was desired by Sietetok
and Tonganpek to come ashore, whither (having resolved to go before) he went
with Lairesse, Captain Poleman, and three Companies of Soldiers to the Isle of
Goutsoe; from whence the Enemy was fled, and they took possession of three new
raised Forts which were deserted, one of them with a Castle, and though not
very beautiful, yet strong, for the Walls and Breast-Works which were twenty
three Foot high, were made of firm Stones, and the Curtain on the Walls six
Foot broad; the whole in Circumference, as big as the Castle at Batavia; but
nothing was found in it, except Stools, Benches, (the Tartars having been there
and Plundered all) and thirty nine unserviceable Iron Guns, which lay about; of
these the Hollanders making themselves Masters, placed Sentinels to look over
them, till they had opportunity of Shipping.

The Admiral coming out of the Castle, was met by the Tartar General, who
earnestly invited him aboard his Jonk to a small Treat, which he modestly
excused, desiring them to take a slight Sea-Entertainment upon the Land, which
he thought would not be inconvenient for either; so giving Order while the Meat
was a Cooking, they viewed the other two forsaken Forts; one of which for the
most part was cut out of a Rock, and built very strong on a Rivers side,
whither oftentimes Armies of Hornets, thick like a Thunder-Cloud, appearing
cover the adjacent Country, devouring Plants, Fruits, and whatever they find
wherever they come; which before their lighting, to prevent, the Rusticks
come armed with Canes, and Flags at the ends, and fight them by flourishing and
waving them about their Heads, which fetches them down in thousands, where thus
destroying some of them, the rest not venturing to light, fly in their great
bodies to other places, and so often clear the Country. Here the Admiral
having spent some time, they were called down, where on the Sea shore they Eat,
Drank, and were Merry; and well-pleased each departed to their own Quarters.

The next day there came Letters from Lipovi, that he had given Order to
dismantle the three Castles, excusing it from the infertility of the Country,
as unfit for the Hollanders to make any thing of, either to improve or
Garrison; and that Formosa was much better for them to resettle upon, which
they need not doubt, but the Tartars should help them to regain, and then they
should possess it as formerly; but the Admiral sent word, that he would not
suffer them to touch it, until the next day he had spoken with their General
Lipovi.

Soon after the Admiral received a Letter from Lipovi, which was to this effect:

At present you have had much trouble, but now there is nothing left but the
Isle Quemuy, which I desire you will Sail to with Setetok and Tonganpek, that
there you may fully take satisfaction for your losses; and therefore let your
Soldiers first Pillage the Country, and then ours shall be contented with the
Gleanings: This done, We will burn and pull down the Towns, because we do not
desire to keep them; when we have won Quemuy, then we will consult of further
Proceedings.

The twenty fifth in the Morning, the Admiral, and the Mars, and Zirikzee
Frigates, setting Sail with all the Tartar Jonks to Quemuy, Anchored in the
Afternoon between Lissoe and Toata, where he called a Council, to consult if
they should take the Island Goutsoe in Possession, because of the Forts already
built upon it, and Garrison them, or not? Whereupon after some debate, they
unanimously agreed, not to settle on that Island, nor Garrison the Forts, but
suffer the Tartars to burn and destroy them, because it was little, barren, and
not improvable by Cultivation; but their special reason was, that it would too
much weaken them, having designed so suddenly to fall upon Formosa.

The twenty sixth in the Morning, the Admiral set Sail again, being followed by
nine Frigates to the West side of Quemuy, where he Anchored amongst several
Tartar Jonks, which Sailed thither the day before.

The Rere-Admiral Verwei stayed with five Ships at the Isle of Goutsoe, to
bring away the remaining Guns, and make those that could not be brought unfit
for Service by Cloying; with Orders also, that when he had done, he should come
up to Quemuy.

The Admiral and his Men going ashore, found the Enemy likewise fled from
thence, and the Tartars pulling down, tearing, and rifling the City, which was
contrary to Lipovi's promise, who not only in his Letters, but personally
assured the Admiral, that the Netherlanders should have all the Plunder; but
after this they set a less value upon the Tartars promises.

But however, the Admiral, Vice Admiral and Captain Poleman went to see this
little City, whose Walls were of an incredible thickness, yet not so strong as
those of Aymuy, and an hours walking in Circumference, with four Gates, besides
fifteen or sixteen Iron Guns, which the Tartars made Prize of. Moreover, the
City consisted all of Stone Houses, but thinner built than Aymuy, yet all were
desolated, the Inhabitants being all fled, only here and there the Tartars
picked up some miserable Creatures out of Holes and blind Recesses, whom they
used Salvagely, killing some, cutting, slashing, and driving them like Cattle,
which the Admiral observing and pitying, toward Evening went thence aboard.

The twenty seventh, the Admiral received several Letters, but that of most
concern was this from the Viceroy and General, Singlamong and Lipovi, which
were written before, but hindered by bad Weather, came not till now, being in
effect the Contents of all the rest.

YOu worthy Hollanders have had great care and trouble to beat the Pirate Our
Enemy, which is very well known to Us; We may certainly say, that you have been
a Terror to them, and put them to flight by your Valor and Conduct; I and
Lipovi Thank you for the Service done to Our Empire. Three days since We
desired you in a Letter to come to see Us at Cinwe, that there We might
Communicate Our Consultations; to which We have received your Answer and
Resolution, that you intend to cleanse your Ships at Quemuy, which We are very
well pleased with. But the Pirate out of fear of your Forces is fled, and has
settled on the Isle Tongsan, which place belongs to the Province of Fokien;
therefore if he be not now prosecuted, he will soon return to the deserted
Islands and sculking places which he has forsaken. You write after you have
cleans'd your Ships, that you will Sail to the Cape of Wetaw, or to Soanchefoe,
to speak with Us; which if the Enemy should hear of, he would soon come and
find the Island, which is now Guarded by you, in its full state as he had left
it; because you desired that the Forts there should not be pulled down, nor the
Houses in the City be burnt; if therefore the Enemy should find your People
gone and his places no way ruined, he might perchance soon be Master of all
again; wherefore We keep Our Forces in Arms near the Enemies Borders, lest that
after your departure he should return.

The twentieth of Our tenth Moon, one of Our Commanders informed us, that in
the last Month he took near Tongsan, in the Haven of Yuntzaw, an hundred and
sixty Jonks and Vessels; and also that he took and killed five thousand Men, of
which two hundred are yet kept Prisoners, whereof one is an eminent Mandarin
Therefore since the Pyrate is so near, and it is not to be doubted but that he
will settle himself again on the forementioned Isle, We desire you to take this
trouble upon you, and do so much Service more for this Empire, as to Sail with
Our Jonks to Tongsoa, that there the Foe may also be dislodged. To which
purpose, Lipovi and I are together at Cinwe, to give Order, that all Our Jonks,
as well great as small, may be in readiness; and being furnished with Men and
Provisions, may Sail with your Ships to Tongsoa. We very well know, that your
People understand better how to fight at Sea than Ours; therefore I and Lipovi
wish, that you be inclined to go thither, that We may have it from your own
Mouth; whereupon We will rely, and desire that We may know your answer by these
two Mandarins; but if it be possible, take the trouble upon you, and come to Us
in Cinwe, that We may consult about this and other Affairs.


The Interpreter and Secretary brought also a Copy of the Letter sent by
Singlamong and Lipovi, about their business to the Emperor in Peking, which
being Translated was to this effect.

THe Holland Ships having set Sail with Our Jonks from Soanchefoe, and Anchored
again at Wetauw, on the twelfth of the tenth Moon, the eighteenth of the same,
eight Ships Sailed to Quemuy, and seven Holland Ships with Our Jonks the day
after passed through, and Anchored by Our Jonks on the West side of Quemuy.

The nineteenth, Our People drove away some Jonks from Quemuy, but on the
twentieth, We saw the Pirates Jonks, being almost two hundred, coming from
Goutsoe, toward Us and the Hollanders, who enclosed the Enemy, and made such a
rout amongst them, that they were forced to fly, having left many Men, as We
understood of some that came over to Us from Eymuy.

The one and twentieth day of the same Moon, the Holland Admiral went with a
courageous Heart with his fifteen Ships to the Enemy at Taota, and stoutly
Engaged him on the Isle Eymuy; from whence the Pyrate, to his great shame and
disgrace, was also forced to fly to Goutsoe, whither the Hollanders and Our
Jonks also Sailing on the twenty fourth, they found the Enemy fled thence
Southwardly to Lamoa and Tangsoa.

The twenty sixth, the Holland Ships Sailed with Ours to Quemuy, and there
caused by Our People, all the Towns and Forts to be burnt and pulled down. The
Hollands Admiral has behaved himself very Valiantly against the Enemy; they
are all a People of great Resolution and Valor, to fight with their Ships at
Sea, and Muskets on the Shore; they have had a great deal of labor and
trouble, for they carry many great Guns in their Ships, which require much
trouble to Charge and Discharge them.


The Admiral writ in answer to their Excellencies, That he intended to send a
Jonk to Batavia, with advice to the Lord General and Indian Council, of their
Adventures concerning the Routing of their Enemy, and his deserting of their
chief Cities, Eymuy, Quemuy, Goutsoe, and others; which done, and that he had
cleans'd his Ships, he would in Person come to their Singlamong and Lipovi.
Highnesses, that then they might consult one with another concerning all their
Affairs.

Moreover, the Admiral told the two forementioned Messengers, how he was
displeased, that their People had taken all the Booty on Quemuy, and given his
Men not so much as an Ox, which was contrary to Lipovi's promises, not only in
Person, but in his Letters also; alleging, that it no ways suited with their
Natures to be served so; which he desired them to tell Singlamong and Lipovi:
Who replied, The Messengers had to their sorrow already understood it out of
the Admirals Letter, and would not forget to make satisfaction for it.

The same day the Vlaerding and Buiksloot came to an Anchor near the Island
Quemuy, before Goutsoe; for the three other, viz. the Cogge, Flushing, and
Naerden could not get out. Here the Rere-Admiral Verwei told the Admiral, That
since his departure from thence, according to his Order, he had gotten twenty
Iron Guns out of the Forts on the Isle Goutsoe, besides an hundred ninety eight
Bullets, which were distributed amongst the Flushing, Buiksloot and Nieuwendam.

The third in the Morning, they saw one great new Jonk, one Wankan, and two
Coyaes coming about the South-West Point of the Isle, to which most of the
Ships sent their Boats and Sloops, to take them, which accordingly was
performed by the Rere-Admiral, who took the Jonk, and also the three other
Vessels, who yielded without the least resistance, all of them Laden with
Ballast, Rice, and Unthres^'d Rice.
Padije.

The Admiral and Rere-Admiral Rowing aboard the Jonk, found in her eight Iron
Guns: The Chinese aboard informed them, that in the seventh Moon of the Year,
they were sent by the young Coxin from the Isle Quemuy to Pakka, Kitat, and
other adjacent Isles, and places lying to the Northward of Hoksieu, there to
Load as much Rice as they could get, and then return with all speed, because
those places were in great want. They also related, That in the eighth Moon,
they had found about the North several Bills of Singlamongs and Lipovi's
sticking up, whereby all the Chinese that kept out of the Empire were invited
to come in to the Tartars. Thus the Chinese in the great Jonk informed the
Hollanders, perhaps on advice of some Tartars that had been with them before;
For those of the other three Vessels declared, that they thought all things had
still been there in their former state and condition, and expected to have
found their Families at Eymuy and Quemuy; neither did they know any other, but
that their Fleet had remained ready to have Engaged the Tartars: But coming
about the South-West Point of Quemuy, and spying the Hollanders Ships, they
would fain have fled, but were necessitated by reason of the calm, and seeing
they could not get clear from them, to surrender themselves without any
resistance; therefore they desired that their Lives might be spared, which they
obtained. They also said, That they expected twenty Sail to follow them, which
on the second instant they had left to the Northward of the Isle Ongkoe; from
whence they came with six Vessels, of which, four were now in the Netherlanders
Possession, and two Sailed about the South, as they judged, to the Isles of
Tangsoa and Lamao, where they dwelt: Being asked if they had not seen any of
the Enemies Jonks coming from Iapan, at Sea, they replied, No, but that in this
Month some were daily expected from thence.

Soon after, Tonganpeks Admiral came aboard the Dutch Admiral, to ask what
Vessels they were which he had taken, and from whence they came, and also if
they had resisted the Netherlanders; of which they informed him as
beforementioned: Then he inquired when the Admiral intended to go to Singlamong
and Lipovi; and if he would Sail with them to Tangsoa? To the first Question
the Admiral replied, That he knew not the certain day: And to the second, That
he did not know what his Ships should do there, because their Highnesses had
advised him, that one of the Tartars Commanders had some days since taken from
the Enemy an hundred and sixty Vessels, and killed and taken Prisoners near
five thousand Men. This, replied he, was not of the young Coxin's power, but of
another Pyrate, who kept about the Isles Tongsoa and Lamao, and was formerly
neither subject to the Tartar nor Coxin, but set up for himself, and maintained
Pyracy.

Then the Secretary related, That young Coxin had sent Agents to this Pyrate,
to crave his assistance against the Tartars; and also that he was gone with all
his Forces to Tangsoa and Lamao, there to join with him, because he did not
know (being driven from the Isles Eymuy, Quemuy, Goutsoe, and others
thereabouts) what he should do.

The same day they sent the conquered Jonk, by them called, The Good Tidings,
to Batavia, with eight Chinese Prisoners, Letters, and Papers.

This day also the three remaining Ships which staid at Goutsoe to help take in
the Guns, came to the Fleet at Quemuy; so that the whole Fleet consisting in
fifteen Men of War, were all in a Body together.

The fourth, a Tartar Vessel with two Mandarins came to the Admiral with a
Letter from Singlamong and Lipovi, in which they earnestly desired him, that he
would repair to them at Cinwe. Whereto the Admiral replied, That so soon as his
Ship was cleared from the Rocks (for the day before it was driven within half a
Musket shot to the Rocky North-West Point of Quemuy) and lay out of danger
amongst the other Ships, he would wait upon them.

Mean while came Maurice Iansz, whom the Netherlanders used as their
Interpreter in the Chinese Tongue, and told the Admiral, That he had heard by
some Tartar Chinese which came aboard with the Mandarins, that young Coxin had
sent Agents to Singlamong and Lipovi, with proffers, that they would submit
themselves to the Tartars Jurisdiction, by cutting off their Hair, because he
was not able to maintain War against them any longer; but especially, by reason
of those great losses which he had lately sustained.

The Admiral to learn the Truth of it, Ordered the Interpreter Melman to
inquire of the two Mandarins, who affirmed it, with alleging, That the Enemy
had lately so many wounded and slain Men by the Netherlanders Guns, that none
of his Soldiers would fight any longer; nay, that all his Forces in Tayowan
came flocking to the Tartars, and would freely surrender both Tayowan and
Formosa to the Hollanders: Therefore the Viceroy and Lipovi desired to speak
with him; also that Tonganpek was to go to Tayowan with some Jonks to fetch all
that would submit themselves to their Emperor, and from thence bring them to
the Main Land.

The next Morning, about five a Clock three Jonks came to the Fleet, and in
them one Mandarin, who came aboard the Admiral, with request from their
Highnesses, that seeing it was fair Weather, he would be pleased in those Jonks
to come to them, or at least to appoint a day, because they might not wait in
vain at Cinwe, from whence they were minded to go with the first convenience.

The Admiral having consulted with his Council, resolved to go thither the next
Morning; whereupon the Mandarins went in one Jonk to carry the News to their
Excellencies, leaving two behind amongst the Fleet to convey the Admiral to
Cinwe.

The sixth, the Admiral went according to his promise attended with Captain
Poleman, Secretary Ysbrantsz, and some other Retinue in the two Tartar Jonks
sent for that purpose to the Fleet.

In the Evening, the Viceroys Interpreter came to them, and in his Masters
Name entering the Jonks, bad them welcome, with promises, that he would take
care the next Morning to provide that they should be well Mounted for Cinwe.

The seventh, the Admiral Landed between the Straights of Eymuy, and the main
Coast of China, where he was presented with a Copy of a Letter, by a Batavian
Chinese, called Seko, from Nobel and Hogenhoek in Hoksieu, dated the twenty
eighth of November, (of which the true Letter and Post was sent by the Conbon)
in which they informed the Admiral, That they could not go from Soanchieu
before the twentieth of the same Month, and that seven days after they came
into Hoksieu, where they were not permitted to Vend their Commodities according
to the Conbon or Governors promise, till he had further Order from Singlamong
and Lipovi, that when they told him that it was granted by the Viceroy and
General, he replied, That he had no such advice.

The Letters and Presents of the Admirals he had received, and sent a Messenger
to their Highnesses, to know their intentions concerning the Trade; further
requesting, That they would be pleased to send him the Originals, written by
Singlamong and Lipovi concerning the same. This Copy being delivered to the
Admiral in his way, riding to the Viceroy, he would not read it till he had
been received in the Viceroy's Tent; after which, he perused it in the
Viceroy's presence, and three of his Council, and explaining it to them, asked
them, Why against their written Obligation they kept their Merchandise unsold?
But the Viceroy excusing himself, said, That he had sent Letters of License to
the Conbon; but Lipovi had Countermanded it, and first desired an Inventory of
all the Merchandise which they had brought with them, that he might send it to
Peking; but since that he and Lipovi jointly had given free leave to sell
those, and bring in other Goods; whereupon the Admiral desired, That he might
have such a Letter of Command then given him, that he might send it with one of
his own to Nobel and Hogenhoek in Hoksieu, which the Viceroy immediately
granted.

This Discourse being ended, Singlamong proposed to the Admiral, and desired
that he would send his Ships with their Jonks against the Enemy, who on the
Isles Tongsoa and Lamoa did now fortify himself; whereupon the Admiral
replied, That he had heard and understood, that the Enemy had sent Agents to
his Highness, and proffered to submit themselves to the Tartars, and therefore
(said he) how shall we understand your Proposal? The Viceroy pausing a little
answered, It Is true, but there is no assurance in these Villains, neither do I
believe them; therefore he judged it convenient, still to prosecute the War
against them. The Admiral replied, That he intended to Sail to Tayowan and
Formosa, and therefore entreated him to send his Forces and Jonks first along
with him thither, and then they would go jointly, and drive the Enemy from
Tongsoa and Lamoa; also that he had received Orders from his Masters in
Batavia, that when he had beaten the Enemy from Eymuy and Quemuy, he should not
go to Tongsoa or Lamoa, but to Formosa and Tayowan: Besides, the Admiral added,
that he had understood that the Coxingan's were not in Tongsoa, but having
Pillaged the Rusticks, and taken what they could find, were gone to Tayowan and
Formosa; and though the Viceroy persuaded the Admiral that he was assured to
the contrary, yet he stood firm to his Proposal, that he might go from thence
to Tayowan; whereupon, the Viceroy observing the Admiral to be in earnest,
said, That the present routing of the Enemy could not be taken for a Conquest,
for they still had their Forces together, and therefore without doubt, as soon
as the Netherland Ships were gone, they would return to their Receptacles
again, and invest the Coasts as formerly. Whereupon the Admiral replied, That
it was impossible to kill them all, because where e're they came, they fled
from them, and got away by the nimbleness of their Jonks; and if the
Netherlanders should go with the Viceroy's Jonks to Tangsoa and Lamoa, and
drive the Enemies thence; yet the Coast would not so be cleared of them, but
that there would still be some in one place or other: To which the Viceroy
said, that if the Enemy were but driven thence, he would be satisfied, because
then he would be hunted out of the Territory of Fokien, where he was Chief; and
then (proceeded he) my Jonks shall go with yours to Tayowan; therefore he
desired the Admiral to consult with his Vice and Rere-Admiral about it; which
he promised to do, and so ended that Consultation.

Moreover, Singlamong excused himself concerning the forty promised Oxen;
because he had no Vessels at Eymuy to bring them aboard the Admirals Ships;
therefore he desired him to accept them now, and with them five hundred Picols
of Rice, which he had given Order to be carried before. The Admiral thanking
him, said, That he needed not the Rice so much as the Cattle, however, he would
accept his kindness; but when they were brought aboard, half of them were dead,
which they were forced to throw into the Sea, whereof the Viceroy having
notice, promised, that for every dead Beast, they should have one alive.

Soon after, the Admiral having been well entertained, took his leave, and went
to the Tents set up on purpose for them, near the Seaside on a high Hill. No
sooner was the Admiral come thither, but he received the promised Letter of
Command to the Conbon, for selling the Merchandises in Hoksieu, that he might
send it himself with his Letter to Nobel, who was only to show it to the
Conbon, and then make Sale of his Goods, which contained to this effect.

Singlamong sends this open Letter of Command to the Holland Admiral of the
Sea, to be sent by him to their Agent in Hoksieu.
SInce the Hollanders with their Ships and Forces have done so good Service to
Our Realm, in the routing their and Our Enemies, and the wished for Victory
remains on Our sides, therefore I and Lipovi have resolved to Grant them to
Sell all those Merchandises, which they have brought with them in Hoksieu, for
the maintaining of their People, as We have by Letters already informed the
Emperor in Peking: Therefore We Command the Conbon in Hoksieu, that he assist
them in the same, and provide them a Person who may be present to look that
they may not be cheated by Our Merchants.

This Letter We have sent open, that the Holland Agent, upon the receipt of
these Our Orders, may immediately begin to dispose of his Goods that are ashore
in Hoksieu; as also those that are yet in their Ships lying before the
Magazine. The Mandarin, who by the Conbon is ordered to be at the selling of
the Commodities, shall take an exact account of what Goods and Moneys the
Hollanders receive in return for their Merchandise, that they may not be
deceived or defrauded by any; and he shall also inform Us of what shall be done
herein.

Under Singlamong's Seal was written: In the second Year of the Emperor
Conchi's Reign, the eleventh Moon, and eleventh day.

In the Evening the Admiral sent the forty Oxen which had been given him by the
Viceroy, to be distributed amongst the Ships.

Soon after the Viceroy sent to tell the Admiral, That if he was desirous to
see the Country, he would send Horses to his Tent; for which Proffer he
returned thanks, and sent word, That he would expect them. Mean while it began
to grow wet Weather; but the Rain again ceasing, the Admiral and his Company
walked afoot to the Camp, where the Tartars had entrenched themselves very
handsomely within several Batteries: Here getting on Horseback, they were
conducted to the Viceroys Tent, who desired the Admiral to come in, where
having sat a while, he inquired if he had sent Letters to his Vice Admiral,
and also his Letter of Command to Nobel and Hogenhoek in Hoksieu; to which he
answered, Yes.

Then the Viceroy told him, That he hoped the Vice Admiral would comply with
his Request, to sail to Tongsoa: The Admiral answered, He supposed there was no
doubt; and withal added, That Nobel and Pedel desired they might go to Batavia,
and therefore he had ordered Hogenhoek, who had lived many Years in Iapan, and
the Factor Bartel (both Men of whom the Netherlanders and his Highness might
expect good Service) to stay in Hoksieu: To which Singlamong answered, That it
was all one to him who staid, so they were People of good conversation, and he
believed the Lord General would not send any other into that Empire. After
this, they discoursed about the cleansing of the Netherland Ships, and the
Island Colongsoe, which the Admiral desired he might see, and that if it lay
convenient for the Netherlanders, they might take it into possession, and
Garrison it with Soldiers, the situation being near the Main Land, and before
the Mouth of the River Chincheu, which whatever the Netherlanders wanted, they
might have from thence, and likewise drive their Trade all under one. Whereupon
the Viceroy replied, That they had always made choice of Goutsoe; What then
would they do with Colongsoe? Whereupon the Admiral replied, That if he would
permit them to drive their Trade, that then they would leave six Ships there,
take the Island into Possession, and Garrison the Forts with their Soldiers:
Whereto the Viceroy suddenly said, That that was not his meaning; for he durst
not give away any Lands that belonged to the Emperor, but that they must expect
his Imperial Majesty's Order for that, as well as the driving of their Trade in
Hoksieu: Yet at last, after many Arguments, he granted the Hollanders on the
Emperors allowance to take and Garrison the Isle of Goutsoe, conditionally,
That if the Emperor should not approve of it, then to desert it again. But
concerning their Traffic, Whether it would be granted them for ever or not,
they must expect an Answer in five Weeks time.

Thus the Business rested; and the Netherlanders, after having been plentifully
entertained, taking their leave, in the Evening rode to their Tents.

Toward Night the Admiral received a Letter from the Vice Admiral Huibert de
Lairesse, and his Council, in answer to one sent to him the day before, wherein
he advised him, That their Opinions agreed with his, not to go with the Fleet
to Tongsoa and Samoa; yet they referred themselves wholly to what the Admiral
pleased to do.

The ninth the Viceroys Interpreter went to the Admiral, to know whether he
had received an Answer from the Vice Admiral; whereupon the Admiral informed
him, That he could not persuade his People to it, because it was impossible for
them with their Ships to go from Tongsoa to Formosa and Tayowan, whither they
had strict Order first to Sail; according to which, after six days, he resolved
to set Sail thither with his Ships that lay at Quemuy, desiring that his
Highness would be pleased to send his Jonks with him; as after the subduing of
the Isles of Eymuy and Quemuy, he had promised; with which Answer the
Interpreter returned. But soon after he was sent back with the Viceroys
Excuses, That he could not send his Jonks with him to Tayowan, because they
wanted Sails and Rigging for such a Voyage; but if they would please to stay a
little longer, they would endeavor to fit themselves out: And as an Inducement
to it, he granted them the Isle of Goutsoe, which they might freely take, and
Garrison as they thought fit. But the Admiral much dissatisfied, answered, That
he delighted not in such Procrastinations, nor would any longer be delayed; for
he plainly saw, and must be bold to say, That the Viceroy minded not either
what he said, or what he writ; and therefore they would no longer rely upon
him: But as for Goutsoe, it was not then convenient for them to take the
possession thereof, because they should thereby weaken their Forces designed
for the taking in of Tayowan, but if they would preserve the Forts and Houses
from ruin till their return, then they would Garrison it.

Many other like Expressions he had to the Interpreter, concerning his not
being satisfied with the Viceroys waverings and unconstancy; who relating it
all to the Viceroy, he seemed very much netled, to hear from the Admirals
Mouth such his Character, and sent him back suddenly with several Complemental
Excuses: But the Hollanders continuing firm to their Resolution, after many
Messages tossed too and fro, at last it was brought so far, that he not only
excused them from going to Tangsoa and Lamoa, but also consented, that with all
the Fleet they might go to Formosa; promising likewise, that he would send two
Jonks, Manned with two hundred Soldiers, to Formosa, under the Command of two
Mandarins, with Letters to demand that Country for the Hollanders: But if the
Enemies would not surrender to the Hollanders, nor submit to the Tartars, that
then one of their Ships should come back with the two Jonks and Mandarins to
inform him of it, that he might send all his Navy and Forces to their
assistance, which, according to the Admirals Request, they should have
confirmed under his Sign Manual before they set Sail.

In the Evening Admiral Bort advised the Vice Admiral Lairesse, in a Letter, of
all that had passed ashore.

The tenth, he having resolved to go aboard the next Morning, desired his Goods
might be put into a Jonk, and that he might be furnished with Coelyes for that
purpose.

These Coelyes, by others called Poelyes, are a mean sort of Laboring People,
that for small Wages will serve any Person whatsoever, in the Carriage of
Burdens and Commodities from Place to Place, as our Porters or Carriers: They
wear Shoes of Straw or Leather, which they tie about their Ancles with a String
made fast at their Toes; and are so swift of Foot, that they can match a Horse
in his full speed.

In the Afternoon Captain Poleman was sent to Singlamong, to thank him for the
Kindnesses shown to them while they had been on Shore, and also to acquaint
him, that they would wait five or six days longer for the two Jonks and
Mandarins, with two hundred Soldiers, and also the Letter to the Governors of
Tayowan: Lastly, to present his Highness, in the Admirals name, a Pair of
Pistols and Holsters, and a Sword with a gilded Hilt.

At his Return Poleman related what he had received in answer, That his
Highness was sorry he could give no better Entertainment; but he hoped they
would excuse it, as being in a Camp, and not a City; That he would send the two
Jonks and Mandarins, with the Soldiers, and also the Letter to the Governor of
Tayowan, at the appointed day: That he accepted the Presents, because they
consisted in Arms, pretending to be ashamed, because the Ong or King of Batavia
had twice sent to him, and he had not made one Return: But he would not forget
to present him by the Finch some of the Products of his own Country, with a
Letter, and humble Thanks for his good Inclination toward him.

The eleventh the Admiral and all his Retinue took their leaves, and soon after
went to the Fleet, and Singlamong with his Army to Soanchieuw.

The twelfth in the Afternoon the Admiral came near the low Point of Quemuy,
aboard of the Zierikzee Frigate.

The thirteenth, several Jonks went from thence to Eymuy and Soanchieuw,
whither Tonganpek was gone four days before, in which time he had written a
Letter to the Admiral, to this effect.

I Thank you for the Honor and Kindness which I have received from you since We
joined Our Fleets. Now the Enemy is fled, there is great hopes that you may
easily regain your Countries of Tayowan and Formosa. The Pyrate is retired to
Tangsoa, whither We must pursue him; to which purpose, I will fit out eighty
great and small Jonks, under the Command of Choentsay and Goemtsin, which shall
Sail to Eymuy, and there join with Sitetok's Fleet, I would have gone my self
in Person, but that I am obliged to go to Soanchefoe, to receive an Honor sent
from the Court at Peking to be conferred upon Me, which I thought good by these
to acquaint your Honor with.


In the Evening two Mandarins brought a Letter to the Admiral from the General
Lipovi at Soanchieuw, and also five hundred Picols of Rice, which he had
formerly promised to the Seamen and Soldiers.

The fourteenth in the Morning the Admiral went ashore in the Island Quemuy,
where he viewed some ruined Villages, and especially the Walled City
Savja-Houpon, being built in a pleasant Place, and full of fair Houses, but
burnt by the Tartars, before the Hollanders coming thither.

This Town, according to the Relation of the Netherland Prisoner Maurice Iansz,
was first built by the forementioned Savja, in the time when old Coxinga went
from thence to besiege Tayowan, having before had his Residence in Eymuy, from
whence he went to Quemuy. About six Months before Savja and his Brothers went
thence, and Embarked themselves to go over to the Tartars, because young Coxin
continually oppressed them by over-heavy Taxations.

Coxin having notice of this Flight of Savja, sent Messengers to him, with fair
Promises not to molest him for the future, and to make him Chief Governor of
Eymuy and Quemuy; which Bait taking, he returned, but was soon dispatched out
of the way, and all his Goods seized, which being told to his Brothers, which
were not yet come back (of which Tonganpek was one) they went over to the
Tartars.

In the Afternoon the Admiral returned aboard, whither in his way, going into
the Boat, he found many dead Bodies, which had been cruelly Butchered by the
Tartars.

The seventeenth two Mandarins came from Soanchieuw, to the Admiral, with the
sealed Letters from Singlamong, in which he advised the seventeen Chinese
Commanders on Formosa and Tayowan, to submit with their Soldiers and
Contrymen. The Letter was this effect.

Lipovi's Letter sent to Tsiakoensin, Wetingwan, Toerlinpetensin, Posinsojau,
Yogaukiloo, Yoewetsji-kay, Gautinong, Soanchyong, Nioetingli, Chuenkicin,
Lioetsingoen, Kiwintsiwan, Suangi, Gautinghtoe, Yuensaugautingwan,
Sinkintingjang, Ympincin, Lioetsinang, all Commanders in Tayowan.
THis is to let you understand, That the Heavens, Sun, Moon, and Stars, nay all
the Elements, have hunted you from one Place to another, till at last you came
with Coxin into Tayowan: Now I and Singlamong tell you by this Our Letter, That
on the tenth Moon, the one and twentieth day, with Ours and the Hollanders
Forces We have conquered the Isles of Eymuy and Quemuy, and all the other
adjacent Places of your Generals, and drove them so long, till they are fled to
Tongsoa, where Kimsia, Coxinga's Son, and all his Party, do now sculk, but
cannot find Sustenance there for so many People: Who knows not that in short
time he will die of Hunger? His Forces have already the last Month received a
terrible blow; for one of Our Generals, called Wansumpin, slew above ten
thousand Men, besides two hundred which he took Prisoners, amongst which are
three Mandarins, Tsiausou, Syancin, and Rikkoe. We have also taken from them in
the Haven Yuntzauw a hundred and fifty Jonks and Vessels. Yet since Singlamong
and I know that you intend and resolve to come to Us, and freely submit your
selves to Our Government and Realm, when a fair Opportunity is offered;
therefore We have sent these Agents and Letters with the Holland Forces to
Tayowan, to persuade you to submit your selves to the Emperor.

At the coming of the Netherland Ships to Tayowan, you and your Soldiers having
corrected your long Hair, shall come over to Us with those Ships; but if you
will not reform your exuberant Locks in Tayowan, We will decline the so doing
till you come on the main Land, under Our Government; but whether you pole your
Heads, or not, the Hollanders shall transport you and yours in safety in their
Ships; which if you distrust, upon notice given, I will send you of Ours, that
shall Land you without doing you the least prejudice; and after assure your
selves that you shall be preferred to the like Dignities and Employments in Our
Army, as you have in Tayowan, which We have already performed to others of your
Party, as Tonganpek, Tuncinpek, Iantetok, and many more that yielded.


The like Letter was sent to the same Commanders by Singlamong. Besides other
Letters of several Advices and slight Concerns, too long to be here inserted.

The twenty fifth the Council unanimously concluded, That since the Fleet was
equipped and ready, to sail with the first fair Wind to Formosa and Tayowan,
and according to the States Order in Batavia, bring them under their Subjection.

To this purpose the two Jonks, called Eymuy and Quemuy, which were amongst the
Fleet, were fitted out: The biggest, being Quemuy, was Manned with thirty
Hollanders, and fifteen Chinese Captives; and the smallest with twenty five
Hollanders and twelve Chinese. Then the Admiral gave order,

First, That the Fleet should steer to the Piscadores, and there Anchor near
the South Point of the Fishers-Isle, or the South-East Point of Pehoe, where
the Rendezvous should be, that from thence they might all go together. If any
of the Ships should chance to miss the Piscadores, they should lose no time,
but sail straight up to Formosa, and there attend the coming of the rest of the
Fleet, which all should endeavor to get to the North Foreland of Tayowan. If
any of the Ships, or the whole Fleet could not reach that Point, or come before
Tayowan; nay, if they were got thither, or any where else on the Formosan
Coast, and be necessitated to seek for a convenienter Anchoring Place, it was
ordered, That they should go behind the Cape of Tankoya, from whence in fair
Weather they might proceed forward in their Voyage to Tayowan: And that the
Almighty might prosper them in their Undertakings, a Fast and Prayer-day was
ordered to be kept in all the Fleet the twenty eighth of that Month.

The twenty ninth the whole Fleet set sail, consisting in fifteen Ships,
besides the two Jonks taken from Coxinga, and two others that belonged to the
Tartar, which they sent with their own Letters and Interpreter to Tayowan, and
steered their Course South-West, between the Isles of Lissoe and Quemuy, and
Anchored about Sunset a League from the South-East Point of Quemuy, where
being hindered by foul Weather, they lay all the next day.

Mean while a Jonk from the Enemy came to the Admiral with an open Letter from
the Netherland Prisoners in Formosa, signed by fifteen of them, and written on
the sixth Instant, in the Village Loakhou, near the Straights of Tayowan, which
Letter informed them, That they not only writ this from their own free
inclination, but also by the express Order of Summimpessiou, who told them,
That if the Netherlanders desired to treat with him, and drive their former
Trade, he would give them Tamsuy, Kelay, or Lemao, alleging, That if they
would not accept that proffer, their Prisoners should never expect to be
released by him: Therefore they begged, That the Admiral would endeavor to work
some means for their Liberty.

Hereupon the Admiral immediately called his Council, and read the Letter in
the presence of the Messenger, who as he had peculiarly done to the Admiral, so
he proffered the Council the same Places. But he had no written Orders for so
doing, neither was he empowered to Treat; for he declared, That he was only
sent to deliver the Letter, and to see how they were inclined: And although
they endavor'd to draw from him some discovery of the Enemies Posture, by
variety of Questions, yet they could get nothing more, than that by the young
Coxin's permission he was sent from the Governors of Tayowan and Formosa, to
Singlamong and Lipovi, to make some Agreement with the Tartars.

Wherefore after serious Debate, the Admiral and his Council, with the five
Tartar Agents approbation, answered the Bearer by Word of Mouth, That the
Netherlanders would not be wanting on their parts, if they were inclined to
agree with them, which they must manifest with the first opportunity, and to
that purpose meet them in the Piscadores before Tayowan, whither they were now
going. Likewise they gave him a Letter, in answer to that of the Prisoners; yet
the Contents were such, that if the Enemy should translate it, he should not
pick any advantage out of it.

In the afternoon the Fleet proceeded on to the Piscadores, but was forced by a
strong North-East Wind to Anchor two Leagues Southerly from Quemuy.

In the Morning, being the first of February, the whole Fleet set sail again,
February.
and on the second reached the South Point of Fishers-Isle, South-East and by
East five Leagues from them. At the tacking about the South Point, they heard
three Cannons fired in Church-Bay, which the Netherlanders supposed was a Sign
to the Inhabitants, to give notice of the coming of the Dutch Fleet.

In the Evening the Fleet came between the Great Table and the South Point of
Fishers-Isle, and the next Morning they all dropped Anchor in the Bay of Pehoe,
lying to the South-East.

In the Night the Weather grew very tempestuous, the Wind blowing hard out of
the North-East.

The sixth the Sea-hound, Buiksloot, and Cinnamon-Tree Frigates, sailed into the
same Bay, close to the Shore.

In the Evening the Captains of the Ships were commanded early the next Morning
to send their Boats full of Soldiers to those three Ships, but not to Land them
till farther Order.

The seventh before day the Admiral and Captain Poleman went aboard the
Buiksloot Frigate, from whence Poleman was sent ashore, with a Party of Men, to
explore the Country, and bring off some Cattle if he could. Mean while the
Admiral commanded the Captain of the Buiksloot to put a Cable out of his Stern,
and bring all his Guns to one side, that, if occasion required, they might fire
at the Shore, which was immediately performed.

Whilst these things were doing, the Netherlanders were informed, That the
Tartars had been ashore, and skirmishing with the Enemy, lost four Men;
whereupon the Admiral sent word to Captain Poleman to be very careful, who
immediately marched with six Companies, each consisting of forty Men, up into
the Country, and left one Company on the Shore. He had scarce marched a League
and half, when News was brought, That the Enemy had fallen upon him, and that
in the Skirmish five or six of his Men were wounded, and an Ensign slain.
Amongst the wounded was Captain Bitter, who with an Arrow was shot into the
Foot, and also received two Cuts with a Sword through his Hat and Clothes, but
not into his Flesh. The Admiral by this time being also landed, gave Order to
all the Ships to send as many Seamen ashore as they could spare, each armed
with a Pike and Sword. Being now drawn up into Battalia, he sent two Companies
more to Captain Poleman, and soon after a Company of Seamen, who had not been
gone above half an Hour, but a Sergeant sent from Poleman brought word, that
the Enemy was put to flight, and fourteen of them slain. The Admiral sent back
the Sergeant with Orders to Captain Poleman to pursue the Enemy as far as was
possible, and prosecute the already gotten Victory; yet not to go any farther
than he would be able to come back in the Evening; for the Admiral would wait
his coming upon the Shore: Whereupon the Sergeant, with another Company of
Soldiers, and some Seamen, marched away.

In the Evening Poleman returned, and informed, That he had pursued the Enemy
as soon as he had put his Men in Order again, having seen much Blood along the
way which he went, and found four more lying dead, but met no manner of
Resistance, nor saw so much as one Chinese afterward.

Poleman also brought a Horse and an Ass with him, but never an Ox nor Cow,
notwithstanding he saw several hundreds, having no opportunity to fetch them.

The twenty eighth, about Daybreak, six Companies of Soldiers and sixty
Seamen, under Captain Poleman's Command, were sent to the Church-Bay; and two
Companies of Soldiers, and twenty Seamen, led by Captain Shimmelpewy to the
Hollands Fort, with Order, That if they could not meet with any of the Enemy,
to fetch some Cattle aboard of the Ships: In the Evening they returned, having
not met with any Opposition, but bringing with them about seventy Oxen, and
some Sheep and Goats, which were distributed amongst the Ships and Soldiers.

The ninth in the Morning Captain Pooleman, with seven Companies of Soldiers,
marched toward the Church-Bay, and several Places thereabouts, to see for more
Cattle, with order to stay there all Night, and return to the Fleet the next
day. The same day also the Admiral, Vice Admiral, and several others, marched
with two Companies into the Country; and in the place where the Battle was,
they found the fourteen forementioned dead Bodies, which were stripped of all
they had by the Tartars. Soon after the Admiral returned to the Place where
they had encamped themselves.

In the Afternoon, being the tenth, the Eymuy Jonk and the three Boats came
again from the Church-Bay to the Fleet; and according to the Relation of the
Secretary, who the day before had marched thither by Land, and was now returned
again with the Jonk, Captain Pooleman had given one whom he had taken Prisoner
his Liberty, on promise that he would furnish them with Cattle, and bring the
Rusticks to them; which he endeavored, though to little purpose; for Pooleman
got only two Cows, a Calf, and a few Poultrey: But Peter Coker, who had been
ashore with his three Boats full of Men before Captain Pooleman came thither,
had found fifteen Iron Guns, twelve of which, that carried from three to eight
pound Bullets, did formerly belong to the Hollanders; but the other three were
made by the Chinese.

Not long after Peter Coker came to the Admiral with some Prisoners and Chinese
Rusticks of the Country, as also twenty six Cows and Oxen.

Lastly, the Admiral sent the forementioned Villagers and Prisoners home, with
Command, as they prized his favor, to bring more Cattle; and then gave them a
Sack of Rice, and a Cup of Arak, for which with their Heads bowed to the Ground
they cried, Camsia Compagnia, that is, We thank the Company.

In the Evening the Admiral went aboard, but came ashore again the next Morning.

In the Afternoon Captain Pooleman with his Soldiers having been a foraging,
brought some Chinese Peasants, and twenty Cows, to the Admiral, who dismissed
the Men, upon promise of bringing in daily fresh Provisions.

The twelfth toward the Evening came about twenty five Contrymen to the
Netherlanders Camp, with Goats and Poultrey, for which the Admiral gave them
two Bags of Rice, restored them the Prisoners, and granted them a free Pass,
which was to this effect.

SInce the People of this Country have submitted themselves, and as an earnest
of Subjection, presented Us some Cattle, Sheep, and such as the Country
affords; therefore We have taken them into Our Protection; and We charge and
command all Persons, and especially the Netherlanders, not to do them the least
harm, when they of their own free Wills come with Provisions, or anything else,
aboard of Our Ships.

Dated on the great Island Pehoe. Balthazar Bort.


The thirteenth, three Hours before day, the Fleet set Sail, and at four a
Clock in the Afternoon dropped Anchor three quarters of a League North-East
from the Castle Zelandia, with their fifteen Ships, besides the Jonk Eymuy, and
the two Tartar Jonks.

And now in regard the Netherlanders received no Tidings from the Shore, much
less Proffers as they expected of surrendering up the Country: therefore the
Admiral on the fifteenth proposed to his Council what it was best to do in
carrying on their design of recovering it; whether it were best first to Parley,
or begin with the Sword. Hereupon they concluded, that they had accepted of the
Tartars Proposition about sending their Ambassadors with Letters from
Singlamong and Lipovi to the Governors of Tayowan, according to a Result taken
the eighteenth of December; in which the Chinese Commanders in Formosa and
Tayowan were desired with their Soldiers to come to the Tartars and deliver up
the Country to the Netherlanders, as we have before related: To which purpose
the Agents were also among the Council; there to desire their Order to let them
go with their Jonks, and two of the Netherland Ships to Tankoya, and there to
deliver their peculiar Letters, and advise them to come over to the Tartars,
alleging, That they could never do it in a better time: whereupon, after
serious consideration, the Council granted their Request, and as Convoys, sent
two Frigates along with them.

Soon after the two Tartar Jonks, conducted by the two Frigates, took their
Voyage to Tankoya.

The next Morning, about two hours before Day, the Admiral set Sail with six
Frigates more to the Cape of Tankoya, and two hours after Noon Rid by the
Frigates that set Sail before, and the two Tartar Jonks lying Westerly about a
League from the Point.

The Tartar Agents being Landed with their Letters, they immediately met with a
great company of People; who soon after ran all up into the Country, so that
they saw not one Man afterward.

Toward the Evening the Rere-Admiral Verwei came aboard the Admiral, with
news, That one of the Tartar Agents was returned, who told him that they had
delivered all the Letters, to which they expected a sudden Answer, and doubted
not but they should attain their Desire, four hundred Soldiers being already
prepared to come over to them; of which one hundred lay at the Mountain
Tankoya, and three hundred at the River of Tamsuy, where the Enemy feared that
the Netherlanders would Land.

In the Morning, being the nineteenth, the Jonk Eymuy came from Tayowan to the
Admiral at Cape Tankoya, with Letters from the Vice Admiral Huibert de
Lairesse, and another from the Governors of Tayowan and Formosa, to the
Netherlanders.

The Rere-Admiral, presently after the Admirals departure from him, Sailed with
all the small Frigates within Shot of the Castle Zelandia: which his appearance
wrought such effect, that those on the Shore sent the forementioned Letter to
him; so that he did not think it convenient to make any farther progress with
their Boats before they heard further from the Admiral. The Letter was to this
effect:

The Governors of Formosa, Kovia, Anghia, and Oenia, have received the Letter
from the Hollanders, and return this Answer.
FOrmosa belongs to us of old. The young Coxins Father permitted the Hollanders
to live and drive a Trade with them: after which the Hollanders made themselves
Masters of the Country, and oppressed the Inhabitants with Taxes, who complained
of it to Coxin: Whereupon he came with an Army and Conquering Tayowan took it
into his possession, and after the Hollanders went from thence elected us to be
Governors of it: and we have, according to the Articles of War, maintained your
Prisoners, and furnished those that went to Batavia with all Necessaries. Coxin
also sent a Mandarin with a Holland Ship to Quemuy, to fetch the Governor
Valentine, and other Prisoners from thence: but the Hollanders did not endeavor
to get thither, but carried the Mandarin with the rest to Batavia; so that the
Prisoners remained in our custody, where they have wanted nothing but Liberty:
but you kept the Mandarin, and carried him to the Tartars your Allies, who are
a very fickle and false People, which the Hollanders have had trial of in
Canton, where they first granted them to Trade, and afterward defrauded and
deceived them. Now you have received Promises from them in Hoksieu, that you
may settle on Haythom and Colongsoe, and there drive a Trade. The old Coxin
knew very well what treacherous People the Tartars were, therefore he would
never agree with them. They have often sent Ambassadors to Treat about Peace,
under which pretense some years since they had like to have taken Eymuy; but it
fell not out according to their expectation, for they were beaten from thence,
and all the Prisoners we took, we chopp'd off their Hands and Feet and so sent
them home, which we suppose you are not ignorant of; but on the contrary, Coxin
knows the Hollanders are a People that keep their Word, therefore he has used
the Prisoners well: but now you are joined with the Tartars, and have taken the
Countries of Eymuy, Quemuy, and Goutsoe from us; yet nevertheless the Tartars
dare not take them in possession, but have only burnt down the Houses; nay,
they have sent Agents since that to the young Coxin, to desire him with his
People to come under their Protection, which he has refused. The Hollanders
have a considerable time Sailed up and down the Coast, and have not yet
obtained from the Tartars a Place to settle on, by which they may plainly
perceive their treachery. Your Letter we have received, and thereby partly
understand your Request, to deliver your Prisoners, which we think very fit:
they are all in good health, and have a good allowance. We know that you
Hollanders seek nothing but Trade, yet we are not ignorant that you will not
trust us, and therefore neither credit our Sayings nor Writings: nevertheless
you may believe that Sepoan, or Kimsia, would agree with you. If you are so
inclined, and desire to settle in any Place, send us Ambassadors, Persons of
Repute, whom we will not detain, if you do not keep ours: if you are hereto
inclined, do it suddenly, that we may inform Sepoan of it, and make a League
with you, that we may no longer stand in fear one of another, but Trade
friendly together; for the Tartar, assure your self, will at one time or other
delude you. This our Writing you may credit, taking the Heavens to witness the
truth thereof.

In the twelfth Moon, the one and twentieth Day.

The same Morning the Rere-Admiral Verwei came Aboard the Admiral with four
Tartar Agents, and two Persons belonging to the Enemy; who being heard in the
Council, declared, That they were sent from Siautongsiong, Commander in Chief
of the Chinese Forces in the South part of Formosa to Treat with the
Netherlanders, and make them diverse friendly Proposals. Whereupon the Admiral
demanded, How many Men the Colonel Siautongsiong had? they answered, Seven
thousand; which so startled the Admiral, that he knew not what to resolve upon.
At last he demanded, What they would desire of the Netherlanders? they replied,
That they had no Order, but only that they came thither to hear what the
Hollanders would proffer. Lastly, having seriously debated the Business, they
resolved to proffer the Colonel five thousand Tail of Iapan Silver so soon as
he should come to them, with a Proviso, That if the Hollanders should want his
Men, they should assist them against the Enemy, which they promised, but
insisted, that the Sum was too little; so that they desired, if the
Netherlanders were really inclined to agree, they should send some Person of
Quality to the Colonel, to Treat with him himself, proffering to leave one of
their number, to stay as a Hostage till the Person whom they should send did
return.

In the afternoon the Secretary, with the Interpreter Maurice, the Tartar
Agents, and one of the Messengers were sent to Siautongsiong with a Letter, in
which he promised him the forementioned Sum; and another to the Dutch
Prisoners, intimating to them the hopes of their Liberty.

After the Secretaries departure, a Tartar Jonk was sent to Tayowan to
Lairesse, with Orders to send the two Chinese with a Letter to the Governors
there, proposing the release of their Prisoners, and offering a Treaty upon
honorable terms.

The same day the Soldiers in the eight Ships under the Admirals Squadron,
consisting in eight hundred Men, were divided into sixteen Companies and put
ashore, and the day after the Tents which were pitched under the side of a
Mountain, were quite finished.

The one and twentieth about Noon, Secretary Ysbrant came back with the
Interpreter Maurice, sent on the nineteenth to Siautongsiong, and related, That
he had delivered him the Admirals Letter, and discoursed with him; whereby he
found that the Colonel was inclined to come with four thousand Armed Men to
the Netherlanders, that so he might be carried to the Coast of China, provided
the Hollanders would give him ten thousand Tail of Iapan Silver; of which they
should pay five thousand so soon as he had given them Hostage, that he might
distribute it amongst his Soldiers, and the other half (being for him and his
Officers) should be paid him so soon as he came aboard their Ships, alleging,
that those of Sakkam and Tayowan, being about nine thousand Armed Men, would
immediately after his deserting them, endeavor to agree with them; that for a
little Money they should surrender up the Castle and Forts, with all the
Country thereabouts, and go to the Coast of China. And further, he desired to
keep five hundred Acres of Land, and two hundred Horses, that were his own,
which he would lend the Hollanders till they were Masters of the Country.
Besides, at the Secretaries Request he had undertaken to deliver the Netherland
Prisoners, and to that purpose advised him to send one or two Ships more from
the Cape of Tankoya to Tayowan, that those of the Castle might not send out
Forces, and prevent the Design.

Whilst they were driving this Bargain, the Jonk Eymuy came to the Admiral at
the Point of Tankoya, sent by the Vice Admiral Lairesse from Tayowan, with
News, That the Enemy, as he perceived with his Perspective Glasses, wrought
very hard upon three Forts, which he had now finished, leading them cross from
the Seashore to the Inland Water; and also that the Enemy before with eight
or nine great Jonks set Sail thence.

The two and twentieth, being Tuesday, the Interpreter Maurice went again to
Siautongsiong with a Chinese Letter, in which he was promised five thousand
Tail of Iapan Silver, so soon as he brought the Netherland Prisoners from
Sakkam to their Camp, and that then he should with all his Soldiers come to the
Netherlanders, and go over with them to the Main of China. And the same day two
Ships were, according to his Request sent from the Fleet at Tankoya to Tayowan.

The three and twentieth in the afternoon the Interpreter Maurice returned,
with tidings, That the delivering of the Netherland Prisoners could not be
effected, because Siautongsiong, before he would undertake it, would first
receive five thousand Tail of Silver. But the Admiral and his Council no way
approving of it, sent them and the former Hostages to their Masters,
notwithstanding the Tartars endeavored to persuade the Admiral to pay the five
thousand Tail, alleging, That the Chinese at their coming over must leave
their Estates behind them, therefore they ought to be persuaded thereto by
Money. But the Admiral answered, That if they should have sent him the Money,
they could not have been assured of his coming to them by his leaving those two
inconsiderable Hostages, and thereupon resolutely declared, That if
Siautongsiong desired Money, he should first deliver the Netherland Prisoners,
and come to them.

The four and twenteth in the Morning, the Zierickzee and Tertolen Frigates,
sent two days before to Tayowan, came again to the Fleet at Tankoya, with
Letters from the Vice Admiral Lairesse, and the Chinese Governors in Formosa
and Tayowan, in answer to the Admirals, written to them on the nineteenth.
Whilst Lairesse lay with part of the Fleet before Tayowan, they perceived that
those which they supposed to have been Battlements before the Castle of
Zelandia, as he had advised in his first Letter, were only Nets, hung up there
to dry. The Chinese Letter was to this effect:

YOu Hollanders write to us to send two Men to Treat with you, which we are not
inclined to do before you send two Persons to Treat with us first: neither do
you understand our Language, which made you send two Chinese Rusticks with
Letters. As to what concerns the Letter written to your Prisoners, we have made
them translate it in our Presence, and thereby understand your kind Salutation
to them all, and also your inclination to agree with us, and cut off the League
with the Tartars; with Requests moreover, that the Prisoners should be set at
liberty: if your meaning be so, we shall be very glad; but the contrary has
appeared to us by a Letter brought to us ashore by Assam and another Person,
viz. That the Hollanders are yet united with the Tartars, as is manifested also
by Singlamong and Lipovy's Letters written to us; so that we know not what to
think of this contradiction. We believe what ever you do is merely to deceive
us, and to draw away our People, but we will prevent it with our greatest care.
Besides, you have, according to the information of your Holland Prisoners to
us, writ to them, That you are cozened by the Tartars, because you could not
get a Place in possession to drive your Trade on, and therefore forced to
Cruise up and down the Seas with your Ships: If this be truth, we will agree
with you. If you are resolved, and desirous to Treat with us, send Assam and
two other Persons of Quality to us, whom we promise to entertain nobly, and
after having Treated with them, let them go freely away; and when we are
agreed, we will also send your Prisoners, and give notice to the young Coxinga,
otherwise called Sepoan, that we are agreed.


The Council of War in answer to this Letter, writ to the Governors of Formosa
and Tayowan the twenty fourth of January from Tankoya, to this effect:

WE thought to have had a better Answer from you, than your Letter, which we
received this instant, makes mention of; for thereby appears to us, that you
will not send any body to us, neither of your own nor of our Prisoners. When we
lay before Quemuy, before our coming hither, a Letter came from Sepoan, wherein
you specified your inclination to agree with us: and do you now require Agents
from us to Treat with you? We positively declare, that you shall first send one
to us, and hear our Answer to your Proffer, to give us Quelang, Tamsui, Pehoe,
or Lamoa, and then we will Treat further, and perhaps make a good Agreement:
which if you will not do, and send us no Answer hereupon, we will in the space
of two days put our Flag of Defiance, and use Hostility against you every
where. Our gotten Victories before Eymuy and Quemuy, with the ruin of both
Cities, as also of the Forts on Colongsoe and Goutsoe, witness our Power:
therefore since we cannot do any thing to you by fair means, we will try what
we can do by force of Arms; for we have that God, who is Creator of Heaven and
Earth, on our sides: neither are we at such difference with the Tartars, as you
suppose. We drive a Trade again in Hoksieu, and their whole Country is at our
Service, and stands open for us: we may put into any of their Harbors with our
Ships: nay, they promise to assist us with all their Ionks and Forces, if you
are stubborn and will not agree with us: Therefore consider with your selves,
and do not refuse our good Proffers whilst you may have them. Here enclosed is
a Letter to our Friends, your Prisoners, which pray deliver to them: we observe
that they have not well understood our meaning, of which at present we have
given them better information.


These Letters were carried to Lairesse by the Zierikzee Frigate, with Orders
moreover to him, that the sending to redeem the Prisoners was come to effect;
and also that the Colonel Sautongsiong had already informed those at Tayowan
concerning their Treating with him, as they had perceived by their Letters.

Upon the sending of these Letters ashore, Lairesse was ordered to stay two
days for an Answer; but if then he received none, to fire a Cannon with a
Bullet on the Shore, and set up a red Flag from all the Ships, and then come
together to the Admiral, that they might consult together what was best to be
done: But if they should, according to the Netherlanders Request, send some of
their Men to Treat with them, and should desire that some of the Hollanders
should go ashore again, that Lairesse should send the Factor Philip Mey.

The twenty eighth the Ensign, Christopher Just, came to tell the Admiral, that
the Enemy was that Morning come over the Inland Water on that Tract of Land,
where their Men lay Encamped with a considerable Army; and being both Horse and
Foot carried about seventy Colors, which he himself had told, and discovered
accidentally, going with five Men more the last Night to shoot some Venison,
toward the South near the River of Tamsuy.

The Admiral immediately upon this Intelligence went ashore, where he caused
the convenientest Place, about a Cannon-shot from the Hill (where the
Netherlanders pitched their Tents,) to be Entrenched, and some great Guns to be
carried thither, that therewith they might put a stop to the Enemy, if he
should march forward; who about two Leagues from thence had Encamped himself,
and shown many Bravado's with his Horse, but yet durst not set upon the
Netherlanders, who kept themselves in good Order at the forementioned
Entrenchment, that they might not lose their advantage.

The next Morning, being the twenty sixth, the Enemy sent three Men with a
Letter to the Admiral, who gave them Audience, and read it without the Works,
which were not then finished, in a Tent. The Letter was to this effect:

Tathonling Totoksiau sends this Letter to the Dutch Admiral, from an upright
heart and good inclination, to which I call the Heavens to witness.
THe Letter written by the Admiral I have received, and understand your
meaning. Our Agents also have told us what you said to them; by which I gather,
that you Hollanders are a People of noble Minds, and endu'd with Wisdom and
Understanding, therefore we desire to enter into a League with you. My
Intentions I have before declared to your Secretary and Interpreter Maurice: I
am now come hither with my Army for my pleasure. According to a Letter sent to
me from Sepoan at Tayowan, I have order to make Peace with you: To which
purpose two Mandarins are sent to Tayowan to make an Agreement, and surrender
such Places as you desire; so that I hope we shall be Friends: To attain which
I send you this Letter, with Request, that you will send Agents to go with me
by Land to Tayowan, that there they may make an inviolable League between us.

The twelfth Moon, the nineteenth Day. Underneath was his Seal.

Whereupon the Interpreter Maurice was sent with the two Tartar Agents to the
Enemies Camp, fully to know their Intentions, and also to tell them the
Netherlanders Resolutions. The Tartars returning before, were in the Evening
followed by the Interpreter, who was immediately sent back again with a
Message, that the Netherlanders granted his Request, viz. To send two Persons
of theirs to him, so soon as the six Hostages which he had proffered should
come into their Camp, who that very Night came thither with the Interpreters.

At the same time a Rumor was spread, and the Chinese General had also told it
to the Interpreter Maurice, That the young Coxinga was gone to the Coast of
China, to submit himself to the Tartars, and accordingly had commanded his
Soldiers in Formosa to come to him, and surrender up the Country to the
Netherlanders: But this quickly appeared nothing but a bare Report.

The twenty seventh in the Morning, according to a Result taken by the Admiral
and his Council, the Hollanders Agents were sent to the Enemies Camp, viz. the
Lieutenant Hendrick Noorden, and Factor John Renaldus, and John Melman, as
Interpreter, for their Assistant. They were fetched in on Horseback, and
courteously received and entertained by the Chinese General, who according to
his Promise was ready with his whole Army, consisting in two thousand Armed
Men, to break up that day, and go with them by Land to Tayowan.

The Agents had these following Orders given them in writing to Read to the
Chinese Governors at Tayowan.

I. That they should deliver and surrender the whole Country of Formosa to the
Netherlanders, that it might be possessed and Governed by them as formerly. II.
Especially the Castle Zelandia in Tayowan, and the Fort Provencia, in Sakkam,
with all the Guns and other Ammunition, and also Quelang. III. To restore the
Companies Goods, Merchandises, Moneys, and other things, which at the surrender
of Tayowan they took possession of; and also satisfaction for the Charge which
they had been at in coming two several years with a Fleet of Ships to their
Coasts, which had cost above sixty Tun of Gold. IV. All Debtors to the Company,
whether their Servants or Free People, shall satisfy their Creditors. V. Our
Prisoners shall immediately be redeemed, and sent with their Goods to our
Ships. VI. On the granting and allowing of these Articles, there shall be an
everlasting Peace betwixt them and us, and all things past shall be forgotten
and forgiven.
The Commissioners having Read the Articles severally to them, said, That the
Netherlanders desired a speedy Answer, what they were inclined to grant or not,
and also what they would have of the Netherlanders.

Three Seamen, which were sent along with the Agents to carry some Goods, came
back with two Chinese, sent from the Enemy with two live Hogs, and four
Baskets of Potato's, for a Present to the Netherlanders; who gave the Bearers
two Cangans, and as much Meat as they would eat, which they devoured very
greedily: He also gave them a Pass to bring Provision into our Camp.

After the Enemy had broke up with his Army, the Admiral, according to a
Resolution taken a little before, also made himself ready to go with the
Hostages from Tankoya to Tayowan; to which purpose toward the Evening leaving
the Shore, he went aboard of the Vlaerding Frigate, and left the chief Command
to Captain Poleman, the second to Schimmel Penny, and to Bittar the third, of
the sixteen Companies then ashore, viz. six under the first, and five apiece
under the other two. The Camp was also in good Order, their Sconces finished,
their Guns planted, and a Breast-work raised with Planks, that if occasion
should require, they might easily cast up Earth against it. The Nut-tree,
Naerden, Mars, Flushing, Buiksloot, with the Quemuy Jonk, remained there at an
Anchor. In the Evening the Admiral, followed by one of the Tartar Jonks, set
Sail, and the next Morning, without having gained much Ground, because of the
strong Tide toward the South, he came to an Anchor about half a League to the
Southward of Tankoya.

The six Chinese Hostages, which were left in stead of the three Hollanders
that went by Land to Tayowan, related and declared at the drinking of a Cup of
Tee with the Admiral, That most of the Chinese which were then an Formosa,
were not inclined to stay there long, but much rather would go to the Coast of
China their native Country where they had Friends, and submit themselves to
the Tartars; That the old Coxinga came to Formosa with his Soldiers, none was
to be blamed but one Pinqua, who was the only Person that advised him to it:
and since they did not find it on Formosa as they had been told; but on the
contrary, lost a great many of their Men in the War and Sickness, occasioned
from the unwholsom Air: and besides, having now lost Eymuy and Quemuy,
therefore the Chinese do not at all esteem of this Pinqua: nay, the Soldiers
and others have desired to cut his Flesh alive from his Bones, and every one
eat a piece of it, if it might have been permitted.

In the Evening the Ionker Frigate, sent from the Haven of Tayowan by the
Vice Admiral Lairesse, brought a Letter to the Admiral from the Chinese
Governors, which was to this effect:

We the Governors of Formosa, Gamia, Siautongsiong, Koulavja, Anglavja,
Owilavja, Tanlavja, and another Tanlavja, write in their Names this Letter to
the Lord Admiral.
WE desire nothing but Peace. We have received Letters from the Tartar, but
will not hearken to it, nor have any thing to do with him. You write in Your
Letter, which We have received, to send You two Agents. It is true, We have
lost Eymuy and Quemuy, and also Goutsoe, but We care not for them; for we
deserted them freely, and suffered the Tartars to come into them. We have
fought against the same Tartars, and slain Bethetok, and other of their
Officers. They have, it is true, destroyed and burnt the Towns and Habitations
upon the Islands Eymuy, Quemuy, and Goutsoe, and pulled down some of the
Fortresses, but have not had the courage to keep them, so that We very well
know what People they are. In former times You Hollanders have Engaged with Us
in the Piscadores, Baxembay, and Loakkau; so that We know Your By the
Hollanders called The Straights of Tayowan.
Customs, and You Ours. We have lost the Fight at Quemuy, and suffered Our
Cities there to be taken by them, but this was done by Your help: We have lost
a great many Men on Our part; but also know, that You likewise have had some
loss. But now a Letter is brought to Me by two Mandarins from Sepoan,
commanding that We shall endeavor to make Peace with You, and give You a Place
to Trade in; Therefore if You are willing to agree with Us on that account, or
not, let Us know with speed. As to what concerns Us, We have order from Sepoan
to agree with the Admiral, that We may live as Friends and Brothers. We have
also understood by Your Letter, that if We do not send Agents to You in two
days, that then You will use Hostility against Us; seeing Your Writing was
somewhat harsh, We have thought Your Proposal to be of like kind. But if You
are minded to agree, We will grant Your Requests, and make a beginning whilst
the two Agents from Sepoan are here; therefore what the one has to say to the
other ought now to be known. The Letter written by the Lord-Admiral to the
Prisoners We have delivered to them: If You will not credit Us, send Assam
ashore to examine the truth.


This Letter was Sealed with Owiden's Seal, in the Title called Owilavia.

The twenty ninth the Admiral set Sail again with the Ionker Frigate, but the
Tartar Jonks went back.

The thirtieth in the Morning the Admiral was got two Leagues to the Northward
of the Cape of Tankoya, where by contrary Tides he was again forced to an
Anchor; and by two Persons that came from Tayowan, he received a Letter from
the young Coxinga, otherwise called Sepoan and Kimsia, who at that time resided
on Tangsoa. They also proffered the Admiral as a Present, twenty Pieces of Silk
Stuffs, four Frails of Iapan Tobacco, and ten Iapan Apples, which he modestly
refused, except the Apples.

In this Letter nothing more was proffered the Netherlanders than the Island
Lamoa, as appears more at large by the Letter it self, as follows:

TSiovan, a Servant to Tsioubontok, is come back, and has brought good tidings
from the Lord-Admiral with a Relation, That the Hollanders were inclined to
make Peace with us. We have received the Letter from the Admiral written to the
Netherland Prisoners, and understood the Contents of it. I much rejoice at the
great love which the Hollanders bear to their Prisoners. In the last Southern
Mouson, the Hollanders coming with Ships into the Piscadores, they delivered a
Letter to the Mandarin, who durst not of himself take upon him to grant what
they desired, therefore he has sent the Letter to Me, on which I sent one to
the Admiral; wherein I desire to make Peace with the Hollanders. But my Letter
coming to the Piscadores, they were gone from thence with their Ships to
Hoksieu. On the Admirals coming with his Ships to Quemuy, a Servant was sent
from Tsioubontok, or Tonbeenpek, with a Letter to the Holland Admiral; to which
he had sent Answer, That he had agreed with the Tartars, and therefore could
not make Peace with the Chinese; nor that he had any reason to break the
League with them; Therefore because we could not then agree with you we Fought
together: in which Fight indeed a great many Rusticks were killed in Quemuy:
but we suppose that some of the Hollanders were also slain. Our intentions were
not to Fight with them, but we thought to have made Peace. All the Villagers on
the Islands, and those which dwell along the Seacoast, have been under my
subjection. I also loved them, as I do your Nation. Therefore I send two
Mandarins, Houpou-Thousou-Iapien, and Lungeugia Tsiouki, whom I have commanded
to endeavor to agree with you; and we hope, you will not be backward in
agreeing with us, which will be good for both, because we shall make good
advantage by your Trade. If we agree, then you Hollanders must forsake the
Tartars Friendship, that we may not fear them; and when the Peace is concluded,
we will give you the Island Lamoa, and deliver you your Prisoners; then we can
Trade together, and you come with your Ships to us, and we with ours to you;
which to testify that I mean it from my heart, I take the Heavens to witness.

Written in the twelfth Moon, the first Day. Underneath was fixed Sepoan's Seal.

The Messengers that brought this Letter related, That they had first been in
the Piscadores, and from thence, according to their Orders, came five days
since to Tayowan: but they should have been there before, had not the bad
Weather detained them some days at Tangsoa. Moreover, they had heard six days
before, that the three Netherland Agents were on their Way to Tayowan; and also
that all the Prisoners were in good health.

The Admiral told them, That if they desired the Island Lamoa, they could have
that when they pleased, and needed not their Proffer: and also told them, That
they did not maintain the War against them for Lamoa, but for Formosa and
Tayowan.

To which they replied, If their Master Sepoan did not rightly understand their
Desires, it was not his nor their fault; for the Netherland Prisoners had so
explained his Letter to them, that he demanded the Island Lamoa: alleging, If
the Hollanders wanted Formosa and Tayowan, they should not have taken the
Islands Eymuy, Quemuy, Goutsoe, and others thereabouts, from them.

Then the Admiral asked if they had no Commands besides the Letter, to declare
any thing else to the Hollanders? whereupon they answering No, the Admiral told
them, That the Netherlanders would on those terms never make Peace with them.

Whereupon they replied again, That they might do as they saw fit: for if they
could not agree, they would go and submit themselves to the Tartar, and desire
of Him not to grant them to Trade there. But these Threats the Admiral not
regarding, told them again, That if they were not yet weary of the War, the
Hollanders would not be tired with using their Arms, till they had utterly
extirpated them.

Whereupon the Coxingans observing that they could avail nothing by harsh
Speeches, after a little consideration desired the Admiral to pass by all those
Discourses, for they would rather live in Friendship than at Variance, and
therefore were sent to Treat; and to that end desired that he would be pleased
to go with his Ship to the Harbor of Tayowan, where (after they had consulted
with the Governor) they doubted not, but they should give him full
satisfaction; To which the Admiral made answer, That he would endeavor to get
with his Ship to Tayowan, and that then he would expect their sudden answer,
what they intended to do; and if they would manifest their good intention, they
should bring some of their Prisoners along with them, that the Admiral might
know the reason, why they had not written to him since he came thither, because
it created suspicious thoughts in him of their Welfare. Then the Admiral as'd
them, Why they did not send their Prisoners to them according to the Agreement
at the Delivery of Tayowan: To which they replied, That they were ready to have
delivered them, if they had been demanded; but because that was not done, they
remained still in their power.

But after they had promised the Admiral at their return to bring one of the
Netherland Prisoners with them, and had been kindly entertained, taking their
leave, they went to the Shore, and so from thence to Tayowan by Land.

The six Chinese Hostages that were aboard the Admiral, and had the day before
told him that most of the Chinese were not inclined to stay on Formosa, but
would rather submit to the Tartar; informed the Interpreter Maurice, that some
desired to stay and live there, of whom several were Persons of Quality.

The one and thirtieth, the Admiral came with the Vlaerding Frigate half a
League Southward of Sakkam, and the next day Anchored in the Harbor of Tayowan,
before the Castle of Zelandia.

The second against Noon, the Interpreter Melman came aboard the Admiral March.
in a Chinese Champan, with a Letter from the Agents Lieutenant Hendrik
Noorden, and John Renaldus, written in Tayowan the Night before, in which they
informed the Admiral, That after the twenty eighth of January, having removed
with the Army under Siautongsiong's Command, they Rode to Sakkam, where coming
on the twenty ninth, on the thirtieth they were courteously entertained at
Tayowan, but forbidden to speak with the Netherland Prisoners.

The next day after their arrival in Tayowan, they had Audience granted them
from the Governor Ouwilavia, before whom they were commanded, according to the
Chinese manner to kneel, which they refused.

Whereupon Ouwilavia having caused them to be asked, to what end they came to
him; and being told that it was to know how he was inclined to agree with them,
he answered, That he referred himself to the Letter written by the Netherland
Prisoners, on the sixth of October last to the Admiral; and then asked the
Agents, if they had any thing else to say? Whereupon the Agents, according to
their instructions read the Proposals, which he would no ways hearken to; but
said, That they were unreasonable, and not fit to be answered, averring, that
the Admiral himself had written to the Netherland Prisoners, that he would be
contented with Lamoa, whereupon they parted at that time.

The first of February, the Holland Agents met with those of Sepoan, where the
Letter written by the Admiral and his Council, the one and twentieth of
October, to the Holland Prisoners, and in which they thought to show, That the
Hollanders would have been satisfied only with Lamoa, was produced, which the
Agents explained quite another way, viz. That Lamoa in comparison to the other
places that were proffered to the Netherlanders, signified nothing, and that
they were no ways satisfied with it.

Mean while, being met together, the Holland Agents said, That they had
understood aboard of their Ships, how their Prisoners were used to hard labor,
nay, that they doubted whether they were yet living; they to manifest the
contrary, brought them all out of the Castle into a Court, where the Agents
looked upon them at a distance, but were not permitted to speak to them. At
last, the Agents were directed to tell the Admiral, that the Mandarins of
Sepoan were ready to go again to the Coast of China, and that he might now send
a Letter with them to Sepoan, and make mention of some other place, and not
speak any more of Tayowan and Formosa, for they were resolved not to hear any
more of it.

While Affairs stood in this posture, the Chinese told Melman, That they would
not deliver the Castle of Formosa, unless forced by necessity, which they
concluded with a Challenge, That if the Hollanders would give them a meeting at
Sakkam, they would fairly try their Valor, and fight them Hand to Hand in
Champain; and if they wanted Boats, would supply them with their own Champans,
to Land as many as had a stomach to the Invitation; and if their fortune were
such (which they did not fear) to loose the day, they would deliver up the
Forts, and whatever else they desired; But if they got the better, which they
could not doubt, yet they would be ready to a compliance; and laying all
animosities aside, join in an everlasting League of Amity.

The Netherlanders seeing by this, that the Chinese Governors on Tayowan had
slighted the proposed Articles, and commanded their Trustees not to make any
further mention of surrendering, judged it convenient presently to send for
their Agents, and break off the Treaty; only Commanding, that they should tell
the Chinese at their departure, that since they had slighted his Proposals,
they must now make their Addresses to Batavia, and accordingly sent them this
Letter.

BY the Letter of Our Agents which We received aboard this day, and also by the
Relation given Us by the Interpreter, We understand, that you will not hearken
to the surrender of Tayowan and Formosa; and since We are not empowered without
that, to conclude of any thing; therefore We desire you to send Our Agents, and
to receive yours, desiring Almighty God to give you a righter understanding of
your own good, that you may not deceive your selves, trusting too much in your
own Strength and Valor.


This Letter the Interpreter Melman carried with Orders to answer their
Challenge thus by word of Mouth, that if they were so hardy, to try their
Fortune with the Hollanders, and put it to the hazard of a Set-day, thanking
them for the offer of their Champans, they would (if they wanted Boats) rather
swim to Shore, to give them their desired satisfaction; and though they knew
their Valor, they should be allowed to bring two thousand into the Field
against their one; and also they would spare their trouble of coming to Sakkam,
by giving them a meeting and smart Entertainment at the half way.

The Tartars Agents now resolved to return, sent one of their Servants to
Baxemboy, with Order, to deliver some Letters there, and Demand answers of
those sent from Singlamong and Lipovi: But he returned soon after with an Arrow
in his side; which the Chinese, when they perceived that he was a Tartar, had
given him ashore; nay, according to his own saying, they would have taken his
Life, had he not saved himself by Swimming to his Champan.

On the fourth in the forenoon, the Interpreter Melman came a second time with
a Letter from the Netherland Agents to the Admiral; and also one from the
Chinese Governors, in Answer to that, written to them on the second instant,
which Translated, was to this effect.

The Governors of Tayowan and Formosa, Lavja, which is the termination of all
these Names, is no other than such a one Lord, or the Lord such a one.
Koulavja, Siaulavja, Gom-lavja, Anglavja, Ouwilavja, Tanlavja, and another
Tanlavja, send in their Names this Letter to the Dutch Admiral. Worthy Sir,
WE have received three Letters from you, whose Contents We understand, being
thereby well informed of your desires, heretofore you demanded only Quelang and
Tamsuy to Trade in; but now, since Our Prince Sepoan has condescended to give
you Lamoa, nothing less will serve your turn than Tayowan, Sakkam, and the
whole Country of Formosa, which is Our ancient Right and Patrimony; but do not
deceive your selves to believe, that We will so part with what so many years
has belonged to Us; but if you will comply, and take what you are proffered,
well and good. The Prisoners are yet strong and healthy. Nor have We any
thoughts to detain your Agents, for whether We conclude, or not, you need not
fear but your Messengers shall be returned, so well We know the Law of Arms;
but send Our Agents first, because We sent them first to you, and then your own
are free to depart. Sepoan has sent a Letter heretofore, to which he desires a
speedy Answer, which also is Our Request.

Dated the first Moon, the seventh Day; underneath it was Subscribed, Ouwiaen.


The Holland Agents now desiring to return, were not permitted, but in stead
thereof, jealousies daily increasing, a Guard was set upon them; wherefore the
Dutch Prisoners earnestly desired in their Letters, That the Admiral would
first use some mild way for their Deliverance, that they might not always live
as Exiles amongst a Crew of Heathens, and their Wives and Children in Batavia,
as miserable Widows and Orphans.

Melman the Interpreter, according to the Admiral's Directions, delivered the
Challenge, but received no other answer than, Very well; and informed them,
that at his return to the Fleet, without the Castle they had lately Planted
along the Shore about twenty Iron and Brass Cannon. Upon this Intelligence,
Siautongsiong's Commissioners perceived that all things were not right ashore,
and therefore believed, that the Hollanders would not send them before their
Agents came back; neither did they desire them to go ashore there, but
requested, that they might be sent to Siautongsiong at Tankoya, from whence
they were brought, fearing their Landing there might cost them their Lives; the
rather, because Siautongsiong refused to go to Sakkam or Tayowan; therefore if
he deserted those of Tayowan, the Agents believed that he would join with the
Hollanders; for the Letter from those of Tayowan to Siautongsiong seemed to
express, That Sepoan had submitted to the Tartars, reforming his Hair, and
sending for all his Soldiers and Officers from Formosa, with Commands, that
they should come thence, and surrender up the Country to the Hollanders.

But the contrary soon appearing, raised in the Agents a further suspect, and
as many jealousies in the Hollanders, so that now the whole business was how to
contrive home their Agents; and to that purpose, concluded to write to the
Governors of Formosa, that since they could not surrender up the Castle in
Tayowan, and the Fort in Sakkam, they would go to Treat with Kimsia or Sepoan
himself at Tangsoa, and there to see if they could come to better terms with
him: This Message they sent, with design to get their Agents, but never
intending any such matter as the performance of it; and accordingly the
Chinese believing it, dismissed the Agents, who upon the sixth in the
afternoon came at last aboard again, with the Interpreter Melman, and a Letter
written to the Admiral from the Governors in Tayowan to this effect:

The Governors of Tayowan and Formosa, Gam-lavja, Siaulavja, Koulovja, Anlavja,
Ouwilavja, Tanlavja, and a second Tanlavja, send in their Names this Letter to
the Hollands Admiral.
WE have perceived by the Hollanders Letter, that they are of an upright Heart,
though they suspected We would detain those they sent to Treat with Us, as
appears by their last, which is contrary to Our Custom, and their Opinion, who
ever put it into their Heads, for We have sent them freely of Our own accords,
without the Formality of meeting half way, and exchanging Ours for theirs,
whereby you may perceive Our Integrity, and that We never had any such design:
We repose the like Confidence in you, and know that you will not fail Us in Our
expectations.

You (as We have understood by your Letters) will entreat Sepoan to send a
Mandarin with you to Batavia, and there to agree with your King, which We will
acquaint Sepoan with, who knows best what is fittest for him in Honor to do:
You have also received from Sepoan himself a Letter, to which be pleased to
send an Answer, because he will not Treat without Letters of Credence.

We also advise, that if you intend to Treat at Tongsoa, with Our Prince, that
you would inform Us punctually of the time, that We may give him notice of your
coming, and that he may the better prepare Jonks to Convoy you into safe
Harbors, to prevent the loosing and endangering of your Ships.

We have no more to say, but desire Our Commissioners may be sent to Us in this
Vessel.


Hereupon the Chinese Agents were sent ashore, not to Tayowan, but according to
their Request to the Southward of the fresh River in Formosa. The Admiral also
Ordered Melman to bid the Men that belonged to the Champan, tell the Governors,
That if they desired a Letter from him, they should send for it the next day.

The Agents Henrick Van Noorden, and John Renaldus being come aboard of the
Admiral again, informed them, That the Quarters in Tayowan, except two or three
Houses, lay Ruined, and were nothing but a heap of Rubbish; but on the
contrary, that Sakkam was much enlarged with Houses, and that they had seen few
Cattle as they past along.

The seventh, two hours before day, according to their resolution taken the
last Night, the Admiral set Sail with seven Frigates to the Point of Tankoya,
where about Noon he Anchored amongst the rest of the Fleet.

Soon after the Admiral's arrival there, Captain Poleman coming to him, told
him, That all things were well on the Shore, only some few Soldiers were sick,
of which some died, and the Distemper increased. He added also, that that very
day, a Captain called Lita and twenty six Soldiers with their Arms, came from
the Chinese with two Colors, and one Pennon to us, to go over with our Ships
to Tayowan, and offered to fight for us against the Enemy; with promise also to
get more to their Party.

This Captain Lita gave Information, that Siautongsiong did not in the least
intend Chinese come over to the Hollanders.
to come to them, but at one time or other, would set upon them, if he could
find a fit opportunity; and that the Enemies Forces on Formosa consisted in ten
thousand Armed Men, of which near five thousand belonged to this Siautongsiong,
whereof he kept about him a Guard of fifteen hundred Men, the rest were
distributed, some about the River Tamsuy, but the greatest part about Iokan.

In the Evening, there came six Soldiers more, belonging to the forementioned
Lita, as on the next day twenty five more, furnished with Coats of Mail,
Helmets, and Scythes; and about Noon nine more, each of them only with a
Scythe, who had stood on the Inland Water, making signs to be fetched over to
the Dutch Camp; and as they related, had been forced to throw away their Coats
and Helmets, or else they could not have gotten through the Woods.

The forementioned Captain Lita, was according to Order Presented by Captain
Poleman, with four Pieces of Cangans or Clothing, to distribute amongst his
Soldiers.

The tenth came ten other Chinese Soldiers, belonging to Lita's Company, with
Tidings, That the Enemy on the other side did fortify and strengthen himself
very much; to which purpose he had already gotten a great number of Baskets to
be used as blinds, and placed them ready for the first opportunity to lay Guns
betwixt them, and that then they threatened to come, and set upon the
Netherlanders.

There also came four Chinese from Siautongsiong, into the Dutch Camp, and in
their Masters Name, presented the Admiral with two Kings Fish, and a Basket
with Potatoes; in like manner, two other Chinese came to the Camp, who brought
some dried Fish and other Provisions to sell, which Poleman took in exchange
for a Cangang; but because it was supposed that they were sent as Spies, none
of them was permitted to come within the Works.

The eleventh came four other Chinese, who affirmed what the ten which came
the day before had related, concerning the Enemies Fortifying himself.

Those Chinese that came thus to the Hollanders (to prevent them from acting
any mischief) were divided amongst the Overveen, Buiksloot, and Cogge Frigates,
and their Arms taken away from them, viz. thirty in the Cogge, nine in the
Buiksloot, and twenty six in the Overveen.

In the afternoon came a Person with a Letter from Siautongsiong, otherwise
called Tatholing-Totoksiau, to the Admiral, which was to this purpose.

Tathonling-Totoksiau sends this Letter to the Hollands Admiral.
FOrmerly the Admiral sent his Secretary with the Interpreter Assam to My Army,
who spoke with Me; My Inclinations have been for the Hollanders ever since they
have been with Me; We then Discoursed of five thousand Tail to be distributed
amongst My Soldiers, of which I have as yet not received one, so that I find
My Expectations of receiving Money to be frustrated; nay fear, that by the long
delay, My good Intentions which I have had in this business, and still have,
will be prevented; therefore I desire, with the first to know your Honors
Intentions, for when I (which I would have the Hollanders take notice of) shall
come to them with my Soldiers, they may be sure of the Castles and Forts, nay,
the whole Country of Formosa. You formerly promised to give me five thousand
Tail, when I should deliver the Holland Prisoners in Sakkam, which I never
undertook, neither think it needful, because they will fall with the Country
into your hands.

And that your Honor may the better Credit Me, I promise hereby to deliver My
Grandfather to go in the Holland Ships to Soanchefoe, and there Treat with
Singlamong and Lipovi, concerning my coming over, and to that purpose Request,
that they would be pleased to send some great Jonks hither with the Holland
Frigates, which if they do, all things shall be well.

Pray Credit my Writing, for I mean all what is here before mentioned with an
upright Heart, therefore I desire it may be kept private; please to send Assam
to Me, that I may hear from him what your intentions are; if that cannot be,
send your Resolution in Writing, that I may Govern my self accordingly.

Written in the first Moon, the fourteenth Day; and underneath stood
Tathonling-Totoksiau his Seal.

The same Messenger brought also two little Letters from Siautongsiong, as he
pretended to the Tartar Agents; but being broken open by the Admiral, one was
found to be to Tonganpek, and the other to Sibja; yet both of the following
Contents.

THe Letter sent to Me by your Servant Gom, I have received and understood your
meaning; My inclinations, as you very well know, were always to leave this
State and come over to the Tartars; but to do it according to your writing with
the Holland Ships, I am something doubtful, fearing they might carry Me to
Holland, or elsewhere: Besides there is no convenience for My Wives and
Children, neither for My Arms in those Ships, for I am near five thousand
strong with My Soldiers and Officers, which are all ready and willing to come
over to you; wherefore I hereby desire you, to be importunate with Singlamong,
that his great Jonks with the Holland Ships may be sent at farthest on the
fifteenth day of the second Month, either to Tamsuy or Tankoya; upon whose
timely appearance, I will immediately put aboard My Commanders, Wives and
Children; as for the Soldiers it is no great matter, they may go in the
Netherland Ships: I intend to send my Grandfather to speak with you farther
about this Concern, which I desire you to keep secret.


The Admiral, by the Vice-Admiral's and Rere-Admiral's advice, returned this
Answer.

FRom your Writing, I understand anew your desire of five thousand Tail, which
had you come to Us with your Soldiers, they had been paid before this time,
according as We proffered: But to be plain with you, We suspect all your
Actions, which are clandestinely managed; you holding a Correspondence at
Tayowan, though you pretend and desire of Us, that your Letter may be kept
private.

We had also thought to have found more fair Dealings in the Governors of
Tayowan, and if you were really resolved to go to the Coast of China, you would
not have trifled so long, but sent some Persons of Quality to Us, to have been
carried in one of Our Ships to Singlamong and Lipovi; but since We cannot by
fair means, We will endeavor to bring you and those of Tayowan both to better
Terms by force.

The twelfth in the Evening, Captain Poleman with eleven Companies being in
Arms, the Guns and other Ammunition was in the Night brought aboard from the
Point of Tankoya; and the next day all the Tents were pulled down and put into
the Ships; and soon after the Seamen and Soldiers that had been appointed to
stay ashore, came from thence aboard.

The thirteenth in the afternoon, the Admiral assembled his Council to consult
what they should do further, and Proposed, That since they had no place of
meeting there, nor on the Coast of China, whither they should go with the whole
Fleet, to see what condition the Forts were in at Goutsoe, and if they could be
repaired with little cost and trouble, then to Pitch there for the present,
that they might have a place of Rendezvous upon any occasion, and also might
leave there some Frigates, to go out in the beginning of the approaching
Southern Mouson, to Cruise for the Iapan Traders.

Secondly, If they should fall short of Goutsoe, whether it were convenient,
and the time would permit them to venture a design on the Isles Lamoa or
Tangsoa, and from thence send the Cruising Frigates.

Thirdly, If they should directly Steer from thence to Batavia, with the
greatest part of the Fleet, and send only three or four Frigates with the
hundred Chinese, and their Captain with the two Tartar Jonks to the Coast of
China, according to their promise to Singlamong.

These Proposals being duly weighed and considered, at last they Resolved,

First, To examine, how the Fleet was stored with Provisions, Ammunition,
Soldiers and Seamen, and then they might on better ground and with more
safety, consult what they had best to do, and accordingly the whole Fleet were
found to be two thousand and seventy eight Men, (nine hundred and sixty
Soldiers, and one thousand one hundred and eighteen Seamen;) besides an
hundred and two Soldiers, and an hundred and thirty Seamen that were sick; the
number of those that were dead, was two hundred and eleven in all.

The fourteenth the Tartars fetched twenty three more from the Shore that came
running to them with their Arms, and in their Champans carried them aboard the
Vlaerding Frigate.

The same day a Party of the Enemies Horse and Foot, consisting in about three
or four hundred appeared upon the Shore, but durst not come within Shot of the
nearest Frigate; and toward Evening they marched away again.

The fifteenth they agreed to send four Frigates, under the Command of the
Rere-Admiral Verwei, to the Coast of China; and that the Admiral should with
the rest of the Ships go to Batavia: The Orders which Verwei was to observe,
were to this Effect.


TO Conduct the two Tartar Ionks home that came with the Netherlanders from
China to Formosa, and also to put ashore in China, the Renegade Chinese, being
an hundred and two, besides their Captain; therefore to use all means to reach
the Coast of China, and if possible, to get to Puthai, and Land them there; or
if by contrary Winds be could not reach Puthai, then to run to Chinchieuw.

To stay on the Coast till the last of February, and wait for an Answer to the
Admirals Letter, which he had given the Rere-Admiral to send by the Renegade
Chinese to deliver to Singlamong and Lipovi; and if he received no Answer in
that time, to go thence, without any longer delay toward Batavia, whither the
Admiral would set Sail with the rest of the Fleet before.


The Admiral's Letter to Singlamong and Lipovi, from the Fleet before Tunkoya
was to this effect.

The Holland Admiral Balthazar Bort, does hereby present his kind Salutation to
Singlamong the Viceroy, and Taising Lipovi General of the Territory of Fokien;
and wishes health to their Excellencies, with a happy and prosperous Government.
WE hoped that the Chinese Forces which remain on Tayowan and Formosa, would
have accepted of your Excellencies Proffer, and accordingly come over to Us to
be conveyed to China. To the Letters written by your Highness to that purpose
to them, We added another, to assure them of Our Integrity and Care, We would
manifest in the carrying over and furnishing them with Provisions, which was
delivered by your Excellencies Agents to Siautongsiong, General of the Forces
in the South part of Formosa, who pretended to be satisfied therewith, and
began to Treat with Us, and Demanded five thousand Tail of Silver beforehand.
But We observing, that if he should once have gotten the Money, he would have
deceived Us, therefore We would not consent to it; however, upon his assurance,
that Sepoan, otherwise named Kimsia their Prince, had agreed with your
Excellencies, and submitted himself to his Imperial Majesty, We dispatched
Agents to him, and I also went from Tankoya thither by Sea. I received a Letter
from Sepoan, whereupon he offered us the Isle of Lamoa, and to make Peace with
us, provided We would immediately break Our League with your Highness, and join
with them, which We look upon as a business no way suiting to Our Honor;
therefore We immediately Commanded Our Agents from Tayowan, and refusing all
Treaties about Peace, resolved to go to Arms; but a Sickness arising amongst
Our Soldiers that lay Encamped some time in Tankoya, We were necessitated to
remove. Mean while Captain Lita submitted, and brought with him an hundred Men,
which We have sent your Highness with this Letter, had your Excellencies sent
your Jonks with Us, many more would have come over; for they pretend, that they
dare not venture themselves in Our Ships: We will be here again from Batavia
(whither We are now going) with a strong Fleet and Forces in the Southern
Mouson, when We hope your Highnesses will also be ready, that We may fall upon
the Enemy in Tangsoa and Lamoa, or where ever else he shall be, that so We may
at once make an end of the Work.


When Kitat or Lita the Commander was come aboard the Admiral, and told that he
should go with four Frigates to China, with all his People, he showed great
signs of joy; affirming, That Siautongsiong did not intend to come in, but only
held them in Treaty to gain time, yet they might easily master Formosa and the
Fortresses thereon, if they would suddenly set upon Lamoa and Tangsoa with a
well Manned Fleet, those being the only strong places which he had on the Coast
of China.

The sixteenth, the Rere-Admiral Verwei set Sail with his four Frigates, and
steering Northerly along the Formosan Coast, about Noon Anchored a League from
Ape-Mountain; and likewise the Admiral with eleven Ships, and the Jonk Quemuy
putting forth, came to an Anchor on the one and twentieth in the Piscadores.

In the Evening, the Rere-Admiral Verwei set Sail with the four Frigates to the
Coast of China, to Land the Chinese Revolters, either on Puthay or about the
River Chincheo, under the Tartars Jurisdiction.

The twenty fifth, a Letter written by the Admiral to the young Coxin, or
Sepoan, in Tangsoa, was sent ashore by a Chinese Prisoner at Pehoe, that from
thence he might go thither with the first opportunity, which was to this effect.

THe Holland Admiral Balthazar Bort wishes Health to Sepoan.
I received your Letter at Tayowan; but the sudden departure of your Messengers
would not afford me Opportunity of sending an Answer. We did at your Request
send Commissioners to Tayowan; but when they motion'd the Surrender of the
Fort, they had a Guard put upon them. We always believed, that it was free for
Us to ask, and you to deny, without such Affronts. Tsiautongsiong made Us
believe, That your Highness had submitted to the Tartars, and commanded all
your Soldiers from Formosa, with Order to deliver the Country to Us:
Whereupon We sent Our Agents, as aforementioned: But when We received your
Letter, We understood the contrary; for you advised Us to break Our League with
the Tartar, and proffered Us only Lamoa for a Factory, and the Releasing of
Our Prisoners: In answer to which, We advise you to unite with the Tartar, and
deliver Tayowan to Us, that We may live peaceably together, and Trade flourish
afresh, which you very well know is Our chief aim. I much wonder why those of
Tayowan, while Our Agents were there, sent not to Me, and why yours never
returned to speak with Me; perhaps they may pretend Fear, but they have no
reason, for with Us it is usual in the midst of the sharpest War, to send
Persons to Treat, and make Overtures of Peace: And themselves are able to make
out, how honorably We protected them: Whereas on the contrary, those of
Tayowan were so barbarously uncivil, that they would not suffer Our Agents to
speak with Our Prisoners, nor take a Letter from them to Us. I have set Sail
from thence, with intention to come to you at Tangsoa, in hopes to find more
Civility, and withal to persuade you to send Ambassadors to Batavia; but the
stormy Weather has spent so much of the time, that to My great sorrow I could
not effect My desire: Therefore I have left this Letter with the Piscadoreans,
to be sent to you with the first opportunity. If you resolve to send, do it
with speed.

Balthazar Bort.


The twenty sixth the Admiral set Sail again with his ten Ships, and ran by the
high Western Island: The twenty seventh he saw the Sands; and the twenty
eighth, the Macau Islands. On one of these Macau Isles stands the City Macao,
of whose Beginning and Plantation this is the Account.

The Chinese at first permitted the Portuguese to Traffic on a desolate Isle
The Original of the City Macao.
called Sancham, or Sancian, thirty Leagues from the Continent, and ten from
Macao, where they built themselves, in stead of Houses, Bowers of plash'd
Trees, and meanly thatched on the top. Here the Chinese came to Trade with
them, after they were thus settled, nor would suffer their nearer Approaches,
being terrified with the remembrance of the former Calamities they suffered by
Invasions, especially of the Tartar in the Year 1208. yet fresh in their
Memory. These their Fears and Jealousies increased upon them, by seeing and
considering the Portuguese Ships, what huge Vessels they were, like floating
Castles, big with Armed Men, and terrifying both Sea and Land with the Voice of
their thundering Guns* Besides, the Mahumetans and Moors, which in great
numbers daily resorted to Canton, reported, That these People (meaning the
Portuguese) were Franks (for so they called all Europeans) and were a mighty
People of prodigious Valor, and Conquerors of whatever they designed, and that
the Borders of their Empire were extended to the Brims of the Universe. But
though the Portuguese were thus represented, and appeared themselves to be too
formidable, yet the Avarice of the Chinese overpowered their Fear; for the
Benefit accrewing by this Commerce was so great, that it did not only redound
to the Emperors Advantage, but also the Magistrates and Common People were all
Sharers; so that by Degrees they suffered it to be driven within their
Dominions, yet with this Proviso, That so soon as their time of Sale was done,
they should go again to India with their Commodities.

The Portuguese Merchants had Annually two Markets or Fairs, to buy what the
Indian Ships transported in January, or the Iapanners in June.

The Fairs or Markets were not kept in the Haven of Macao, nor on the Isle of
Sancian, as in ancient times; but in Canton it self, whither an infinite
Company of People resorted; for the Portuguese went from the City Macao, with
the Magistrates leave of China, to the Metropolis Canton, two days Journey by
Water, against Tide, and lodged at Night in their Vessels in the Haven: Yet all
things were done with such circumspection and vigilance, that it was easy to
see they were not without jealous Fits, and grudgings of their former Fear.
These yearly Fairs continued two Months, and sometimes longer.

By this means that Place which was before desolate, began to be inhabited not
only by the Portuguese, but also by many of the neighboring People; so that in
few Years, by the great abundance of Commodities brought thither out of Europe,
India, and China it self, it grew a famous and populous City: Nay, such was the
Chinese Covetousness, seeing their Wealth, that they not only dwelt there, and
Traded, but Married with them, and in a short time filled the whole Isle full
of rich Habitations.

This Place is also famous amongst the Catholics, for the great resort thither
of Priests, and their converting the Natives to the Christian Faith. From hence
all the Voyages for the Converting of Heathens were undertaken; as to Iapan,
China, Tunking, Cochinchina, Cambaya, Laos, and other Countries; wherefore the
King of Portugal gave it the Title of a City, and by the approbation of the
Pope raised it to an Episcopal See. But since the banishing of the Portuguese
out of Iapan, this City has much decreased.

The twenty ninth in the Night the Fleet reached the East Point of the Isle
Ainan, which, according to Bartholomew Verwei's Observation, lies much more
Northerly than it is placed in the general Map. On this Isle lies the City
Ingly, otherwise called Ciunchew, being fortified with very strong Walls, full
of handsome Buildings, and well seated for Trade; the whole Island being in a
manner surrounded with Mountains and Woods, produces great plenty of all
Necessaries for Humane Sustenance.

On the Mountains grows the sweet smelling Craine-Wood, and likewise Ebony,
Roses, and Brasile, much used by the Dyers through all China. There are also
many Indian Nuts, and a Fruit by them called Iaca, which grows not on the
Branches, but the Body of the Tree. Amongst others, there also grows a certain
strange Herb, in the Chinese Tongue called Chitung; for the Seamen are of
opinion, that they can find by its Joints or Knobs, in what Month, and how many
Storms there shall be in a whole Year, saying, The fewer Joints this Herb has,
the less the number of Storms will be; and likewise from its Stalks that shoot
out of the Joints from the Root upwards, they judge in what Month it will be
tempestuous Weather. The Island also breeds many Hearts, and other wild and tame
Beasts, besides abundance of Birds.

Near this Island they also fish for Pearls on the Northern Shore, between this
and the Main Land. There is likewise a very strange Fish caught here, with four
Eyes, and six Feet, which the Chinese affirm produces also Pearls.

There is yet another Monster in this Sea, whose Head resembles a Birds, all
the rest a Fish, and yields, as they say, several Precious Stones.

Between the City Coacheu and the Isle of Hainan they catch some Sea-Crabs,
which differ not much from the other, except in this, that as soon as they come
out of the Water into the Air, they are turned into Stone, yet still keeping
their former Shape. The Portuguese and Chinese use them for Medicines against
Burning Fevers.

On the Southside of this Isle the Chinese catch Whales, after the same manner
as we do at Greenland.

This Island has diverse Mountains toward the South side, whereof one called
Kinim, has a Quarry of red Marble.

Not far from Linkao, a little Town, there lies the Mountain Pisie, of which
the Chinese tell strange Fictions; for they relate, That there was a Stag
endued with Humane Reason, which conducted the Islanders Army through unknown
ways, and brought them where they blocked up their Enemy, that came from
Cochinchina to invade them, by which means they obtained a great Victory, and
on the same place erected a Temple in his Honor.

Eastward of Cincheu is a Lake, where a City stood formerly, that was swallowed
up by an Earthquake.

By the little Town Iai rises a Mountain, said to be so lofty, that neither
Wind nor Rain reaches the top; and therefore called Hoeifung, that is, Above
the Wind.

It is very remarkable what the Chinese relate of the Sea near the Town Cium,
viz. That it neither ebbs nor flows, which is observed at the neighboring
Places; but runs one half of the Month toward the East, and the other half to
the West.

The City of Ingly is a Place of great Commerce, in which there are three
Markets every day; one of which is held in a very large Place on the East side
of the City, whither so soon as the Sun rises diverse Merchants resort, as
Arabians, Turks, Zurats, Malabars, Abyssines, and those of Pegu and Malaya,
besides many of the Native Inhabitants, Indians, and Portuguese.

After this Market is ended, which continues till nine a Clock, begins a
second, which is kept before the Governors Palace, and lasts till Noon, at
which time every one retires home to their Dinners.

In the Afternoon about three a clock the third Market begins, in a Place at
the South side of the City, where those Women (for the Females drive the Trade
here, and not the Men) which sell several sorts of Goods, stand apart by
themselves, and separated from one another; First stand in a row the
Pepper-traders; next, those that sell Betel Leaves, Onekka, Water-Melons, and
Anana's; and behind them the Booksellers. In another Quarter are the
Ironmongers and Brasiers Shops, furnished with Armor, Poniards, Swords, and all
sorts of Weapons, and likewise Sandal-Wood: Opposite to them stand such as vend
Sugar, Honey, and all manner of Preserves: Not far distant is sold white,
black, red, yellow, green, and gray Beans; and lastly appears a handsome Square,
where all sorts of Herbs, either for Food or Physical use, may be bought.

Here also those Merchants which Trade in Linen, and other Commodities by
Wholesale, have their Exchange; beyond which is a Market for Poultry, as Hens,
Ducks, Pigeons, Parrots, and other Birds; and likewise of Cabrito's, or Goats.

Here are also three High Streets: In the first on the right side are some
Jewellers, which sell Rubies, Hyacinths, and the like; on the left side, many
Chinese Picture-drawers, intermixed with such as sell diverse Colors of
Sowing-Silks, Silk and Damask Stuffs, Flannel, Satin, Gold Wyre, Cloth of
Tissue, Porcelane, Waxed Baskets, Copper Basins, Pots, and Cans, great and
small; Quicksilver, Chests, Writing-Paper of all Colors, Almanacks, Leaf-Gold
in Books, Looking-glasses, Combs, Spectacles, Brimstone, Chinese Scymiters with
waxed Scabbards, China-Roots, Fans, and other Trifles. The second is full of
Picture-Shops. The third is only for private use. Passing on somewhat further,
you come to the Fruit-Market, and through that into the Fish-Market; and from
thence turning toward the left side, to the Shambles, beyond which is a
peculiar Place, where the Women sell by Retail round and long Pepper, white and
black Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace, Cubebs, Cinnamon, Cummin, Ginger, Zedoar,
Sandal-Wood, Rhubarb, Galanga, Anniseeds, and the like: On the right side is
the Rice-Market; close by which, the place where they sell Pots, Bags, Mats,
and Salt; and opposite to it, on the left side, Oil.

The first of March the Fleet sailed by Tinhosa; the second, by the Cape de
March.
Avarelles; on the third they passed over the Garden of Holland, Breda, and
Ackersloot Sands, lying on the South side of the Paracelles: The fourth they
sailed by Candor, and on the seventh Anchored at the Isle of Timon.

The eighth was publicly read an Order of the Council, by which it was
commanded, That none, either there or at Batavia, should sell any of the
Chinese Children which the Officers, Soldiers, or Seamen had taken, either to
Moors or Heathens: And for the better prevention thereof, it was ordered, That
they should all be numbered; which Office was committed to the charge of Peter
Suskens, Captain Adrian Mouldpenny, Secretary Henry Ysbrands, and John
Renaldus. This Order was verbatim as follows.

SInce there are many Chinese Children, as well Females as Males, in the Fleet
which belong to the Officers, Seamen, and Soldiers, whom We fear they may sell
either here at Poele Timon, or when they come to Batavia, either to Idolaters
or Mahumetans, which is neither fitting nor lawful for Us Christians, but
strictly forbidden by Our Superior Magistrates: Therefore We give every one
knowledge and warning, not to dispose of any of the Maids or Youths, or other
Chinese, either here at Poele Timon, or Batavia, to Mahumetans or Idolaters,
neither to barter nor give them away to such, on pain of those Punishments
decreed for such Offenses: And that such Misdoers may be found out, every one
shall be obliged to give an Account of how many they have, to Our appointed
Officers, that they may take their Names in Writing: And this to be set up in
all the Ships of the Fleet lying at an Anchor before Poele Timon. Dated the
eighth of March, 1664.


The tenth it was concluded in the Council, That since there was not Provision
enough to be had for the Fleet, and that which was there, very dear, to go
thence to the Isle of Laver, in hopes to be better provided: Toward which
having weighed Anchor, they set Sail in the Evening, and about midnight arrived
there. On his departure the Admiral left a Letter with the Inhabitants of Poele
Timon, to deliver to the Rere-Admiral Verwei, in which he advised him of all
what had happened since they parted.

The twelfth it was resolved in Council that Evening to proceed on their Voyage
to Batavia; according to which, they weighed Anchor, and set Sail.

The thirteenth the Fleet sailed by Poele Panjang; and on the fourteenth passed
Lingen, and Poele Saya, and in the Evening Poele Toesjouw.

The fifteenth toward Night they passed by the Rock Frederick Hendrick, and
toward Evening entered the Straights of Banka.

The twentieth the Fleet stemmed the Thousand Islands, and in the Evening
Anchored in twenty eight Fathom, and were about three Leagues distant from the
Isle of Edam.

The next day, being the one and twentieth, the Fleet came to an Anchor at
Batavia, with ten Ships. The Sea-hound Frigate, sent thither with the Quemuy
Jonk, with Letters from the Piscadores, were also arrived there, and likewise
two other Jonks.

Toward Evening the Admiral Balthazar Bort, Vice Admiral Huibert de Lairesse,
the Council of War, and Commanders of all the Ships, went ashore, and were
courteously received by his Excellency the Lord Maetzuiker, who inviting them
to Dinner the next day, the Admiral related all his Adventures to him,
delivered him also his Papers, and a List of the Prisoners and the Chinese
Children, which were in all two hundred forty three; viz. fifty nine Men, a
hundred forty eight Male Children, and thirty six Female.

Mean while the Rear-Admiral Bartholomew Verwei, who on the twenty fourth The
return of the five Ships, with the Rere-Admiral, from the Coast of China.
of February set Sail with four Ships from the Piscadores, to the Coast of
China, to transport the revolted Chinese, and land them about Puthay, or the
River Chincheo, the twenty sixth came to an Anchor at the Island Colongsoe,
where he desired the Tartar Agents, that they would with one of their Vessels
fetch away the Chinese; to which purpose he put the Agents ashore at the City
Eymuy. The next day they brought a Jonk, into which they were put with their
Arms, and likewise the Letters given to the Agents, to be delivered the
Viceroy Singlamong and General Lipovi, with which the Agents went to the City
Chincheo.

The twenty eighth a Tartar Vessel came aboard the Rere-Admiral, in which was a
shaven Chinese called Hionko, which had formerly lived in Batavia, and spoke
Portuguese, who told him, That he was sent by Sitetok, with Request to Verwei,
That he would please to come to him to Haytin (a Place about a League and a
half from thence) to a Treat; but Verwei being sickly, put it off. This Hionko
also related, That the Enemy with his Forces lay yet in Tangsoa, and durst not
go to Tayowan, fearing the Dutch Ships that lay before it; and that about
fourteen days since, five thousand Men came to them in sixty Jonks, which then
lay at Haytan; that the Commanders which came in the said Jonks desired to
inhabit the Isles of Eymuy and Quemuy, which if it were permitted them, the
Prime of the Coxingans would come over to them: But the Viceroy Singlamong had
denied, and would not hearken thereto, alleging, That when another Holland
Fleet should come again on the Coast, they would then without any further
trouble submit.

The first of March the Overveen, Cogge, and Buiksloot Frigates came to an
Anchor by the Rere-Admiral.

The third, being Monday, Verwei set Sail with his four Ships, that according
to Order he might proceed on his Voyage to Batavia, and in the Afternoon found
himself half a League beyond the Island with the Hole; his Course
South-South-West.

The fourth he descried Lammo, an Isle in the North-West, four Leagues from the
Fleet, in twenty two and twenty three Fathom Water; and in the Evening the
Sands, Nor-West and by West, within five Leagues.

The fifth, being Wednesday, Verwei came amongst a Company of Chinese Fishers,
of which he thought to overtake one, or by firing of a Gun make him strike; but
in vain, for they by their nimble sailing got clear away.

In the Forenoon they saw Pedro Branco, and about Noon were in twenty two
Degrees eleven Minutes Northern Latitude: Toward Evening they descried the
Isles Lemas, Nor-West, three Leagues from them.

The eighth, being Saturday, in the Morning they had Tinhosa in the West, five
Leagues distant, and at Noon in the Nor-West, his Course being South-South-West.

Monday the tenth, about Sunrising, they saw Poele Canton, West-South-West
four Leagues from them; and at Noon, by Observation, found themselves in
fifteen Degrees and three Minutes Northern Latitude, and at Sunset descried
the Box Horns in the South-West and by South.

The eleventh they discerned the Cape Averello, in the South and by West, six
Leagues from them; and Poele Cambier de Terre in the Nor-West and by West, at
three Leagues distance.

The twelfth in the Morning they reached the Round Holm, being three Leagues to
the West and by North; and the Bay of Pangerang in the Nor-West, at the same
distance.

The thirteenth early they saw Poele Cecier de Mare, in the South-East and by
East, about six Leagues from them; and the fourteenth at Noon the Point of
Sinques Iagues about five Leagues to the Nor-West.

The fifteenth, being Saturday, they had still sight of the high Land of
Cambodia.

On Monday they saw Poele Candor in the Nor-West, about three Leagues distance.

The twentieth in the Morning they had the Isle of Timon in the South, toward
which Verwei steered his Course with the other Ships, and in the Afternoon
dropped Anchor on the West side of the great Sandy Bay, in eighteen Fathom
Water.

The Inhabitants of this Place informed Verwei, That the Admiral Bort had been
there ten days with the rest of the Fleet.

The same day Verwei set Sail again about Noon from Poele Timon, and was the
next day in the South-West and by South, four Leagues from Poele Panjang, which
lay Nor-Nor-West two Leagues from him: The following Day the East Point of
Lingen bore West-South-West from him; in the Evening, the Isle Poele Sayo
Nor-West and by North; and the Northermost of the Isles, South-West and by
South.

The twenty third, being Sunday, the Fleet descried the Mountain Monapyn, in
the South-South-East, five Leagues distant, in fifteen Fathom Water. In the
Afternoon the Monapyn bore South-South-East three Leagues off. Here he sailed
directly toward the Straights of Banka, and on Monday Morning came up with
Poele Nanko, driving with a Fore-Tide into the Straights, and in the Evening
descried the Island Lucipar East-South-East, in five Fathom and a half, from
whence he steered his Course directly South-West.

On Tuesday, being the twenty fifth, they saw the Isle with the High Trees in
the West and by North, four Leagues from them: On Wednesday the North-Watchman*
in the South-South-East, about three Leagues; and toward Evening in the
South-South-East, at one League.

The twenty seventh, being Thursday, Verwei sailed Westward, along by the
Thousand Islands, and in the Afternoon ran safe to an Anchor in five Fathom
Water, on the Road before Batavia, where going ashore, he went with the
Commanders of the other three Ships to the Lord General Maetzuiker, and the
Council, and related such Adventures as had happened to him since his departure;
who for his faithful Services and valorous Conduct, gave him hearty Thanks, and
promised him greater Rewards.

Thus much of the Relation concerning what happened to the first Fleet, set out
under the Command of the Admiral Balthazar Bort, and the Vice Admiral John Van
Campen, to the Coast of China, and their Expedition to the Viceroy Singlamong
and General Lipovi; and likewise what Adventures befell the second Fleet. Now it
is requisite to give a brief Account of what happened in Hoksieu, to the Merchant
Ernest van Hogenhoek.

Till the first of March, Anno 1664. Captain Constantine Nobel had resided in
March, 1664.
the City Hoksieu, as Agent; but then he came aboard the Finch, which he
freighted with Merchandises to Batavia; in whose Place Hogenhoek was ordered to
look after the Companies Business in Hoksieu, and to keep a Journal as well of
State as Trading Affairs, and of all his Transactions and Services done for the
Company, according to his Orders given him from the Admiral Bort and his
Council.

The same day in the Morning the Viceroy Singlamong went to Chinzieu, to
receive the Enemies of the Isles Tamswa and Lamoa into Favor, except Kimsia,
who was said to be gone to Tayowan.

On Wednesday, the fifth, the General Lipovi went also to Chinzieu, that there
with the Viceroy, he might receive the submitting Chinese into Favor; from
whence he sent one of his Mandarins to the Netherlanders, to Complement them,
and tell them in his Name, That some Letters written by the Council of State
for that Empire, were come to his Hands, and that theirs would soon follow. Not
long after the General Lipovi's Chief Secretary came also with a Copy of the
Council of States Letter, which was to this effect.

WE Lepous have showed your Letter concerning the Hollanders Trading A Copy of
the Council of States Letter.
here, to his Imperial Majesty.

We Ponpous have also made your last Years Writing concerning the Hollanders,
known to his Majesty.

The Piejapous have also showed yours written to them, to his Majesty.

The Conbon likewise has written a Letter to the Emperor, That the promised
Ships were already come; and likewise the Hollanders Request concerning Trade.

Povi has also written to the Zoetaysins, That the Holland Admiral was come
with his Fleet of War to Hoksieu, and that his Request was to come and Trade
here once a Year, and also that he might have a Place granted for the building
of a Storehouse. The Express of the Conbon written to the Zoetaysins informed,
That the Holland Admiral has brought some Goods with him in his Ships, with
Request that he may dispose of them to pay his Soldiers.

On all the forementioned Writings his Majesty made Answer, You, my Lords, go
and consult first about this Business; then let me know your Opinions, and I
will give you my further Answer.

The Zoetaysins, Puejapous, Lepous, Ponpous, in humble Obedience to Your
Imperial Majesty do certify our Opinions in manner following.

We have looked over ancient Records, and find that it was never used to permit
any Strangers to live in our Country, or build a Factory, much less to drive a
constant Trade; therefore We suppose it ought not to be granted.

We also find, That in ancient Times it has been accustomed, that when any
Strangers came to Complement the Emperor, their Goods which they brought with
them were put into one of the Emperors own Storehouses, erected for that
purpose, where one of Our Mandarins taking an Inventory thereof, sold them: But
without Addresses to the Emperor with Presents, nothing was permitted.

But since the Holland Admiral comes hither to assist the Emperor against his
Enemies, We think that by way of Compensation he may this one time be suffered
to sell his Goods brought along with him, first obtaining License from the
General Lipovi, and the Conbon in Hoksieu: But hereafter the Hollanders shall
first make their Addresses to the Emperor, before they shall sell their Goods.

The Empeeor answered hereupon,

I Conghy, the twenty seventh Day of the twelfth Moon, in the second Year of My
Reign, permit the Hollanders to come every other Year and Trade: The other
Points I am of the same Opinion as You, my Lords. These are the Words of the
Emperor, according to which, and this Letter, you may govern your selves.


In the translating of this Copy of the Council of States Letter, their manner
of Style was as much as possible could be imitated.

The forementioned Lepous and Ponpous, which had written these Letters to
Singlamong and Lipovi, are Judges and Counselors of Civil Affairs, as the
Piejapous are of Martial: The Zoetaysins are four Guardians in the time of his
Father, placed over the young Emperor and Empire, to supervise Affairs during
his Minority, being at the time of this Grant about twelve Years of Age.

The tenth, being Monday, Hogenhoek sent the Secretary Cheko with a Letter to
the Governor of Hoksieu, who promised to speed it with his Post to the
Netherland Ships.

On Wednesday, being the twelfth, the Netherlanders went all to the Pagode
Conzan, being one of the greatest in all those lower Territories, situate in a
most pleasant and delightful Place, about three Leagues from Hoksieu.

Monday the seventeenth, in the Afternoon, Lepora, one of the Viceroys
Secretaries, came to visit Hogenhoek, to whom, amongst other Discourses, he
related, That the Enemies of Tanzwa and Lamao had altered their Opinions,
except Ziekautia Chief General of Kimsia, who staid with his Wives, Children,
Soldiers, and Jonks, to know on what Terms he should come in, having first cut
off his Hair after the Tartar Fashion.

He also related, That there was shortly expected a Sealed Letter from his
Majesty, with great Presents for the Hollanders.

The twenty eighth, being Tuesday, Hogenhoek went to visit the Conbon and
Governor, and desired him to expound the meaning of those Words, That the
Hollanders might come and Trade with their Ships every other Year: To which he
courteously replied, That the Great Council of State at Peking would not yet
permit the Hollanders a Free Trade for ever, nor grant them a Place for the
building of a Storehouse, according to their Minds declared to his Majesty;
but he was assured that his Imperial Majesty, on the Proposal of the Council,
had made answer, That they might come once in two Years; which was as much as
to say, That the Hollanders coming from remote Places, could come but once in
two Years with their Ships to Trade, at which time they should have leave to
drive their Commerce: And it seemed by this Order, that Gifts and Presents were
only wanting to supple the Courtiers, and soften the Counselors of State,
through whose Hands all things of this nature passed, by reason of his
Majesty's Puerility: And if (continued he) you do hereafter order your Affairs
accordingly, I dare promise and undertake that you may not only come once a
Year, and Traffic; but twice, if you be able so to do. Whereupon, after
several such like Discourses, he took his leave and departed.

From the nineteenth, being Wednesday, till the twenty second, nothing happened
of any Remark, the Netherlanders being only busy in building of one small,
and two great Rooms, for the stowing their Commodities against the next Season.

On Sunday the twenty third, the General Lipovi's Chief Secretary came to to
visit the Hollanders, with whom they discoursed about the News sent from the
Court in Peking; and he explained it just as the Governor had done, saying,
That he had discoursed with his Master about it, who had told him, The
Hollanders are sure enough in this Country: The building of a Storehouse is
of small consequence; they have already a good House to Trade in. When his
Majesty says, Once in two Years, they may come every Year, nay twice a Year, if
they can, provided the Hobou (meaning Constantine Nobel) went back to Batavia,
and from thence were sent with a formal Embassy and Presents to the Court at
Peking.

Against the Evening the Governor of Hoksieu sent the forementioned Letter to
Constantine Nobel back again, with information that the four Ships were gone.

On Monday the twenty fourth the Emperors Commissioners came from Peking, to
confer Titles of Honor on Tonganpek and Zibja, the Sons of Zovja, whom his
Majesty had received into Favor.

On Tuesday, being the twenty fifth, Ongsamya, Secretary to the Viceroy ^rse
with
Singlamong, received the Netherlanders that came to visit him very
courteously; and after having drank two or three Cups of Tee, and showed them
his whole House, he solemnly invited them to a Dinner, where they were nobly
entertained: And having passed about several Cups of their Liquor, he said to
them, The Netherlanders may now be assured of a Free Trade for ever; but that
they being so eminent Merchants, ought not to deal with the meaner sort of
People, (as they had done the two preceding Years) who sold their Goods again
by Retail, and then could scarce dispose of half of them; but that they should
Trade with the Viceroy, General, and Governor, who if they wanted any thing in
their Requests, might intercede for them at Court; and that then also they
would be assured to carry out as much white Raw Silk (which his Majesty had
prohibited on pain of death) as they desired: Whereas on the contrary, if their
Highnesses were not pleased, they could not transport one Bale; therefore they
ought to be wary.

Hereupon Hogenhoek made answer, That it was certain these Proposals might be
advantageous, and that they agreed with the Opinions of his Masters; but if the
Hollanders should Trade with their Excellencies only, who engrossed the
Commodity, as they had done in Canton, that then they could not subsist at that
rate; on which account, and for no other Reason, they had left Canton: And he
would rather prosecute the Design no farther, but go to a Place of Trade, where
they might dispose of their Goods at Profit: But if their Highnesses would deal
with them, they should have the Refusal, and they would be very reasonable,
according as the Market went.

After this they fell into other Discourses, viz. That Ziekautya, a famous
Soldier, and General to Sepoan, was come to them, accompanied with six thousand
of the chiefest Coxingan Soldiers; and that one of the chief Officers, Haytan's
Brother, being ashore, and repenting, intended to make his Escape again in the
Jonks that lay hard by, but was overtaken by some of the Viceroy's Soldiers,
who would immediately have Beheaded him, had not his Brother, who had been
Governor of Haytan, begged him; yet nevertheless he was put into Prison. This
Discourse being ended, and having drank a chirping Cup, he desired Hogenhoek to
bear him Company for two or three Hours longer, and then gave him leave to
return.

On Wednesday the twenty sixth, the Governor of Hoksieu's Secretary came to
visit the Netherlanders, with Request, amongst other Discourses, for his Lords
Cotton Quilt, promised by Constantine Nobel, which Hogenhoek immediately sent
him.

The twenty eighth, being Friday, Hogenhoek went to the Conbon or Governor,
with Requests to him, That since the Goods which he had left were not sold, he
would grant him a Pass; for he intended to send some Goods to the Territory of
Nangkin, or Chikiang, there to exchange them for wrought Silks; To which he
made Answer, That he could not do it of his own accord; but that he would write
to the General Lipovi, who was also concerned in it, and let him know his
Answer in a Fortnights time.

Besides, the Governor told him, that it was their own faults, that they had
not sold their Merchandises sooner, for he was a Man of sixty Years old, in all
which time he never knew Cloves sold for an hundred and sixty, or an hundred
and seventy Tail; and accordingly all their other Goods were set at too high
Rates, so that they would not go off, unless they sold them cheaper, although
there was neither want of Buyers nor Money. The Chinese sold the Goods which
they brought with them much cheaper, viz. Bags of Pepper at nine or ten;
Sandal-Wood, twenty two; and Quicksilver, at an hundred and ten, and an hundred
and twenty Tail; Colored Clothes, at three, and three and a half the Dutch
Ell; Scarlet, five and six Tail; which said he, are too great gains, according
to what they are bought at Kalappa. Hogenhock answered the Governor hereupon,
That it seemed not strange to him, that the Revolted Chinese sold their Goods
so cheap, (for stolen Goods were always sold cheaper than those that were bought
with ready Money;) at which the Governor Smiling, desired the Hollanders to
excuse him, that he did not invite them to Dinner, because his youngest Wife
lay a Dying, so that after having drank a Cup of Bean-Broth, they departed.

On Tuesday, being the first of April, the Governors Wife died, which
occasioned that he gave Audience to none in fourteen days time.

Wednesday, being the second, the Viceroy's Secretary sent the Factor Lapora
with a Letter to the Hollanders, informing, That two Agents, with two Mandarins
styled Tzouzou (that is, Governors) came the twenty eighth of the first Moon
from Peking, and had brought with them the Emperors Letter and Presents to the
Hollanders, for their faithful Service.

On Tuesday the twenty eighth, Haytankon Governor of Sinkzieu, with two Jonks,
set Sail to the Manillaes: Their Lading consisted chiefly in Raw and Wrought
Silks: And it was rumor'd, That the Viceroy and General intended to send a
Trading Fleet to Iapan, to which purpose abundance of Silk was already bought
out of the upper Territories, which occasioned so small Inquiry for the
Netherland Goods.

About this time it happened that no Rain had fallen for six or seven days:
Whereupon the Conbon or Governor caused the killing or eating of Swine to be
forbidden by Proclamation, on pain of death; because the young Rice-plants,
that should be transplanted, dried up to nothing. And on the Thursday, being
the seventeenth, the Conbon, with all his Mandarins and Nobles, went in
Procession on foot, (which was never seen before) into several Temples, and
carried Perfumes, making great Offerings to their Idols. The Priests also went
up and down every day making great Lamentations and Prayers for Rain; the more,
because the Conbon had threatened them, That if no Rain fell in ten or twelve
days, they should be severely beaten with Sticks.

The sixteenth, being Wednesday, the Factor Lapora came with a Letter, copied
out of the Viceroy Singlamongs, written to his Secretary Ongsamya, the
Contents of which were as follows.

THe Holland Admiral has by assisting Us against the Enemy gained great Honor,
which I have made known to the Emperor, who has sent two Agents from Peking,
with an Imperial Letter and Presents to them: His Majesty has also written to
Us to go with your Forces and engage Tayowan, and upon the Conquering of it, to
restore it to you; and also that you may come every two Years to Trade.
Acquaint the Holland Hobou with this joyful News, and that the Agents are also
to be in Hoksieu within fifteen or sixteen Days.


On Friday, the eighteenth, the Netherlanders were informed, That the Viceroy
and General, attended with some of the Revolted Mandarins, were gone a Voyage
with their Jonks to Tanswa and Lamoa, to meet Tziekautzia, who waited there to
submit, as they had been informed; but coming thither, they found no body,
Kimsia being fled with all his People; yet the Tartars not daring to stay,
fearing his Return, took away the Villagers, with their Wives and Children,
ruining and burning all they could find.

On Saturday, being the nineteenth, some Merchants came with Tidings that
Tziekautzia had brought a great many Merchandises with him from Tayowan, and
the other Islands, as Pepper, Sandal-Wood, Quicksilver, Iapan-Wood, Cloves,
Amber, Cloth, and the like.

About this time the Rice (by reason of the abundance of Prisoners and Coxingan
Chinese, and likewise the Army which lay there) began to grow very dear;
insomuch that a Sack was sold for thirty five or thirty six Maes: Their
Highnesses therefore were necessitated for some time to give leave to those
Chinese that were not Soldiers, to go to Sea with their Vessels, and seek to
get a Livelihood, and also Till some Ground on the Seashore.

On Monday, the one and twentieth, News came that Houtin, one of the valiantest
Soldiers belonging to Sepoan, was come to the Tartars, accompanied with eight
thousand Men, whom he delivered all to the Tartars; and likewise, That Kimsia
was gone to Tayowan, and Anpikya to the Piscadores; and that Kimsia resolved
there to venture the Hollanders and the Tartars till the uttermost time, and
was daily busy about fortifying and strengthening the Castle Zelandia, and
raising another Fort on Sakkam, so to make Formosa invincible.

On Thursday, being the twenty fourth, News came that the General Lipovi was
gone from Sinchieuw to Soanchieuw, whence he was expected in ten or twelve
days; likewise that a Post was come from the Court at Peking, with information,
That Lipovi was made Povi, or Governor of three Provinces, viz. Fokien,
Kiangsi, and Chekiang; a thing seldom done, to give the Chief Command, both in
Civil and Military Affairs, of three Territories, to one Lord.

Monday the twenty eighth, a Mandarin came in the Governors Name to complement
Hogenhoek, and to tell him, That the Emperors Agents were expected within five
or six days in Hoksieu.

On Tuesday the twenty ninth, the Governor caused an Idol-Priest, because he
had been negligent in his Prayers and Offerings for Rain (for the droughty
Season still continued) to be miserably beaten with Sticks, threatening him
moreover, That if none fell in five or six days after, he should be executed.

The first of May, being Thursday, it happened to rain, to the great joy of the
May.
Idol-Priests; and the same day the Governor sent the Mandarin Tan-lavja to
tell the Netherlanders, That the Agents were expected either that day or the
next, and if they would not please to go and fetch in those Lords, because they
were come so great a Journey about their Business, it being the Tartars
fashion, and that which Nobel had also done the last Year. Hereupon, the
Netherlanders prepared immediately to go to meet the Agents, and Congratulate
their Welcome, as soon as they should have notice of their Arrival.

On Saturday, being the third, in the Evening the long expected Commissioners
came to Hoksieu, with a great Train of Tartar Soldiers and Servants; so that
the Hollanders could not fetch them in.

On the fourth in the Morning, Hogenhoek went with all his Attendants to the
Castle, to Welcome the Emperors Agents, who came to meet him in the Hall, and
conducted him through two or three Chambers, where several Stools were placed,
desiring him to sit down on the left hand, (by them accounted the most
Honorable, which Hogenhoek refused; yet after many Ceremonies, he was forced to
sit right against the Chief Agent, who would not take the Upper-hand, saying,
The Hollanders are Mighty Lords; and that His Majesty rejoiced very much that
they had assisted him with such a great Fleet and Forces, which was taken as a
great kindness at Court, for to none else but the Hollanders did his Majesty
ascribe that Victory: Wherefore he was sent from the Emperor to them, with
returns of Thanks, together with Sealed Letters and Presents. Then he
signified, that his Majesty had granted License to come thither, and Traffic
every other year; and besides, had written to their Excellencies the Viceroy
Singlamong, the General Lipovi, and Governor of Hoksieu, to join with the
Netherland Fleet and Forces, and go with them to Tayowan, which after the
Conquest, should be delivered to them, that they might as Neighboring Friends,
Trade with one another.

Then the Agents asked for the Admiral Bort, and the Fleet: Whereupon Hogenhoek
replied, That for diverse Reasons written to their Highnesses, he was gone to
Batavia, but intended to return very shortly with fresh Recruits, and then with
joint Forces to set upon Tayowan. Whereto the Agents replied, That his Majesty
and the Council of State knew not, but that the Admiral and the whole Fleet had
been still upon the Coast; for which reason, they had with all speed written to
their Excellencies, to go with them to Tayowan, that the Hollanders might be
repossess'd of it, which his Majesty earnestly desired. They would willingly
deliver him his Majesty's Letter now, but their Highnesses, the Viceroy
Singlamong, and General Lipovi, who were also concerned in it, being absent, it
could not be done: therefore they desired he would be pleased to have patience
till their coming, which would be very shortly.

Hogenhoek having drank a Cup or two of Tee, took his leave, and was conducted
out at the Gates by the Agents, who professed great love to the Hollanders. In
his return home, Hogenhoek met with the Conbon or Governor of Hoksieu,
accompanied with diverse Noblemen and Mandarins, who were all going to welcome
and Complement the Agents.

On Monday Morning, being the fifth, one Mandarin came in the Agents name to
salute Hogenhoek; and after having been entertained with Wine and Fruit, took
his leave.

Soon after, Hogenhoek went to the Governor to ask, If the opening of his
Majesty's Letter must be deferred till the Viceroys and Generals coming home?
Who answered, That it was very requisite; and because the Letter must be broke
open in the presence of the forementioned Persons, and him, he had already sent
an Express about it to their Excellencies: But that it would be eighteen or
twenty days before the Viceroy could return, till which time he must have
Patience. Then Hogenhoek asked the Governor, if it was requisite to invite the
Agents to a Treat, and some other Recreation? Whereupon he was answered, That
before they had done all their Commands and Businesses, they durst not come,
but when that was done, he might do his pleasure. Asking moreover, If Hogenhoek
did yet doubt, whether he was a true friend to the Hollanders? And told him,
That they were too hasty in the going with their Ships, and had they staid but
five or six days longer, they might (without doubt) have carried this News to
the King of Iacatra, (meaning Maetzuiker.) But the Admiral, for two years
together, was gone so hastily, that he did not so much as take his leave of any
person, which was not well taken by them, and they had written their discontent
concerning it to the General and Governor of India: Which Hogenhoek answering,
said, That necessity had forced them.

After being handsomely entertained, the Netherlanders taking their leave,
returned to their Quarters.

The sixth being Tuesday, some Chinese Merchants came to the Dutch Storehouse
to look upon the Commodities that were left; and afterward asked, if the
Hollanders would dispose of them by Parcels, or all together? To which
Hogenhoek replied, That if they liked the whole quantity, that he would dispose
of them all, and be paid for them as in Constantine Nobel's time; at which the
Merchants laughing, said, That then the Goods were sold the dearer, because it
was the first time that the Hollanders drove a Trade there; and also, because
the Chinese were formerly forbidden on pain of Death not to buy such
Commodities of Foraigners: But if they would abate something of their Price,
considering the whole Parcel, then they would Treat with them; which if they
would not do, they told Hogenhoek, that he might keep them a year or two
longer. Whereupon Hogenhoek desired them to make a proffer, which was, an
hundred and forty Tail for the Cloves; an hundred and twenty for Quicksilver;
for Amber of twelve Guilders, eight Tail; for that of eleven, seven Tail and an
half; for that of six, four Tail; for that of five, three Tail; for that of
twenty four Stivers, nine Maes; for the best sort of Camphier, of twenty three
Ryals, eighteen Tail; for the second sort of twenty Ryals, sixteen Tail and a
half; for Scarlet, six Tail the Dutch Ell; for Crimson, four Tail; for other
Colors, three Tail; and if he thought fit to dispose of them at these Rates,
they would deliver him White-Raw-Silk in the sixth Month at the Market Price
which should be then; to which, Hogenhoek desiring some time of consideration,
they returned.

On Thursday, being the eighth, the General Lipovi returned with all his Train
to Hoksieu, where he was nobly received by the Conbon or Governor.

Friday, the ninth, Hogenhoek sent the Factor Pedel to the General Lipovi, to
Complement and welcome him in his Name, because the Chollick, wherewith he was
sore afflicted, prevented him from doing it in Person.

Being come home, he related, That the General had accepted of the excuse, and
asked, if he had sold all his Goods; to which Pedel had made answer, No, and
that they remained without any enquiry for them; which the Governor said, was
not strange to him, because they held them at so high a rate; and if they
intended to dispose of them before more came, they must set a more moderate
Price, as they had done before, or else they would hereafter so stick on their
Hands, that they would get nothing near so much for them as they might do now.

The tenth, being Saturday, the General sent for a piece of Crown Serge to
Hogenhoek, which being carried him, he asked, What he must pay for it?
Hogenhoek answering, said, Forty Tail; to which the Factor replied, If the
Merchants pay forty, my Master ought to pay but thirty eight, because he wants
it for his own use, to make a Tent of it; whereupon Hogenhoek, according to his
desire, let him have it.

On Sunday toward the Evening, the Governor sent his Servant to invite
Hogenhoek to come to Dine with him the next day; to which returning Thanks, he
sent word, that he would come, notwithstanding he was not well.

On Monday Morning, the twelfth, Hogenhoek went to the General Lipovi's House,
to Complement and welcome him; because at his coming he could not in Person do
it, being prevented by Sickness, and now going to a Treat at the Governors, it
might have been ill resented, if he had not first visited the General.

When coming, he had immediately Audience by the General, who before he sat
down, asked him concerning his Health, and why he walked abroad so soon, and
that he could see by his looks that he was not perfectly cured. To which he
answered, That he did it for the Reasons aforesaid, fearing if he had denied,
that the Governor might perhaps have resented it ill.

The General, after he had drank, and Presented Hogenhoek with a Cup of Milk
mixed with Bean Flower and Peking Butter, he began to speak concerning the
Letter that came from the Emperor, whereby he said, It appeared how the Emperor
loved the Hollanders, observing, he had Commanded his Forces to go to assist
them out of his own Dominions, which was never done before, neither in the
Chinese nor Tartar Government. Nay, that which is more, if the Hollanders
desired Tayowan, they should possess it again, and then as true and faithful
Friends, to Trade and assist one another; as for their Trading there, they were
ascertained; and concerning their coming every other year, they need not to
take any notice thereof, but that they might upon his word come and Traffic
every Year.

But an Ambassador must without fail be sent to the Emperor, with humble Thanks
and Presents for his gracious Favors; and that he had writ to his Majesty, that
the old Hobou (meaning Constantine Nobel) was gone to Batavia, to be
Commissioned to that purpose; and therefore it would not be convenient, that
any other should come in his stead. But Hogenhoek answering, that he could not
assure it; the General seemed dissatisfied, however taking no further notice,
asked, When the Admiral Bort would come again, because they only waited for the
Fleet to go to Tayowan, to engage it with all their Forces: To which Hogenhoek
replied, that he knew not certainly the time, but supposed, that the Fleet
would either be there again in June, or the beginning of August, as the Admiral
Bort had written at his departure to their Highnesses. But the General in
return, only declared himself unsatisfi'd with the Holland Admirals departure,
laying the whole fault of the Enemies not being totally subdued upon him, who
(he said) pretended to be more bound up, and limited by his Commission than he
was.

Hogenhoek, after many other Discourses, desired, That he might take his leave,
which the General permitted, because he was invited by the Conbon or Governor;
from whence as he was going, he met with a Mandarin by the way, sent by the
Conbon, to tell him, That it was time to come, because the Agents were there
already.

Coming to the Court, Hogenhoek was very courteously received by the Governor,
and likewise by the Agents, which being passed, they took their places: The
Governor sat below the forementioned Lords. The Stools on which they sat were
covered with Damask, Imbroyder'd with Gold. After having rested themselves a
little, the Agents craved Hogenhoek's excuse, that they had not visited him,
alleging, That the chief reason was, because they had not fully effected all
their Commands; which should no sooner be done, but they would wait upon him in
his House.

Then having drunk a Cup or two of Milk, the Governor desired the Netherlanders
to rise, and sit down at the Table, as the Stools were placed, on which they
accordingly went, and seated themselves.

Whilst they were at Dinner, the Governor had ordered some other Pastimes to be
presented, so to make the Treat the nobler, which was very Magnificent of it
self: After the several Chargers with variety of Meat, had been changed for
greater Delicacies thirty six several times, and the Feast ended with Mirth and
Entertainment, the Agents took their leave first, and afterward the
Netherlanders.

On the twenty ninth, against the Evening, the Viceroy Singlamong returned to
Hoksieu, where he was received with great signs of Rejoicing, having Conquered
Tamzwa, Lamoa, and other little Isles lying thereabouts, by which the whole
Coast was cleared.

The twentieth, the Mandarins belonging to the Agents came again to the
Netherlanders, to raise the Price of Silks, telling their Landlord, that they
had understood by the way, that the Hollanders bought great quantities of Silk,
which they sent to Batavia, a thing contrary to the Emperors Order. But because
of their Services done to the Empire, it was connived at; therefore their
Masters had also bought Silk to deliver to them, which if they would not take,
it might easily be wrought by the Agents means, to procure the Viceroy,
General Lipovi, and Governor, to forbid them to buy any more, before they had
leave from the Emperor, with several other such like Discourses; but Hogenhoek
returning them the former answer, they went away unsatisfi'd.

About ten a Clock, Hogenhoek with all his Company, went to the Viceroy
Singlamong's Court, to Complement and wish him joy, of the Conquest gotten
against his Enemies.

Coming thither, the Viceroy was gone about half an hour before, to visit one
of his Chief Captains, that lay very sick. But his Interpreter desired the
Netherlanders to stay a little in the base Court, and he would give his
Highness notice; which being accordingly done, the Viceroy, after a little
stay, returned home, and immediately granted Audience to Hogenhoek, who
Congratulated his happy Return, and likewise his Victory, for which his
Highness returned him Thanks, and wished him Joy of the Letter and Presents
sent to them from his Majesty. But after some short and Complemental
Discourses, the Viceroy made fresh Complaints of the Admiral Borts sudden
departure, without giving him the least notice of it, saying, it was true, that
he had received a Letter from him, but it was just at his departure, when he
had no time to answer it.

He asked moreover, if the Admiral would return, or another come in his place;
to which Hogenhoek made answer, That it was at the King of Iacatra's pleasure,
and that he could not give his Excellency any assurance of it.

Then the Viceroy said, That in regard he could not agree with the Admiral
therefore wished, that there would come another in his stead; for had the
Admiral (said he) observed my Advice, to have gone together to Tayowan, after
we had Conquered Tamzwa and Lamoa, we had surely been Masters of it er'e this
time. But the Admiral would never believe him; but there was now Order come
from his Majesty to go thither; for He did not know, but that the Fleet was
there yet, and therefore for their faithful Service done to the Realm, he had
likewise granted them to come and Trade every Year, which they ought to take as
a great Favor, and believe, that his Majesty was very graciously inclined
toward them, and therefore when an Ambassador should come with Addresses to
his Majesty, he doubted not, but what er'e else they desired at Court, they
would obtain. They staid only for the Fleet, which should no sooner be come,
but according to his Majesty's Commands, they would go together to Tayowan. At
last excusing himself, that he could not in person stay to Treat him, being
still weary of his Journey, he Commanded two of his Council to bear Hogenhoek
Company, and Entertain him, and when it was time to open the Emperors Letter,
they should give him notice; which said, he went in, and the Netherlanders soon
after returned to their Lodgings.

Against the Evening, being the one and twentieth, their Excellencies sent word
to Hogenhoek by one of their Mandarins, that the next Morning about Sun rising,
he should go to the Emperors Poetzienzie; and accordingly at the appointed
time, Hogenhoek taking Horse, went thither with all speed; where coming, and
finding the whole Court Guarded, he stayed at an appointed place, till the
Viceroy and Agents came with the Emperors Letter; where, also, the General
Lipovi, with the Conbon or Governor, and all the Mandarins waited.

After they had staid some time, the General Lipovi sent to the Factor Pedel,
to tell Hogenhoek, That since he could not help to fetch in the Emperors Letter
at first; that now, when it came to the Court, he should fall on one of his
Knees, to do it Reverence, because it was the Custom of the Country; Nobel
having also done it at the fetching in of the Letter the last Year.

Hogenhoek having staid an hour with patience, the Viceroy Singlamong appeared
with a great Train of his Mandarins, Nobles, and Courtiers, and soon after, the
Agents with the Emperors Letters and Presents.

The Letter was carried by eight Persons, all in a Livery of Red and Yellow, on
two Waxed Sticks, on which stood a Cabinet made like a Temple, richly Gilt and
adorned with Imagery; in this Cabinet lay the Emperors Letter, wrapped up in a
Yellow Scarf: Afterward followed five or six Red Waxed Tables, covered with
Damask Clothes, and carried by four Persons, on which the Presents which
consisted in Money, Gold, and Silks lay bare: Then followed the Agents on
Horseback, accompanied with diverse Nobles.

Before the Emperors Letter walked above twenty Persons, beating on Drums, and
playing on diverse Musical Instruments; so that it rather seemed to be a great
Triumph, than for the reading of a Letter.

As it passed by, Hogenhoek, according to the Generals Request, showed
Reverence to the Letter, by Bowing of his Head and Body; which done, they
followed the Train into a great Hall, where their Excellencies were already
Seated, and then rose up: After they had consulted a little together, Hogenhoek
was again Commanded to Kneel, and so to continue Kneeling all the time, whilst
it was reading.

After the Letter had been read publicly, it was laid on Hogenhoek's Arm by
the Chief Agent; for which Honor, he was forced Kneeling to bow his Head
several times together, and likewise for the thousand Tail, and Silk Stuffs.

After this, their Excellencies went to sit under a Canopy, and caused a great
Tankard with Milk mixed with Peking Butter and Bean Flower, to be brought to
them, whereupon they invited Hogenhock also to sit down by them; at last, the
Viceroy rising and taking his leave, went to his own Court: Soon after
followed the General Lipovi, and lastly, the two Agents, Netherlanders, and
Governors, who advised Hogenhoek, that he should go the next day to Thank the
Agents, which he accordingly promised to do.

The Emperors Letter Hogenhoek Commanded Lewis de Keizer to carry on his back,
but the Presents were laid in Pallakins; all the way which they passed, several
sorts of People, with Drums and other Musical Instruments, thronged the Streets
to see them.

Hogenhoek coming home, was welcomed by two of the Emperors Poetzienzie, with
three Volleys of Shot, and the Drums and Pipes played a whole hour before the
Letter, which they did only to get Money; for Hogenhoek was directed to give
somewhat more than Nobel had done the Year before; and likewise the Viceroy
and General Ordered Hogenhoek to go the next day to visit the Agents, and
return them Thanks, because it seldom or never happened, that his Majesty gave
such great Presents to any Person whatsoever.

After Hogenhoek had been at home some time, he caused the Emperors Letter to
be Translated: Which was to this effect.

I Conghy Emperor, send this Letter to the Holland Admiral Balthazar.
I Love strangers who come from remote and far distant places, as an Emperor
ought to do; and the more, because those that do us good, must receive good
again; and those that deserve Honor, must be well rewarded. I have certainly
understood that you have purchased Honor, therefore I have sent Presents to
you. I have heard, that you Balthazar have justly and valiantly gone with my
Officers to War, by which I perceive you mean honestly with me and my People,
as appears by your subduing the Pirates, and driving them away, like a Bird
which has made a Nest to Hatch in, and is now broken to pieces. The Honor
which I always expected from the Hollanders, by Conquering the Islanders, and
driving them away from thence, is performed; therefore I am Obliged to Gratify
you with some Gifts, and send this my Letter, desiring you to accept my
Presents, and Honor my Letter.

Conghy.


The Presents that came with his Majesty's Letter, consisted in a thousand Tail
of Chinese Silver, and sixty Pieces of several Silks and Cloth of Tissue.

On Friday, the twenty third, Hogenhoek went in the Morning with all his
Attendance to the Viceroy and General, and likewise to the Emperors
Commissioners, to acquaint them, that he was dissatisfied for that the Emperors
Letter made no mention of their Traffic, or about their staying there, much
less, to go with their Fleet and Forces to Tayowan, as their Highnesses had
long since promised him, as also the Admiral Bort, and Captain Nobel; viz. that
there were Sealed Letters expected from his Majesty about it; and likewise,
that the Admiral and they had not without reason complained of their
inconstancy, appeared now plainly, because not one of their Verbal Promises and
Assurances were found to be true, which would be very ill resented by the Lord
General, that they had been detained two years, and now received nothing but
words: To which the Viceroy answered with a Grim Countenance, that' it is true,
his Majesty had permitted the Hollanders to Trade, but an Ambassador must every
other year be sent to him; and as to the business of Tayowan, they would be
ready to go with them thither to subdue it; if therefore an Ambassador should
come, they would immediately dispatch him with Letters of Recommendation to
Peking; Whereupon he durst assure them, that they would obtain the everlasting
Trade, and leave to go and come when they pleased, and also have an Island or
piece of Land allotted them, on which they might reside without Molestation.

The like Answers Hogenhoek received from the Governor; but the General Lipovi
seemed to be highly displeased, saying, That so great honor of receiving
Presents, and a Sealed Letter from the Emperor, in which he attributed the
Honor of Conquering the Enemy to them, was never yet known; so that they ought
to have been satisfied with that only. Hogenhoek replied, That they thanked his
Majesty for his Favor: But wherever the Hollanders were permitted to Trade,
they received Sealed Letters from the Princes, which served as a safeguard for
their Governors: Nay further, (said he) the Hollanders Trade through the whole
World, without being limited a time; but when er'e they came, they were
Welcome, and Traffiqu'd as they thought fit: Whereupon the General angerly
replied, Each Country had its fashion, and so accordingly had his; if they did
not like the proffer of coming every two years once, they might stay away; and
if they did not come in the time limited, they should go away again without
effecting any thing. Hogenhoek answered, That this Discourse seemed very
strange, when as he himself had promised, that he would procure him Sealed
Letters from his Majesty for it, and indeed in Honor he could do no less, their
Requests being so reasonable, viz. That after the Conquering of the Islands,
they might for their great Charge and trouble, only enjoy the benefit of Trade.

The Viceroy having been silent some time, diverted the Discourse, asking
Hogenhoek if Nobel would return, with Addresses and Presents to his Majesty at
Peking? Whereto he replied, That he could not assure it, in regard it was in
the Lord General's choice, whom he would choose to Negotiate such an Affair.

Then the General told him, as he had often done before, That he had writ to
the Emperor, and at Nobels return, they would grant the Company all what they
would ask; for the Emperor affected the Hollanders very much, as appeared by
his Letters and Presents, which in his time had never been done to any
Stranger; and the Agents must also be better gratified than Nobel had done, and
that without fail, the next day, because they were just upon their return to
the Court.

Hereupon Hogenhoek asked the Viceroy, that he would be pleased to tell him,
how much more he should give than Nobel had done? Who said, That it was at his
pleasure: Then Hogenhoek taking his leave, went thence to the Agents, who
courteously received him, and Discoursed with them concerning the constant
Trade, saying, He hoped that they would have brought Sealed Letters from his
Majesty about it. To which they replied, That they had delivered Sealed Letters
about it to their Excellencies, Singlamong, Lipovi, and the Conbon or Governor
of Hoksieu; to this effect, that if an Ambassador came to thank his Majesty, he
should immediately travel up into the Country, and the Trade take a beginning
to come every other year.

The Agents also were of opinion, That if an Embassy was sent to the Court at
Peking, that the Hollanders, if they requested any thing else, it would be
granted them, in regard his Majesty bore a great affection toward them,
(because they had so faithfully assisted in the War) and gave them the sole
Honor of the Conquest of Eymuy and Quemuy. They also promised Hogenhoek, that
when they came to the Court, they would seek to obtain a Grant from his Majesty
for the constant Trade, for which he thanking them, returned to his Lodging,
where he debated the General's Proposal of augmenting the Presents to be made
to the Emperors Commissioners, and at last resolved to give the prime Agent
twenty two Dutch Else of Scarlet, half a Chain of Blood Coral weighing six
Ounces, two Pieces of Colored Perpetuana's, six Pieces of Linen, with four
rich Swords.

The second Agent they gave seventeen Else of Scarlet, half a Chain of the like
Coral, weighing four Ounces, two Pieces of Colored Perpetuana's, four Pieces
of Linen, and two Swords; and likewise in their Presence, their Mandarins and
other Attendants were also presented every one according to their Quality.

On Saturday Morning, being the twenty fourth, Hogenhoek with his Servants went
to the Agents to deliver the Presents, who seemed to refuse them, yet after
having looked them over, and denied them several times, they at last
over*perswaded by Hogenhoek, received them.

At parting, Hogenhoek desired once more, that they would be pleased to seek
the Hollanders advantage, before the Emperor and Council of State, in the
gaining of the constant Trade, and render such an account of them, as they had
found and seen during their stay; all which they faithfully promised.

Besides, the Hollanders had some discourse about Trading into several parts of
India, and what Goods were brought thither, and carried from thence by the
Netherlanders, which they again Transported to other places.

The Agents seemed to be much delighted in this Discourse, saying, If an
Ambassador be sent to the Emperor, and the Enemy be driven from Tayowan, they
need not fear but all things would be granted them. Here the Discourse ended,
and Hogenhoek returning Thanks, took his leave and departed.

On Monday, being the twenty sixth, the Governor or Conbon sent the Hollanders
a Present, being good Table-provision; for which Hogenhoek returned him thanks
by Factor Pedell.

On Thursday the twenty ninth, the Chinese kept the Feast in Hoksieu, by them
Feast Peelou kept by the Chinese.
called Peelou; and likewise on the same day through all China, viz. with long
Boats with Oars, new Painted and tricked with Silk Flags and Pennons of several
colors, with which they Challenge and Row great Matches.

According to the Chinese relation to Hogenhoek, the Instituter of this great
Festival Peelou, was formerly Governor of the Paracelles, a Country that is
very fruitful, and abounds with Gold and Silver, who foretold, That that Island
should be swallowed up: wherefore he and some of his Friends, and others that
believed him, several days before fled from thence in their Jonks to the Main
of China; where they honor him as a God of the Sea: for as they report, soon
after his departure the Island sunk; in Commemoration of which they keep this
annual Holy Day.

The Hollanders to observe the Custom of this Feast, as also to recreate
themselves, hired a Boat to go among the rest.

No sooner was Hogenhoek returned home, but the General Lipovi sent his
Mandarin to give him notice, that the Emperors Agents intended the next Morning
to go for Peking, and that he and his Men should conduct them out of the City,
and therefore to send him word what Horses he wanted, and they should be
accordingly furnished.

On Friday, being the thirtieth, about Daybreak, another Mandarin, sent from
Lipovi, came to Hogenhoek, to desire him that he would be at the Agents House
betimes: Whereupon he and his Men went immediately thither, some on Horses,
others in Pallakins; where coming they found them busy Packing up their Goods,
and linking and coupling of Slaves and Slavesses, to the number of six or seven
hundred, taken from the Islands Eymuy and Quemuy, and given to them by the
Governors of Zing and Sanzieuw, and other Officers; wherefore the Hollanders
desired to go out before, that they might not hinder the Agents; which
accordingly they did: and after having stayed a considerable time at the
Viceroys open House, the Agents came to them on Horseback* excusing themselves
that they had made them stay so long: which they answering again with a
Complement, told them, That they had not accounted the time long, but took it
for an honor to wait upon them.

Here the Emperors Envoys thanked Hogenhoek for the Presents, saying, That they
had received them very kindly, but knew not whether his Majesty would let them
keep such great Gifts without ordering to return them again. They also
promised, as they had done several times before, to speak in the behalf of the
Netherlanders before his Majesty and Council, and give them an account of all
they had seen and heard; and also would do their utmost endeavor, and assist
the Ambassador when he should come to Peking: for which Hogenhoek returning
them humble thanks, Drank to them his Majesty's Health in a great Glass of Sack
that he had ready for that purpose, which went merrily round. The Envoy much
admiring the excellent relish of the Liquor, asked if it grew in their native
Country? saying, That it must need be a brave Place, which not only produces
such excellent Wine, but diverse sorts of rare Commodities, desiring him to give
each of their chiefest Servants also a Glass, that when they came to Peking,
they might say they had drank some Dutch Liquor. This done, and the Hollanders
having taken their Leave, they returned, and came toward Evening to their
Quarters.

The last, being Saturday, Hogenhoek was informed, that the General Lipovi
Lipovi will resign his Governorship.
had shut up his great Gates, because he would not grant any more Audience; and
also that he would not trouble himself any longer about business concerning his
Office, being resolved to go to Peking, where his most pre-eminent Wife (Aunt
to the present Emperor) resided, she having writ to him several times to come
up to her.

The Council of State (as on the twenty fourth of April is related) endeavored
preferring the General, to make him chief Governor of three Territories, which
he modesty refused, being rather willing to give over all Offices of State,
because (as he told Hogenhoek) his Age required case, and that to Govern was a
Work too great for him; and to that purpose expected his Writ of Ease, for
which he had sent five or six Posts to his Majesty and the Council, whose
Answer he expected daily.

On Tuesday, being the thirtieth of June, Hogenhoek sent Factor Pedell to the
Hogenhoeks Request for the Emperors Allowance.
Conbon, or Governor, telling him, That he had not received any allowance of
Money for his Table from the Mandarins in two Months, and therefore desired
that he would please to provide it for him. The Governor, to whom this seemed
very strange, said, That his Majesty had not yet forbid, but that it should be
continued. But however, on Thursday Morning early, he with all his Company went
to the Viceroy and General themselves, complaining that they had not received
their Table Pension these two Months: whereat they were much dissatisfied, and
immediately sent Order to the two Mandarins, not to fail to pay the Arrears
next day, and so at every Months end punctually, at their peril, and
thence-forward.

On Friday, being the sixth, the Grand Mandarin Tziekautzia, came from Sinchieu
June.
by Land to Hoksieu, with a Guard of between four and five hundred Soldiers,
and the remainder of them were to come within a day or two after, with his
Jonks. It was also reported, that he should go to Iemping, a Town about nine
days Journey from Hoksieu) to be Governor of it, though the Townsmen opposed it.



On Wednesday, being the eleventh, Tziekautzia's Jonks arrived at Fort
Minjazen, and were expected in three or four days to come up to the Bridge.

On Friday the twentieth, Hogenhoek went to the Viceroy and General Lipovi,
with Request in their General Maetzuikers Name, for the delivery of some
Holland Prisoners, that were brought thither with Tziekautzia's Jonks:
whereupon they promised to enquire if it were so or not, and would give Order
that they should be sent to the General Lipovi, he having the Command of the
submitted Chinese.

The Netherlanders heard this day the news of the death of Tonganpek, Zavja's
Brother, and one of the Admirals, as also of the great Court Messenger.

On Tuesday the twenty fourth, Zanzia, chief Secretary to Lipovi, came in his
Masters Name to acquaint Hogenhoek, that he had sent to Tziekautzia concerning
the Prisoners; who answered, That they which came to him from the Castle
Zelandia in Formosa, had told him, that they would rather choose to be chopp'd
in Pieces, than return again to their Contrymen; and that the Negro Boys
refused in like manner. To which Hogenhoek made answer, That it seemed very
strange to him, since every day one or other spoke to him to procure their
Liberty. I hear, that since I moved the General concerning their Freedom, they
have been in Fetters, and harder restraint than before. In brief, I am
confident he has falsely informed the General, of which I desire you will please
to acquaint him.

The twenty fifth and twenty sixth Hogenhoek sent a Letter to the General
Lipovi, but it was not received in regard of his Infirmity: but on Friday the
twenty eighth it was delivered, and Answer sent, That he had read the Letter,
and finding mentioned therein, That unless the Prisoners were delivered, some
trouble would arise thereupon, which he understood to be Threats; therefore
Hogenhoek must know that he was Lipovi, and that it lay in his power to do the
Hollanders good or hurt, and desired to hear no more such calumnious words, or
else to forbear the Court.

The Sunday following the Master of the Lodgings where the Agents lay, desired
him to take Tziekautzia's Goods and sell them for him, promising to give him a
good Reward for so doing: The Cargo consisted in twenty four Pieces of colored
Cloths, ten Picols of Amber, three hundred of Tin and Lead, thirty Birds-nests,
fifty of Pepper, three hundred of Iapan Wood, twenty of Quicksilver, twenty
five of Cloves, and one hundred Picols of Sandal Wood, besides other
Commodities. But Hogenhoek refused it, alleging they had not yet put off their
own Goods; wherefore he durst not undertake another Man's Business.

The same day Lepora the Viceroy Singlamong's Secretary lying near, came to
Visit the Agent, as his custom was, and discoursing with him concerning the
Prisoners, and Lipovi's rough Answer, proffered his Service to acquaint the
Viceroy with the Business, well knowing that he had sent two or three days
before to Lipovi to let Hogenhoek have them; to which he assented. After this,
through the interposition of the Viceroy, Lipovi and Hogenhoek came to a
better understanding, and the distasteful Letters, and harsh Repertees, were
meliorated into a Reconciliation.

The next day General Lipovi sent his chief Secretary to Hogenhoek's House,
Secretary Zangia come^ to Hogenhoek.
with Orders to tell him, That there had been five Holland Ships seen about the
Islands Heyton, by his Jonks which had brought Rice to Sinksieu, which caused
great joy amongst the Netherlanders.

The first of July the Viceroy Singlamong sent his Physician to the Dutch July.
Agent, who for three Months had been troubled with the Gripes, and also
desired him to send him two Chains of Blood-Coral, which accordingly he did.

The sixth the Governor or Conbon, went to the Castle Tiolo, lying about three
Leagues from Hoksieu, to Besiege Ovatunge, an old Soldier, that held out
against the Tartars from the time of Iquon, Coxinga's Father, being now of the
age of seventy years, and having under his Command three thousand Men.

On Tuesday the eighth, Tziekautsia went to Iemping, to take the Government
upon him, having four or five hundred Soldiers and eighty Jonks, with which
upon the return of the Dutch Fleet they were to go to Tayowan, as the Viceroy
and General had informed Hogenhoek.

From the tenth to the eighteenth nothing happened of any remark: when the
Merchants which came from Nanking out of the Territory Chekiang, carried all
their Silks to Sinksieu, not coming to Hoksieu, which was to the great
prejudice of the Hollanders, as well in the Goods which they Imported, as those
which they intended to Export.

Haytankon, Governor of Sinksieu, and also others, might not publicly send any
Jonks to Iapan, the Manilla's and Tayowan, but used this Invention, which
Hogenhoek makes mention of in his Annotations, viz. those Jonks which they
intended to send away, they load in public at the Keys, and when ready to
Lanch them, news comes in another, that some of the Enemies Jonks are on the
Coast: whereupon the Merchant immediately unladeth, and the Cargo is carried
ashore, and their Jonk with others sent to Fight the hovering Enemy, while
privately in the Night they load again with prohibited Goods, which get away by
Daybreak; but this could not be done, but by the connivance of the Searchers,
knowing the Grandees are concerned in the Freight.

From the seventeenth, being Thursday, till the twenty sixth, nothing happened
but a prodigious Storm, mixed with impetuous Showers of Rain, continually
deluging for nine days, by which many Houses were torn down and washed away,
and twenty People drowned in Hoksieu. It raged also in the neighboring Parts;
for in the Streets of Lamthay the Water was Knee-deep: and in Sinksieu the
Water swelled so high, that they lost above four thousand People, which were
overwhelmed and carried away with the Torrent, and in some Places sweeping away
whole Villages: In the Fort at Sinksieu the Land-flood did rise fourteen or
fifteen Foot high. Amongst others the Viceroy lost four hundred Picols of
white Raw Silk, which he thought to sell to Tonganpek, which made Silk to rise
two hundred Tail; and as it was reported, there was above two thousand Picols
more carried away and spoiled.

On Tuesday, being the twenty ninth, Hogenhoek gave the General a Visit;
Hogenhoek visits Lipovi.
who, though much indisposed, rejoiced to see him, asking him why their Fleet
stayed away so long? to which Hogenhoek made answer, That they had a Month
good to the time of their arrival the last year: at which the General wondering
said, You came in the sixth Moon: but he replied, It was because there were two
sixth Moons that year; but if the General pleased to reckon the days, he would
find a great difference. The General seemed to doubt whether any Ships would
come thither that year, because they stayed away so long, and asked if
Hogenhoek would assure him of their coming? whereupon he replied, It was
without doubt, and therefore desired the General to have patience; that their
Ships wanted a great deal of Repair, which required some Months before they
could be fitted to go to Sea. We, said the General, are all ready so soon as we
receive tidings, that the Admiral is arrived at the Piscadores, or before
Tayowan, to send the great Mandarin, Tziekautsia Governor of Sinksieu, and
Zietetok, and two other great Lords, to welcome and consult with him.

On Wednesday the thirteenth of August, Hogenhoek received news, That the
August.
General Lipovi had received his Writ of Ease from the Emperor, with License to
come to Peking, and also that he was made a Councellor of State, for which
Place he had given eight Tun of Gold, and many rich Presents: Nay, it was
certain, that the Viceroy Singlamong at the same time gave twelve Tun of Gold,
that his Son might succeed him in his Place.

On Saturday, being the sixteenth, Hogenhoek had news, That one of Haytankon's
Jonks, the Governor of Sinksieu, in its return from the Manilla's was taken by
Anpikja's Jonks, having a hundred and fifty thousand Spanish Ryals in her, and
that Haytankon had on the contrary taken nine Jonks laden with Rice, to carry
to Zanchieu, in which Place Rice was very scarce. None was able to apprehend
these kind of dealings, in the taking one another Jonks; yet nevertheless
Traded with one another, the one is Silks and Cotton Clothes, and the other in
Rice.

Till the two and twentieth nothing happened of remark.

The three and twentieth toward Evening, the Viceroy's Factor came to
Hogenhoek invited by the Viceroy to Dinner.
invite Hogenhoek in his Lords Name to Dine with him the next day, which he
promised to do.

The twenty fourth, being Sunday, Hogenhoek went with all his Attendants to the
Court; where coming they were immediately called into the Hall of Audience,
filled with Mandarins and Lords, the Viceroy himself sitting very stately on a
Stool, with a Chain about his Neck, and an Ave Mary fixed to it, bad Hogenhoek
kindly welcome. Having sat a little while, he related, That His Discourse with
him,
about three Months since he had sent a Letter to the Council of State in
behalf of the Hollanders, to be delivered to his Majesty, but would not tell
him of it before, because he knew not whether his Majesty or the Council would
grant his Request, as he was now informed; therefore he had invited him to be
merry: for which Hogenhoek humbly thanked the Viceroy. Yesterday (said the
Viceroy) there came some Agents with two Mandarins from his Majesty to
Hoksieu, only to enquire if there were one or two Ongs, that is Kings, in
Batavia: And they understood there were two from the Letters that came from
Canton; for that of Canton was in the Name of the Governor, General Maetzuiker
of Batavia; and that of Hoksieu written to their Highnesses, was in the Names
of Captain Moor and John Maetzuiker. He added also, that he had a Letter from
the Lepous, or Council of State at Peking; in which was mentioned, That his
Majesty had granted his Request, which much rejoiced the Viceroy, who promised
to send them the Copy of it: for which Hogenhoek returned him humble thanks,
answering, That the Lord General would think himself much obliged to hear of
his great Favors. As to what concerned the Names and Titles, Hogenhoek said
they were all one, and that they had but one Governor-General, which was the
Lord John Maetzuiker, but by the Indians was Entitled Captain Moor, that is,
Chief, or Governor over all others in India; so that both Titles were butone.
Hereupon the Viceroy asked how many Counselors and petty Governors he had
under him? to which Hogenhoek answered, Seventeen or eighteen: at which the
Viceroy seemed to be much amazed, saying, He never thought that the Ong of
Batavia had had so many Rice-Roys under him, saying, Can it be possible?
Hogenhoek smiling said, He hoped that his Highness should find that it was
true, and thereupon named most of them: after which the Viceroy looking
steadfastly on all his Counselors and Mandarins, who bowed their Heads, showing
him reverence. Then his Highness giving a Nod, all the Tables were brought in,
furnished with Silver Chargers and golden Goblets, which filled with variety of
Meats, made up a most noble Entertainment. The Viceroy was at this time more
than ordinarily merry, beginning several Healths one after another.

Whilst they were at Dinner, to recreate their Eyes and Ears, as well as
satisfy their Appetites, exquisite Music was presented, with Masquing,
Dancing, and other Princely Recreations.

After having drank very plentifully, Hogenhoek desired to take his Leave:
whereupon the Viceroy commanded three great Bowls, Cut and Turned of a
Rhinocerots Horn, to be fetched, one for himself, one for Hogenhoek, and a
third for Factor Pedell, which they were to drink out three times one after
another, before he would permit them to go, which accordingly they did.

Lastly, standing up to return Thanks and take their Leave, his Highness said,
That the Discourse which he had had with Hogenhoek he must within three or four
days advise the Emperor of, because his Majesty and Council expected it. And
here again he warned him to take heed that all were truth, for upon the least
prevarication his Majesty and Council would be very much dissatisfied: Upon
which Hogenhoek assured the Viceroy, that all was true which he had related.
Whereupon he departed, and coming home in the afternoon, he heard that the
General Lipovi had on the Morrow invited him to be his Guest, and also to tell
him that the Letters were come from Court.

On Monday the twentieth, Hogenhoek went with all his Train to the General
Lipovi's House, where he was Entertained with the like Discourse as he had with
the Viceroy. Mean while, the Copy of the Letter which the Viceroy spoke of on
the twenty fourth was sent to the Agent, which being translated was to this
effect:

To His Highness Singlamong.
YOur Letter We Lepous of the Council have received on the twenty fourth of the
sixth Moon, and in the third Year of Our Emperors Reign; which We delivered and
read to Him. We have seen Your Letter and Request, and understood that the
Holland Admiral is gone with his Ships, and has left a Houbou, or President,
and a Tonpin, or Deputy in Fokien. Your Highness writes also that You have
delivered the Presents for the Dutch Admiral to their Agents, he being gone
before. You writ also, that the Admiral behaved himself bravely, having taken
the Isles of Eymuy and Quemuy, for which good Service His Majesty has
Presented him: but he being subordinate to their King Maetzuiker, who
Commissioned him to our Assistance, therefore he also must be Presented. This
Your Highness's Request We have acquainted the Emperor with. We have all
considered and made our Opinions known to His Majesty, and approved of Your
Higness's Proposal; therefore We will Present the Ong of Batavia with two
thousand Tail of Silver, and with a hundred Pieces of Stuffs wrought with Gold
and Silk. We have already given order to Our Officers to make them up, and
prepare them for Transportation, and one of Our Lepous, with the Emperors
Secretary, to go with them to Fokien, where they shall give the Silver and
Stuffs to them, if they be there, but if not, then to leave them with Your
Highness till their Return. We Lepous write this to Your Highness, that You may
know how to govern Your self accordingly.

Dated the fourth Year of Our Emperors Reign.

On Tuesday the twenty sixth Lipovi's Secretary, with some Commissioners and
Mandarins came to Visit Hogenhoek; where after a Dish of Tee, the Commissioners
said, They were come thither purposely to hear the Lord General of Batavia's
Name, and how he was styled, because there was some difference in the Name and
Titles of the Letters, which were sent from thence to Canton. It Is true (said
he) their Highness's Singlamong and Lipovi had already satisfied me, but I must
hear it from your own Mouth, that I may the better render an account of it to
his Imperial Majesty; being therefore sent hither, and that his great Master
desired to know his true Title, that he might address himself the better with
Presents. Hereupon the Agent drew a Letter out of his Pocket directed to him,
which contained the Lord Generals Title and Names, as Hogenhoek had given them
to Singlamong and Lipovi, which was in these words: Captain Moor of India, John
Maetzuiker, residing in Batavia: but according to their manner of writing, they
had writ Captain Moor of India, Maetzuiker John, writing his Sur-name first,
and his Christen-name afterward. Then one of the Commissioners from Peking
said, That Holland must needs be a fertile Country, from whence so many good
things come; asking also some ordinary Questions, as it is usual there; which
the Hollanders only answered with a Smile: whereupon the Agents and Mandarins
taking their Leave went home.

On Wednesday, being the twenty seventh, Coxinga's Mother came with his Brother
Sibya to Hoksieu (who had submitted her self to the Tartars that Year before
the Dutch Fleet came thither) to desire their Excellencies to furnish them with
Guides to go to Peking, the Emperor having sent for them to come and live there
for the prevention of further trouble and inconveniences.

The twenty eighth General Lipovi sent a Mandarin to Hogenhoek, to tell him it
would be necessary for him to conduct the Emperors Commissioners out of the
City, because they had taken so great a Journey for his Business, and also to
Present them with something that was handsome. Whereupon Hogenhoek asked him if
his Lord had not told him what he was best to Present: to which he said, With
fifty or sixty Tail of Silver, and when he delivered them, to tell them, That
all his Goods were sold, and that they would except of that Sum to buy Tobacco
with on the Way. Hereupon Hogenhoek making himself ready, went to take Leave of
the Agents and their Retinue, taking with him sixty Tail of Silver, viz. twenty
five for the first Agent, fifteen for the second, seven for the Heralds, and
five for some of the Attendants: Coming to them, he presented the Money as he
had put it up handsome in Papers in several Parcels; which they received very
thankfully, with promises, That when they came to Peking they would not fail to
Serve the Hollanders in what they could possible: whereupon Hogenhoek returned
to his Lodgings.

SInce the Province of Fokien, and the Towns and Cities belonging to it, have
often been made mention of, and hereafter will be more, our Business seems here
to require a brief Description thereof. Borders*


This Province, one of the fifteen which make up China, Paulus Venetus sets
forth by the Name of Fugui, taken from the Metropolis Focheu: It borders the
Sea from East to South; in the South-west, on Quantung; West and Nor-West
conterminates Kiangsi; the remaining part from the North-west to the Northeast
verges upon the Country of Chekiang.

This Province is the smallest in the Empire of China: the Southermost part of
it lies in twenty four Degrees and forty five Minutes, extending to twenty
eight Degrees and thirty Minutes Northern Latitude; a Tract of sixty one
German, or two hundred forty four English Miles.

The Kingdom of Min, or rather several Dominions, over which the Free Lords
called Min, Commanded, were anciently accounted into this Territory. They
divide it into eight Shires or Counties, as we may call them, whereof Focheusu
the chief, Cineucheufu, Changcheufu, Kienningfu, Ienpingfu, Tingcheufu,
Hinghoafu, Xaounfu, besides the small Colony of Foning: every one has several
Towns and Cities, to the number of fifty six, belonging to them, besides two
fortified Cities, and many Castles and Strongholds at the Seaside. Borders.


The first County Focheufu, borders Easterly at the Sea; on the North, at
Foningfu and Kienningfu; on the West, upon Ienpingfu; and the South looks upon
Hinghoafu.

The Chinese Records tell us, that this Country was first planted by a Family
called Cheu, and by them named Min; notwithstanding it did not then belong to
the Emperor of China, but to certain Free Lords which they called the Min. The
first that joined it to the Empire of China was the chief of the Family Cheu;
yet the Inhabitants soon shook off that Yoke, and kept themselves free, till
the fortunate and valiant Emperor Hiaou, of the Family of Han, reduced and
added it to China, with all the Southern Territories, settling them in Peace,
and placed a Viceroy over it, called Veuching, who kept his Court in the
Metropolis thereof. Cyn, the first King thereof, called the chief City, and the
Tract of Land thereto belonging, Cyngan; the next King Sui named the Country,
Mencheu; but the Tangs, of another Line, Kiencheu, and not long after Focheu;
which Name the Taimingian Race kept ever since.

This Country Focheufu contains eight Cities, Focheu the Metropolis, and
Cities.
chief of all the Country, otherwise called Hoksieu, or Hokzieuw, Cutien,
Mincing, Changlo, Lienkiang, Loquen, Iangfo, Focing.

The City Focheu, by Paulus Venetus called Fugui, lies about fifteen Leagues
Westerly from the Sea, on the Southern Shore of the River Min, which with a
wide Mouth falls Easterly into the Sea, and brings both great and small Vessels
up to the City Walls. The convenience of this River makes the Town very
populous and of great Trade: It is adorned with fair Buildings, and has large
Suburbs, called Nantai, otherwise, according to the pronunciation of the
Inhabitants, Lamthay; for those in Fokien use in stead of N the Letter L. and
often say Lamking in stead of Nanking: There are also many Idol Temples.

Cross the Bay near Nantai, lies a Stone Bridge, a hundred and fifty Rods long,
and one and a half broad, built all of white Freestone, resting on a hundred
very high Arches; on the top of each side are Rails and Benches; adorned at an
equal distance, with Lions neatly cut of Stone.

Next this Bridge, at the South end, stands a fair and large Pagode, or Temple.

Another Bridge not unlike this, being a hundred Rods long, may be seen at the
City Focing. And many more are without and within the Walls of the chiefest
Cities.

Three Leagues from Focheu stands a Temple called Kouzan, the largest of all in
the Nether Provinces.

The second Division, Civencheufu, borders from the East to the South-east,
Borders.
and so to the South upon the Sea; and from the South-west to the West, touches
Chancheufu; and on the North verges with Ienpingfu.

This Country formerly belonged to the Princes Min: and has seven Cities,
Cities.
Civencheu the chief, Nangan, Hocigan, Tehoa, Ganki, Tunygan, and Iungehung.

The City Civencheu lies near the Sea in a delightful Plain, and admits by a
large Bay the greatest Ships to Ride close under the Walls, not only on one
but both sides of the City, for it is built on a Promontory encompassed with
Water, except on the North and South-east sides.

On the opposite Shore are many populous and Trading Towns, and chiefly on a
Place toward the North-west called Loyang, which may rather be looked upon as
great Cities. There also is a Bridge which has the same denomination with the
Town, the whole World not showing the like; for it consists of a black Stone
like Touchstone, not supported with Arches, but above three hundred square
Columns, sharp above Bridge and below, the better to break the impetuous egress
and regress of the Current. These Pillars are Capp'd, to walk upon, with five
Stones of an exact breadth, each eighteen Paces long, and two broad, which
successively touch one another at either Foot of the Bridge; of which there are
to the number of a hundred and forty: it is certainly a Miracle of Workmanship,
not only for its great number of Stones of such a bigness, that rest on those
Columns, but most of all, where so many large and equal Stones could be had: on
each side, to make the Passage the safer, are Rails of the same Stones, adorned
with Lions, standing on Pedestals, and other Imagery.

It is worth our observation what is written of one part of this Bridge, that
is between a Village called Loyan, and a Castle built on the Bridge; for beyond
the Village reaches another part, not much less than the former, and of one
make: A Chinese Writer says thus concerning it:

This part of the Bridge Loyang, and also called Vangan, lying on the
North-west side of the City, cross the River Loyang, was built by a Governor,
called Cayang: it extends in length to about three hundred and sixty Rods, and
in breadth one and a half. Before this Bridge was built they crossed the River
in Boats; but because every year many Vessels were by Storm cast away, Cayang
resolved, for the safety of Passengers, to build a Bridge; but seeing such a
great piece of Work to be too much for Mankind to undertake, and also the Water
too deep to lay a Foundation in it, he invoked the Gods of the Sea (as he says)
for some time to stop the Current of the Water; which (if you will believe) he
obtained. After the Essluxes were stayed, and no Tides swelling the River in
one and twenty days, the Foundation was laid, and forty hundred thousand Tail
spent in the building of it.

The third Province called Chancheufu, being the most Southern of all this
Borders.
Territory, borders in the North-East and East with Civenchufu; on the East
South-East and South, with the Sea; on the South-West touches the Country of
Quantung; on the West and North-West, and North, at Tingcheufu.

It contains ten Cities, of which Chancheu is the chiefest; the rest are
Changpu, Towns.
Lugnien, Nancing, Changtai, Changping, Pingho, Chaogang, Huicing, and Ningyang.

The Name of Chancheu was first given to this Metropolis and Country by Names.
the Family of the Tang, from the River Chang, on whose Western Shore situate,
and was then allowed the privilege of a small City; but the Iuem made her
afterward a Metropolis; and at the same time built the small City Nancing:
from whence Father Martin concludes, that then all these Places were much
frequented by Navigators, and that Paulus Venetus his Zerte must needs be
thereabouts.

On the South Side, where the River also washes the City, is a large Bridge of
Hew'n-stone, with thirty six high Arches, and so broad, that on each side are
diverse Tradesmen and Artificers Shops, in which they sell every day all manner
of rich and foreign Commodities, which are brought thither from Hiamuen.

The fourth called Kienningfu, a very wide and spacious piece of Land, borders
Borders.
on the North and North-East, upon Chekiang; on the East, with Foningfu; on the
South, at Focheufu and Ienpingfu; on the West, at Xaonufu; on the North; West
and North, upon Kiangsi.

This Division belonged anciently to the Princes Min; after which the Family
Names.
Tang gave it the Name of Kiencheu; and Sung, another Race, that which it has
at present.

Here are seven Towns, whereof Kienning is the chiefest; the rest are Cungan,
Towns.
Puchiang, Chingo, Sunghi, and Xeuning.

The City Kienning lying on the Eastern Shore of the River Min, is no way
inferior, either in beauty or worth, or bigness, to the Metropolis. Father
Martin affirms this City to be Venetus his Quelingfu.

In this last Tartarick War this City suffered much damage; for having revolted
from the Tartars, it was taken after a long Siege, and laid in Ashes, and all
the Inhabitants put to the Sword. The Fire consumed here a Bridge over the
swift River Min, the Pillars whereof were of an exceeding height of Freestone,
the other parts of Wood, beautified on the top with Houses and Shops on each
side: but since by re-building it has re-gain'd somewhat of former luster.
Beyond the Bridge, on the opposite Shore, stands a stately Pagode.

Most of the new Buildings fall short of their old beauty, notwithstanding the
Chinese Towns that are consumed by Fire, are much more easily rebuilt than
those in Europe, because most of them are nothing but Wood.

Near the City Kienning is another fair Bridge, with Shops and Houses on both
sides.

This City Kienning is a Place of great Trade; for all those Commodities that
come either up or down the River must pass through it. When they come to the
City Pucing, they are taken out of the Vessels, and by Porters carried to a
Village called Pinghu, belonging to the City Kiangxan, over high Mountains and
deep Valleys four days Journey: In like manner they are carried from Pinghu to
Puching. The whole Way, as much as is possible to be done by the Art or Labor
of Man, is made even, and Paved with square Stones, along whose sides are built
many Houses and Villages, only to entertain Travelers. The Merchandises being
first weighed, are delivered to the Master of the Inn, which send them for a
certain Gratuity by Porters to other Places, where the Merchant without any
trouble receives them: If any thing chance to be lost, the Host is bound to
make it good. Here are always above ten thousand Porters ready, which wait to
receive the Goods, and carry them over the Mountains. Because of this Carriage
of so many Goods, a House stands erected for the receiving a small Custom, or
Duty, toward the maintaining and reparation of the Highways.

The fifth Tract of Land, called Ienpingfu, makes the Center of this Territory,
and borders in the East, at the chief County Focheufu; in the South and
South-West, at Civencheufu and Kancheufu; on the West and North at Tingcheufu,
Xaounfu, and Kienningfu.

King Cyn was the first that called the chief City, and the Country thereto
belonging, Ienping; the Family Tang named it Kiencheu; that of Sung, Nankien;
but Taiming restored its ancient Name Ienping.

This Ienpingfu contains seven Towns and Cities, of which Ienping is the
chiefest, next Cianglo, Xa, Yonki, Xunchan, Iungan, and Tatien.

The City Ienping lies on the Western Shore of the River Min, from whence it
rises with its Buildings up the Hills, rendering a delightful Prospect to those
that pass by, and though none of the biggest, yet it is beautified with several
fair Houses: The Walls exceed in height the neighboring Ascents, which on the
outsides are inaccessible, making the City very strong, and indeed the Key to
the whole Territory.

On the East Side is a Lake made by the Rivers Min and Si. Almost every House
is furnished with Water, conveyed to them through Pipes from the Mountains,
which Convenience no other Place in China has.

Not far distant lay over the Rivers Min and Si two fair Bridges, near which
are two Temples.

The Town of Xa lies on the Northern Shore of the River Taisu, (though
formerly on the Southern Shore) but was by the Emperors Order pulled down to
the Ground, and left desolate, because in it a young Man had Murdered his
Father.

The sixth Division being Tingcheufu, is the most Western of this Territory:
Borders.
borders Easterly on Ienpingfu; on the South-East, at Quantung; on the West, at
that of Kiangsi; and on the North, Xaounfu.

This Country belonged also heretofore to the Princes Min: King Cyn gave it
Names.
the Name of Sinlo; and the Tang Family that which it bears at present: in
which Tincheufu was only a small Town, but the Taimingian Family made it a
chief City.

This Country contains eight Towns and Cities, viz. Tingcheu the chief* Towns.
Winghon, Xanghang, Vuping, Cinglieu, Lienching, Queihon, and Iungting.

The seventh County, called Hinghaofu, is a small, yet fruitful Country, and
Borders.
borders on the East and South-East, with the Sea; on the South, at
Civencheufu; on the West, at Ienpingfu; on the North, at the Tract of Land
belonging to the Metropolis Focheu.

King Sui gave it first the Name of Putien; the Family Sung, that of Hinghoa,
Names.
which signifies A Budding Flower; afterward the same Family called it Hingan;
but by the Taimingian the ancient Name of Hinghoa was restored.

This Shire has only two Cities, whereof Hinghoa is the chief; the other
Towns.
called Sienlieu is but small: but the Country abounds with Villages and
Hamlets. All the Ways, being sixty Stadia's long, and a Rod in breadth, are
Paved with square Freestone.

The City Hinghoa is very neatly built and adorned with many triumphal Arches,
and full of Colleges for the training up of Youth in Literature, and
encouragement of Learning.

At the Foot of the Mount Hocung, South-Eastwards from Hinghoa, lies a Village,
in splendour and bigness of Buildings like a great City, but has neither Walls
nor any Privileges belonging to it; yet many rich Merchants reside there,
which Traffic through all China.

On the Shore of the Lake Ching, lying at the Foot of the Mount Chiniven,
Northward from Hinghoa, stands a great Palace, with ten Gardens belonging to
it; in which, before either Rain or tempestuous Weather happens, as the
Chinese say, is a ringing noise heard like the sound of a Bell.

The eighth County, being Xaounfu, borders Easterly at Kienningfu; in the
South, at Ienpingfeu and Tingcheufeu; in the West, North-West and North, at the
Territory Kiangsia.

This Division reckons four Cities, the chief of which is Xaouw, the rest
Borders.
Quangce, Taining, and Kienning.

The City Xaouw, the most Northern of this Territory, was anciently a mean
Place, under the Princes of Mins Jurisdiction, and was first fortified with
Walls, and the Title of City given it by the Family called Tang; yet has ever
preserved its Name of Xaouw. It lies Westerly of the River Cu, and is cut
through by the River Ciao, which poures its Streams into the Cu, and from
thence by several small Channels waters the City.

Because this County is a firm and profitable Soil, and on the Borders of
Countries, whose Passage is troublesome, it is fortified with several Castles
Garrisoned with Soldiers.

The small Tract of Land belonging to the City Foning, a Mountainous The
smallest Tract of Land belonging to the City Foning.
Country, and the most Eastern of this Territory, borders in the East and
South-East, at the Sea; in the South and South-West, at Fochenfu; in the West,
at Kiennunfu; in the North, at the Territory of Chekiang. It contains three
Towns, Foning, Fogang, and Mingte.

The Ways through the Mountains are very scraggy, and scarce passable,
especially toward the North and South-East.

The City Foning it self is fair and large, lying near the Sea, to its great
benefit and advantage, having to the pleasure of the Prospect an Idol-Temple.

On the North-side of the City Xaouw a fair Bridge leads over the River Cuyun,
sixty three Rods long, of the same fashion as those mentioned before. There are
also two large Temples.

This Province, or Kingdom of Fokien, has many strong Holds, especially
Fortresses.
on the Seashore, against any Invasion of Enemies; the chiefest, built
formerly by the Chinese against the Incursions of the Tartar, are two, Ganbai
and Hiamuen.

The Castle Ganhai has a convenient and safe Haven for Ships.

On the East Side of the City is a fair Bridge, two hundred and fifty Paces in
length, built of black Stone, and supported with diverse Arches.

The Garrison of Hiamuen lies on an Island North-West from Quemuy.

Both these Forts, for the beautifulness of their Building, Populousness and
Trade, exceed diverse great Cities in China; for from thence all sorts of
Commodities are Transported through all India, and foreign Goods brought
thither.

Some years since the famous Pyrat Iquon, otherwise called Coxinga, (well known
to the Hollanders, Portuguese, and Spaniards) possessed both these Places, and
was also very powerful at Sea, having a Fleet of three thousand great Chinese
Jonks.

The other Forts for a defense of the Seacoast, are Pumien, Foning, Tinghai,
Muthon, Xe, Huckeu, Vangun, Chungxe, Tungxan, Hivenchung, Iungting.

Anno 1662. the Tartars having Conquered the Empire of China, caused all the
Towns and Strongholds to be pulled down, to prevent the Invasions of the
Enemy, and hinder them from having any Supplies from thence by their Party
which might reside in them.

Thus ends the Continuation of the second Embassy.
A THIRD EMBASSY TO THE EMPEROR OF China and East-Tartary, Under the Conduct of
the Lord PIETER VAN HOORN, CONTAINING Several Remarks in their Journey through
the Provinces of Fokien, Chekiang, Xantung, and Nanking, to the Imperial Court
at Peking.
Sent from Batavia, Anno 1666. the third of June; whither he returned Anno
1668. in January, etc.

WHat Troubles, Charges, and Endeavors the Netherland East India Company, and
their Magistrates in India, have some Years since used from time to time, on
several Occasions, for the gaining of their so long wished for Chinese Trade,
it would be needless here to describe, because we may plainly perceive it from
other Discourses, especially by the former Embassies and Expeditions under the
Conduct of Peter de Goyer and Jacob de Keizer, sent out Anno 1655. and 1656.
And likewise from those of Balthazar Bort, John van Campen, and Constantine
Nobel, in Anno 1662.

Yet after long Referrings, Debates, and serious Considerations, it was at last
again concluded, on the twenty eighth of May, Anno 1666, by the Lord General
and Council of India, to send a Magnificent Embassy, with rich Presents, to the
Tartars Court, to the Great Emperor of China and East-Tartary, that if
possible, they might at last attain to their so long desired Free Trade through
the whole Realm of China.

To this purpose was elected and chosen his Excellency the Lord Peter van
Hoorn, Privy Counselor and Chief Treasurer of India, as he was entitled in
his Commission, given him the third of July in the same Year.

Constantine Nobel was also chosen as Chief Counsel in the Embassy, and Prime
Head and Governor of the Trade in Hoksieu, or Focheu, the Metropolis of the
Territory Fokien. He also was commanded, for several Reasons, to travel in the
Degree beforementioned up to Peking, and upon the Ambassadors Decease, to
succeed him in his Place, and Negotiate that Affair to the Companies best
Advantage.

Furthermore, the Embassy was by the Lord General and his Council ordered to
consist in the following Persons.

The Lord Peter van Hoorn. Constantine Nobel Chief Counselor in the Embassy,
and Governor of the Trade. John Putman Factor, and Master of the Ceremonies.
John vander Does Secretary. Gysbert Ruwenoort Steward. Six Gentlemen, viz.
Banning, Berkman, Frents, and Ruysser, Van Alteren, Van Doorn.
A Chyrurgeon. Six Men for a Guard. Two Trumpetters, and One Cook.
During their Journey up to Peking, it was ordered, That David Harthower,
Cornelius Bartelsz, and Maurice, should provide all things below in Hoksieu.

On the third of June beforementioned, the Commissions were read aboard the
Vlaerding, by the following Lords,

His Excellency the Lord General Maetzuiker. Charles Hertzing Chief
Comptroller. Usual Counselors of India.
Nicholas Verburgh, Laurence Pit, Matthew vander Brook,
Counselors Extraordinary.
John Thysz, John van Dam,

After a kind Farewell, the forementioned Persons returned ashore.

For the more Honorable carrying on of this Embassy, a Fleet of five Sail,
Laden with Presents and Merchandise, and Manned with Soldiers and Seamen, was
fitted out from Batavia, consisting in these Ships, viz.

The Vlaerding, Afen, Constance, Gilded Tygre, and The Blyswiik Frigate,
Commanded by John vander Werf. John Naelhout. John Hendricks. Henry Bommer.
Peter Iansz.

Several Chinese also Shipped themselves in the Fleet, to return to their
Native Country, from whence they came some Years before, and had settled
themselves in Batavia.

The fourth, being Sunday, in the Morning the Fleet set Sail, and lying by the
Lee about the Islands, they staid for some ready Moneys, and other Necessaries,
which about seven a clock were brought them by one Simon de Danser, Master of
the Exchequer. Then the Fleet weighing Anchor again, ran Easterly, between the
Isles Edam and Alkmaer, that they might have the advantage of the Eastern
Mouson (but the Wind, on the contrary, in the Afternoon came about to the West)
and then tacked to and again, having the Wind about seven a clock at Night to
the South-West; then they steered their Course Northerly, and so proceeded in
the same Course as we have fully mentioned in their former Journals from
Batavia; and therefore we think not fit to trouble the Reader with needless
Repetitions of the same things.

The fifth of August about Noon they came to the Netherland-Haven, where a
Tartar came aboard of the Ambassador in a small Vessel, who said that he was
sent from the Governor of Minjazen, to inquire what People and Ships they were,
and also from whence they came, and what Persons of Quality were in them?
Whereupon being answered accordingly, the Tartar returned ashore, to give an
Account thereof, having first informed them of the General Lipovi's Death.

The sixth in the Morning, while they still rode at an Anchor, waiting for the
Fleet to carry them into the Netherland Haven, there also came a Tartar Vessel
aboard, with the third Person of Minjazen, to ask in the Governors Name, What
Ships they were, and if an Ambassador was come with them to the Emperor?
Whereupon the Ambassador answered him accordingly, and also told him, That they
intended to send the Master of the Ceremonies, and Mr. Ruwenoort, with the
Interpreter De Hase, to Hoksieu, with Letters to the Viceroy Singlamong, and
the new General which was come from Peking in the deceased Lipovi's Place: To
whom the Mandarin proffered his Service to carry them to Hoksieu, alleging,
That he was sent from the Governor for that purpose.

After having received Thanks from the Ambassador, he returned with the
forementioned Persons aboard of the Blyswiik, where the Letter was translated
into the Chinese Tongue: The Contents were to this purpose.

That this Letter was to advise their Excellencies from the Lord Ambassador, of
the coming of five Ships, laden with several Merchandises, and Presents for his
Majesty, and their Excellencies the Viceroy, General, and Conbon, or Governor,
and likewise of his coming from Batavia in the beginning of the last Month,
with the Merchant Constantine Nobel, and their safe Arrival in the beginning of
the New Moon before the River of Hoksieu.

Their Highnesses also were desired to permit the Merchant Constantine Nobel
with the first opportunity to come to Hoksieu, to complement their Excellencies
from the Ambassador, and acquaint them with his Intentions.

About Noon the Holland Ambassador arrived in safety in the Netherland-Haven,
where he dropped Anchor with the Vlaerding and Blyswiik, and was visited by the
chief Pilot of the Tygre, with a Letter from Hendrick Bommer Master of the
Tygre, written to the Ambassador, signifying, That the Pilot beforementioned,
having been several times in the Netherland-Haven, made no question to bring
the Tygre thither; so that he desired his Order, because the Ship would be
safer there than in the Bay of Sothia. On which the Ambassador made answer,
That he ought to govern himself according to the Agreement made on the fifth
Instant, of which the Copy was sent him, and first steer his Course to the Bay
of Sothia, till further Order came from above.

The Ambassador observing, That the entering into the Mouth of the River Hoksieu
was dangerous, because of the Rocks called the Pyramides, commanded all the
Masters and Pilots to consult about it, and give their Opinions in Writing,
that other Ships that should come after, might make use thereof.

The seventh against Noon three Mandarins were sent from the new General
Siangpovi, to see how many Ships and Men were come, and likewise what Presents
they had brought, from whence the Ambassador came, and what Retinue he intended
should go with him to Peking. But the Ambassador did not think it convenient to
inform him of all things, because the Master of the Ceremonies and Interpreter
were not yet come from Hoksieu; therefore he told the Mandarins only, That he
was come thither with five Ships, of which three lay in the Bay of Sothia, and
two in the Netherland Haven; and that he had four hundred Men aboard: but as to
the Presents, he could not readily give an Account, because he must first
unpack them, and then draw an Inventory in Chinese: neither could he yet tell
them the Number of the Persons that were to attend him to the Court; but if
they pleased to stay till to morrow (when he expected the Master of the
Ceremonies and Interpreter would be there) he would resolve them. Then the
Mandarins asked, If there were no more Ships that had put into other Harbors on
the Coast of China? To which they were answered No. Then they demanded further,
From whom the Lord Ambassador was addressed? to which they received a suitable
Answer. The Ambassador had also a Chinese Letter given him from the Governor of
Minjazen, the Contents being only to congratulate his Welcome, which the
Ambassador answered civilly in like manner. Hereupon the Mandarins departed,
saying, they would send one on the Morrow to know the Quantity and Quality of
the Presents.

The Ambassador soon after was informed by Nobel, That the Mandarin which bore
the chief Command over the Jonks that lay there, had understood the day before,
that the Emperor was inclined to allow the Hollanders and Tartars the Isles
Eymuy and Quemuy, to set up their Factories and Trade.

The eighth the Master of the Ceremonies, Mr. Ruwenoort, and the Interpreter De
Hase, came aboard again, relating, That they had been at Hoksieu, and there
delivered the Ambassadors Letters to the Governors: The General, who first
granted them Audience, had after the reading of the Letter asked them several
Questions, as amongst others, Whither they had a Design upon Formosa, or came
only upon Embassy? To which they answered, That the Ambassador was come
thither but with five Ships, of which two lay in the Netherland Haven, and
three at Tinhay; and that they had no other Design but to wait upon the
Emperor, according to the Contents of their Credential Letters and Commission.
After this, they gave the Conbon or Governor of Hoksieu a Visit, who showed
himself very joyful at the news of their arrival. And next they visited the
General, and gave him an Account of the Ambassadors arrival, who sent two
Mandarins to go along them.

About Midnight in their Return they came before the Castle of Minjazen, where
they lay till the next Morning, and then desired the Governor to furnish them
with a Vessel to carry them aboard, to which he very willingly condescended.

The ninth Nobel, Harthower, Secretary Vander Does, and the Mandarins which
came down the next day in a Pleasure-Boat sent to the Fleet for that purpose,
were carried aboard, having a Letter of Advice with them, to make use of when
occasion should serve.

The same Day this Present was prepared for the Governor of Minjazen.

A Pair of Pistols, A small Quilt, Four Pieces of fine Linen. Two Swords, Two
great Pieces of Sandal-Wood.
From that time nothing happened of remark, only some Jonks came to an Anchor
close by the Ambassador, to watch the Netherlanders Transactions, as had been
done from the beginning, ever since they arrived; sometimes fresh Jonks
relieving others.

The eleventh in the Morning, the Ambassador sent the Blyswiik's Boat to the
Bay of Sothia, with a Letter; by which he Commanded the Captains of the three
Ships, the Alfen, Tiger, and Constance, to come to him with the first fair
Weather, to consult once more about the bringing in of the Ships to Hoksieu.

The twelfth, the Captains came according to the Ambassadors Letter aboard his
Ship in their Sloop, and just at low Water they went with Captain Vander Werff,
and Peter Iansz Vlieg, to the River of Hoksieu, to know the Soundings and the
breadth of the Channel.

Afternoon, Siangpovi's Interpreter came aboard with some Tartars, to tell the
Ambassador, that Nobel Landed the Night before in Hoksieu, and that Horses were
provided against the Morning to carry him to the Governors to have Audience.
Moreover he told him, that he was sent from the General Siangpovi, to inquire
about the Ambassadors Health, and if he wanted any thing, or if any surly
People slighted or neglected, to supply them with what necessaries were fit,
and they required.

The Ambassador caused his Interpreter De Hase to ask the Tartars, How the
Governor of Hoksieu resented the Hollanders, and whether he should be civilly
received? Whereupon he replied, That he needed not question his glad Reception.

Furthermore, he doubted not but that they should have all their desires
granted when so er'e they arrived at Peking.

The Tartar Interpreter also acquainted the Ambassador, that it would be
convenient to invite the Captain of the Jonks that lay to watch to a Treat;
which some hours afterward was performed by Putmans, and the Interpreter De
Hase; who coming to the Captain, and Mandarin, were kindly entertained, with
answer, that according to their Requests, they and some other Mandarins would
wait upon them the day following: They also sent a Present to the Ambassador,
of Capons, Geese, and a Vessel of Chinese strong Drink.

Toward Evening, the Masters and Pilots came aboard again to the Ambassador,
and told him, That he had searched the Bay of Hoksieu, of which they would give
an account in writing, how the Ships should get in and out with most safety, as
was done the day following.

In the afternoon the Vlaerdings Boat brought a supply from Hoksieu, of Beeves,
Porkers, good Liquor, and several Fruits, with Letters from Nobel, Harthower,
and Vander Does, that on the eleventh they were arrived at the Bridge of
Lamthay; and at their passing by, the Governors of Minjazen Treated them
kindly; and at Hoksieu they were presently admitted to the Presence of the
General Siangpovi, the Viceroy, and the Conbon or Governor.

All these Visits were past with many kindnesses, and upon the delivery of
their Letters from Batavia, with an Inventory of the Presents, were told, That
the Ambassador was Welcome, and according to his Request should be honorably
and kindly Entertained, and that he would be pleased presently to come ashore,
that they might the better inform his Imperial Majesty of his arrival; with
which, the Ambassador being acquainted, gave Order for his Landing the next day.

The next day they were to Treat about Commerce, which they supposed to be of
great Consequence; the more, because by Proclamation every one was on pain of
Death forbidden to Trade with the Hollanders without License.

When a rumor was spread in Hoksieu, that the Fort Quelang in Formosa had been
Besieged two Months by three thousand Tayowan Chinese; but at last were
forced to Retreat to Tamsuy, with the loss of their General, etc.

The fifteenth, being Sunday, nothing happened of remark to the Ambassador, but
only expected further Tidings from Nobel, and his other Friends in Hoksieu.

The sixteenth, four Mandarins came from the General Siangpovi and the Conbon,
sent to the Ambassador to Present him with an hundred and twenty Canasters, or
four Tun of Rice, thirty couple of Capons, as many Ducks, forty great Vessels
of their best Drink, six fat Beeves, twenty Porkers, a Score and a half of
Geese, and a hundred Water-Lemons.

Because the Name of Chinese Beer will be often used, it will be requisite to
give a short Description of it.

THe Drinks which the Chinese use are many: The first called Samfoe, or Sampe,
made of Rice, is of a clear Color, like white Wine; wherefore they also name
it, Sampe, signifying pure White.

The second called Looszioe, is of a brown Color like Dutch Beer, of a
pleasant Taste, but very strong.

The third named Tzonzui, and by some held for the best and strongest Liquor in
all China; is of a bright Brown, very clear, and resembles Brunswick-Mum, yet
tastes like Sack, and as strong in its Operation.

Which Liquor Vulgarly the Hollanders generally call Mandarins and Chinese Beer.

The fourth being a sort of Distilled Water, is called Hotzioe, and is not only
clearer, but much stronger than Brandy, therefore by the Netherlanders called
Strong Arak.

The fifth Drink is called Kietzjoe, and by the Hollanders Kniep; and is also a
Water Distilled, yet not so strong as the former, of a ruddy Color, and much
drank in the Chinese and Holland Ships, during their stay on the Coast of China.

Most of all these Liquors are made and Extracted out of Rice.

They say, That in the Emperor Yu's Reign, above two thousand Years before
Martin Histor. Sinen. l. 2. page 54.
the Birth of our Savior, this famous Chinese Drink, Extracted of Rice, was
first made: The Inventer thereof was called Ilie, who having Presented the
Emperor with the new and pleasant Liquor, when he had well tasted it, said,
What great Misfortune has brought this Drink into the Realm? Now I foresee the
fall of my Family, and the ruin of the Empire by this inebriating Drink:
Whereupon, he straight, instead of reward and honoring him for his happy
Invention, being such an assistant to weaken Nature, banished him the Empire
for ever; and Commanded further upon pain of Death, that none should imitate or
experiment the same: But though You Banished the first finder, yet he could not
prevent the Art of making it, from spreading through his whole Dominions.

Besides these Drinks, there is an ordinary sort boiled of the Root Tee, or
Cha; and likewise another, by the Netherlanders called Bean Broth, which, as
some say, is Milk mixed with Peking Butter.

The Chinese also Press several sorts of Juyces, or Wines out of Fruit; as
among other out of the Fruit Lichi.

Yet in no place, do they know any Liquor made of Grapes; that kind of Tope
only belonging to the Province of Xensi, though they have store of Grapes and
Vineyards in other parts of China; for the Chinese either dry or Preserve
their Grapes, to eat them in Winter, which they do by Boiling in a great Pot,
and then pour dissolved Sugar upon them.

Upon the delivery of the forementioned Presents, Singlamong was not once made
mention of, which occasioned some jealous thoughts.

And now, because the Ambassador expected that he should Land shortly, he made
an Order for his Attendants, and Information to the Comptroller, to be observed
at his Landing, thereby to shun all Confusions, according to which every one
was to govern himself.

Orders for the Attendants of the Embassy.
OF what concern this Embassy is, every one may apprehend: How circumspectly it
ought to be performed, in respect to our selves; and also how much Honor and
Profit our Nation may reap by it, cannot be sufficiently expressed.

Therefore since the good Orders, Virtue, and fair Carriage of the Persons that
shall attend us, must be observed and maintained as the Chief Point, it may be
judged what care and diligence ought to be used in it, that our bad
Conversation may not hinder a good Event.

This being considered of, we have thought it necessary and fitting to
prescribe some short Orders to all our Followers, with express Commands, that
every one shall exactly observe them upon their Perils.

I. Coming ashore, every one shall go to the appointed place, without
separating himself, or going from the Train without special Orders from the
Ambassador. II. Every one shall look to his Office, and be diligent and careful
in what he is employed. III. None shall go out of the Ambassadors Lodging,
without his, or the Secretaries knowledge. IV. The Comptroller Ruwenoort shall
have the second Command over the Gentlemen and Soldiers, but no Power to send
any one out, or Discharge him without the Secretaries knowledge, who shall, if
it be requisite, acquaint the Ambassador therewith. V. Every one, of what
Degree soever, shall have a special care, and abstain from too much Drinking
and Quarrelling, which oftentimes arise from it, on forfeiture of three Months
Wages the first time, and the second, of all his Pay, loss of his Place, and be
sent to Batavia; he that shall occasion a Quarrel or Contest between any
Person, shall receive the same Punishment. VI. Every person shall carry himself
very humble, and be bare headed in the Ambassadors Presence; as also, the
Gentlemen, Soldiers, and other Officers shall be Dutiful and Obedient; but
above all, be very Courteous and kind to the Chinese. VII. Putmans being
Master of the Gifts and Presents, shall have a great care of the packing and
dividing of them, that they may be looked after and secured from spoiling, or
Rain, and keep an exact account of all, by entering them down in a Book of
Presents; he shall also, as Master of the Ceremonies, observe that good Orders
he kept in that concern. VIII. On the Ringing of a Bell ashore, or by the way,
every one shall come to Prayers in his peculiar place, which shall be in the
Evening at seven a Clock, performed by the Secretary or some Person else, on
forfeiture of a Rix-Doller, for those that without great reason stay from it.
Information for the Comptroller.
I. OF the Comptroller is required, that he take upon him a Grave Formality,
neither showing a lightness in his Behavior or Conversation, and justly to pay
every one their Due; he is to be Governor of the Gentlemen, Clerks, Assistants,
and Soldiers, and so necessarily required to be a good Example in Virtue to
others; and also to be Courteous and Civil to all Persons, especially to the
Chinese and Tartars, with whom lies our greatest Concern.

II. The Comptrollers Office and Government shall consist in Domestic Affairs,
that all things may be done orderly, and kept clean; to which purpose are
allowed him as Assistants, Frents, as Chief Butler, and Banning as Steward, who
shall act in their Offices according to Putman's Direction, and take care not
to wast and lavish, but to see that nothing be lost: Also two Assistants more
are allowed Putman, to look after all the Traveling Utensils and Necessaries,
viz. Cuiper, and Van Altern, which shall look to the Bedding, Housholdstuff,
and other things thereto belonging, and keep an exact account thereof, at the
Shipping or using, that they may not be damnifi'd, that when the Ambassador
shall resolve to Land, or go, and come from one place to another, and the
Secretary acquainting them with it, they shall presently order the getting of
them ready.

Three Tables shall daily be kept and furnished at twelve a Clock at Noon, and
eight at Night, viz.

The first Table being the Ambassadors, shall be Oval, with room for eight or
ten Persons; at this shall Eat the Ambassador; at his right Hand Nobel,
Putman's, and Vander Does the Secretary; at his left Hand, John Van Hoorn, the
Ambassadors Son, and as many more Plates shall be laid ready for Strangers.
This Table shall be attended by the Comptroller Ruwenoort, who must stand
behind the Ambassador; besides two Gentlemen, viz. Frents, and Doornik; at
every Course serving up, the Trumpeters shall Sound, and betwixt, the other
Musicians play.

The second, being the Comptrollers Table, Mr. Ruwenoort shall sit, with six
Gentlemen, who shall all be attended by the Negro Boys, except a Soldier to
Wait upon the Comptroller.

The third Table shall consist in six of the prime of our Guard, the
Interpreter and Master-Cook, who rising, the under Waiters shall take the
remainder.

About the Dressing of the Meat, and the quantity, great care must be used. To
which purpose Putmans, the Secretary Vander Does, and the Comptroller Ruwenoort
shall first consult about the Bill of Fare, and then give order for it.

Every Week the Comptroller shall deliver a Bill of his Charge to the
Secretary, which when looked over, shall be entered in their due places.

Berkman shall be as Master of the Horse, and therefore is to look over them,
that they have their Provender in due season, and that it be good and not
Musty; and likewise be careful of their Furniture, that all things may be kept
clean and in repair.

At their Landing and going up to the Court at Hoksieu this order shall be
observed:

First, Two Trumpets shall Ride before, then six Soldiers with Carbines and
Swords, next Captain Vander Werf, and Pilot Peter Iansz de Vlieg, then the Lord
Ambassador himself; after him Bekmans and John Dubon Halberdiers; John Van
Hoorn, the Ambassadors Son; Nobel and Putmans; Vander Does and Ruwenoort; after
these the six Gentlemen, Banning, Ruysser, Berkman, Van Alteren, Frents, Van
Doorn, and lastly, Hans and Sluiter.

The same day nothing happened of remark, only the General Povi's Interpreter
came to visit the Ambassador, and tell him, That the Vessels which were to take
in the Steeds, would either come that Night, or early in the Morning.

The following day, soon after Sunrising, the forementioned Interpreter, with
two Captains belonging to the Jonks, came aboard of the Ambassador, to acquaint
him of the two Vessels arrival, to fetch the Emperors Presents, the Horses and
Oxen.

After some Discourse it was concluded, That the forementioned Captains should
the next Ebb go and fetch the Horses with their great Jonks; to which purpose,
the Comptroller Ruwenoort was sent with them.

In the afternoon, the Ambassadors Boat came again from above the River, with
the Secretary Vander Does, who besides his own Relations, brought two Letters,
one from Nobel alone, and the other Signed by three, in which was written, That
they had acquainted his Highness of the Ambassadors intentions to Land,
whereupon they had obtained leave to send the Secretary Vander Does with the
Boat.

In which were also brought a dozen Porkers, four Baskets with Artichokes, two
with Cucumbers, and fifty Pots of A Chinese Strong-Water.
Chamchoe; and that it was concluded, that twelve Men should first go ashore
with the Ambassador, and that he should bring the Emperors Letter with him.

By the same Letters they also informed him, That the General had desired them
to procure some Glasses, Quilts, Blood-Coral, and several other things for him
which they had aboard, and could have wished, that they had been Shipped
uppermost, because his Favor was of great concern, and they might do some good
with him by the way of Presents, as they were informed, he being of a more
affable Character than his Predecessor. And Nobel and Harthower told him, That
the Ambassador was not concerned in the Trade, but it was entrusted wholly to
them; so that without doubt, the Ambassador would not be troubled about it;
therefore they would on this first undertaking so prosecute their business,
that it might tend to his Honor; so that they desired he would please to leave
it to their care. They added further, that they esteemed themselves happy by
the Ambassadors grave counsel to be provided against the Chinese Treachery. In
the Trade nothing was to be done, but to use care and prudence, as in former
times. If they intended to effect any thing, they must wait, yet not depend too
much upon it. The Jonks which were should the Horses at Minjazen, were judged
to be unfit to go to Sothia; therefore the Tartars desired, that they might be
brought into the Netherland Haven, in one of the Ships, from whence they would
convey them up the River.

The Governors had lately chosen a place on the other side of the River, where
they intended to request of the Emperor, that the Hollanders might build a
Storehouse; but they knew not whether it was done out of their own
inclination, or by the Emperors Order, (which perhaps had long since granted
it.) They were informed, that about eight or ten days since, a Mastless Vessel
ran into the Storm-Bay, and soon after went away again, and that the Commanders
of her said, that they were sent from Batavia to Iapan, and likewise that an
Ambassador was come thither with nine Ships; by which they supposed, that it
was the Newpoort, because no other Ships knew of the Ambassadors coming.

There went also a rumor, That some Portuguese Ships were arrived at Makaw, and
of an Ambassadors going to Peking, that came over in them.

The single Letter from Nobel was to this purpose: That Hopes and a good Heart
was half their Business, and he much rejoiced at what the Ambassador had been
pleased to write; but nothing more concerned him, than the promoting and making
the Embassy more Honorable, that it might be performed with all fitting
Splendour and Magnificence, of which there were fair appearances. But because
nothing could be assured from the Chinese looks, therefore time must produce
it.

They declared, that all the Governors were exceedingly rejoiced at the
Ambassadors coming, and had never shown such great encouragements to their
Design.

The nineteenth, the great Jonk which went the same day to fetch the Horses,
returned, and brought a Letter from the Commander to this effect.

That that Morning he had received the Ambassadors Order, for the sending of
the Horses and Oxen; according to which he had Shipped them in the Jonks, with
three Chests full of Saddles, all in good condition, and that at their putting
off, he had fired seven Guns in Honor of the Emperor, and the Ambassador, which
he hoped he would opprove off.

His Excellency Commanded Ruwenoort, that so soon as it was Flood, he should go
up with the Horses to Hocksieu, which was performed accordingly; and the
Ambassador writ a Letter to Nobel and Harthouwer, advising them, that he had
received theirs by the Secretary, and prepared himself to go in the expected
Vessels to Hoksieu; and in the mean while, had sent the Horses and Oxen, as
also their Saddles, and the Coach provided for the Emperor.

The twentieth, nothing happened of remark.

The one and twentieth in the Morning, two Pleasure-Boats came with three
Mandarins, two from the Viceroy and General, and one from the Governor of
Minjazen, to attend and bring in the Ambassador, who desired two days for the
fitting and accommodating all things for his more convenient Landing.

The three and twentieth in the Morning, the two Pleasure-Boats
beforementioned, that came with the three Mandarins, were ready to take in the
Ambassador, but proved much too little to carry him, his Attendants and Goods
up the River. And because they proffered as many Jonks on the one and twentieth
as he should need, therefore they were desired to procure one more, which they
scrupling, he said he had been told, that they were a well Governed Nation, and
therefore wondered that they kept not their own promise, that he should have as
many as he needed; therefore he would send one up to Hoksieu to fetch written
Orders from the General, according to which he would Govern himself. Upon the
news thereof, without any more ado, they sent a Jonk to carry his Goods, or any
thing else; whereupon he gave Order for the Shipping of his Goods and
Attendants.

At Noon, the Ambassador Embarked himself to go up to Hoksieu, and about three
a Clock arrived at Minjazen; of which place the Governor sent him a
Complemental Letter, informing him of his indispos'dness, which prevented him
from giving the civility of a meeting. Moreover, he caused the Ambassador and
his Retinue to be Entertained with As the Dutch call it.
Bean-Broth, and Baked Meats.

The Governor of Minjazen also sent to desire the Ambassador to stay some short
time, because he would send a Letter with him; and soon after, some Mandarins
coming aboard said, That they were sent from the Governor to search all Chests
and Trunks, which was so ill resented by the Ambassador, that he said with a
displeased Countenance, the Mandarins had promised him, That his Goods should
without trouble or molestation be delivered; and if they could not, he would
rather return aboar'd, than suffer such affronts, which words made them wave
their received Orders; yet he went away in the Evening without a Letter. The
Ambassador, by reason of the Ebb meeting him, was forced to Anchor at Lamthay,
and about Flood setting forward again, about Day light arrived at the Bridge of
Lamthay. Here the Mandarins went to acquaint the General of the Ambassadors
arrival, and also to know, if it pleased his Highness, that he should first go
into the Netherlanders Inn, or come to his Highness: The Ambassador also made
his coming immediately known to Nobel and Harthouwer, who came to welcome him;
of whom he demanding, in what Postures Affairs stood; They told him, they had
no present cause of dissatisfaction, because the last Night Singlamong's
Secretary had come and told them, that seven hundred Bales of Silk lay in
store, which were to be exchanged for the Netherland Commodities, and also that
Singlamong would have half a share in the Trade; The General two third parts in
the other half, and the Conbon a third part.

The four and twentieth, after several Houses shown, and denied, a Mandarin
came to ask if the Ambassador would be pleased to send one of his Servants to
see the House which was chosen for him. Whereupon he sent Nobel, Putmans, and
Ruwenoort to the General, to desire him, to give Order for a House.

The Mandarins which had fetched the Ambassador, and were that Morning gone to
the General, to make his coming known, returned with Horses to conduct him to
the Viceroy Singlamong.

And Nobel, Putmans, and Ruwenoort came with the forementioned Mandarins, to
tell the Ambassador, that a House was making ready for him; also that his
Highness expected him at Court, and before the Ambassador should have done his
business with his Highness, the House would be ready.

The General also said, That if they had known of the Ambassadors coming from
Batavia before hand, the Emperor would have given Order for the building a new
House.

And accordingly, although it Rained very hard, yet the Ambassador prepared
himself to go to his Highness.

First, between the sound of several Instruments, he was conducted to the
Viceroy Singlamong, who bad him Welcome, and showed him to sit on a Bench at
his left Hand, (by the Tartar accounted the upper) and next him Nobel,
Harthouwer, Putmans, and the Secretary Vander Does, on a piece of Cloth spread
on the Ground.

Then the Viceroy wished the Ambassador much joy, for which the Ambassador
with many Ceremonies thanked him; so that this first Visit ended only in
Coplements.

He at last asked, If he had about him the Letter from his King to their
Emperor; and also, that with the first opportunity, they should give an account
to the General, how many Chests and Trunks they wanted to carry up their Goods,
that they might be got ready against the appointed time.

And likewise, that the General might give Order for the Jonks and Vessels to
fetch the Presents for the Emperor ashore: To which the Ambassador answered,
That he had not brought the Letter with him, because of the badness of the
Weather, but his Highness might Command it when he pleased; the number of Cases
and Chests, he would also give an account of, as they had occasion, and so soon
as they could come at the Presents, acquaint his Highness with it.

Moreover, The Ambassador desired the Viceroy's advice, and instruction in
this Embassy, which he would be sure to observe, and other such like
Discourses. To which the Viceroy answered, That he would invite the Ambassador
to his Court, and then they would further consult concerning all affairs.

From thence they went to the General, who enquired after the Ambassadors
Health, and how all Friends fared in Batavia? To which the Ambassador answered,
and returned him Thanks for sending the Mandarins to fetch him in, and also for
the fresh Provisions. Then he asked the same question as the Viceroy had done
before, whereon the Ambassador replied, That the Goods which were to be sold,
lay upon the Presents; but he would give Order to Nobel to fetch them up, that
they might be seen, and if they were damnifi'd, they should immediately be
shown to his Highness; which said, his Highness was well satisfied, saying,
That he would then write concerning it to the Court at Peking. The Ambassador
also desired his Highness's advice, because he knew not the Customs and
Fashions of the Country.

Moreover the Ambassador said, That he would on the Morrow present his Highness
with some Glasses, and other such like Rarities, which he desired he would
please to accept. His Highness inquired also of the Ambassador, if he had left
good Orders on board, that his People used no Outrages, nor carried any Goods
privately ashore; to which, the Ambassador said, Yes, and if any one should
break such Orders, he should be severely punished.

The General showed the Ambassador two Mandarins, which (said he) shall wait
upon you, when I intend to acquaint you with any thing of consequence,
therefore desired him to grant them Audience. On which the Ambassador taking
leave, was entreated by his Highness to Eat with him first, which was
performed, and at Table said, That he would with the first opportunity invite
the Ambassador to his Court, to Discourse with him concerning the Embassy.

From hence they went to the Conbon, whither they came about the Evening, and
were kindly received and bid Welcome by him.

Moreover, the Conbon said, That the Ambassadors coming would prove an
advantageous business to them, promising to assist him in all things he would
desire. Whereupon the Ambassador taking leave, came to his Lodging about eight
a Clock; about ten arose a mighty Storm out of the North, which lasted till
Midnight.

The twenty fifth in the Morning, they received the bad news, that the Jonks
Laden with all their Traveling Necessaries was cast away, driven from the
Anchor, and shattered in pieces against the Bridge of Lamthay. But Putmans and
the Secretary were sent to see what could be saved of the Damnifi'd Goods.
Toward Noon, the Viceroy and General sent them in all sorts of Kitchen
Provision, of what the Country afforded, and some Vessels of their best Liquor.

The General sent likewise a Pass to the Ambassador, for the fetching ashore
the Emperors Presents; to which the Ambassador replied, That it could not be
done before he Traded: But the Mandarin answered, That it must be, or else the
General could not write to Peking: Whereupon the Ambassador told him, That he
would visit the General on the morrow, and discourse with him about it; on
which he went away.

Next Morning Captain Putmans went to Complement his Highness Singlamong, and
in the Ambassadors Name to present him with some Rarities, who himself was
ready to repair to the Court, where a Mandarin gave him notice, That he was
immediately expected; whither instantly going, and after some Complements had
passed, he delivered him the Copy of the Letter to his Imperial Majesty, with a
List of the Persons Names that were to go to Peking with him; and also a
Schedule, being an Abstract of the Embassy, which was to this purpose.

That the Lord General Maetzuiker and the Council of India say, That the
Hollanders look upon it as the best way of effecting Business, to be just, and
endeavor Friendship; which has been hitherto attested by all People that have
dealt with us, either upon the score of Alliance, Commerce, or both: But the
way of Traffic is looked upon as the best Foundation, whence sprouting, it
may grow up and branch like a Tree, so to enrich each other in Peace, and
assist in all Exigencies of War.

That the Hollanders have many years endeavored both Traffic and Alliance with
the Chinese; to which purpose the General and Council of India ten years since
sent their Ambassadors with Presents to the Emperor in Peking, which were
kindly received, and his Majesty accepted of the Hollanders as Friends, and
declared them so publicly.

The Hollanders have now again by the Lord General and Indian Council addressed
their Ambassador with Presents to the Emperor, with hearty wishes, That his
Imperial Majesty may live for ever, and that this their desired Affinity may
last as long as the Sun and Moon endures.

The Ambassador desires of the Viceroy, General, and Conbon, That they would
assist him in this Negotiation, because their Mediation may facilitate, and so
the sooner effect the Business.

This being translated, was, together with a Copy of the Batavian Missives to
the Emperor, presented unto the General, who after inquiry concerning the brave
Horses and Oxen which were to be given to the Emperor, desiring to see them,
they fell into other Discourses concerning the Presents, and about landing the
Merchandise, upon which there had like to have happened some Contrast; but the
Ambassadors discretion seasonably broke it off, and so departing, went from
thence to the Viceroy, where they were conducted through another Gate than
they went the day before, into the Inner Court, or Privy Chamber, in which the
Ambassador, after having showed Reverence to the Viceroy, was by him bid to
sit on his left Hand, on a small Bench, and next him his Prime Officers; to all
whom the Viceroy seemed to be somewhat more affable than the General, saying,
That the Hollanders were now no Strangers, and that he had been acquainted with
them in Canton, and done them several good Offices in their Negotiation there;
and that he was as ready now to serve them as heretofore, especially because a
Person of greater Quality was employed with like Addresses to his Imperial
Majesty. Whereupon the Ambassador modestly replied, That he had been well
informed of his Highness former Affection and Favor to their Nation at Canton,
and also of the late continuation of the same Civility and Goodness to
Constantine Nobel, ever since his residing there, for which he returned him
especial Thanks, not doubting but he would keep up his Hospitable Character to
Strangers, in assisting them in this their present Embassy, in which they
desired nothing but what was Just and Honorable, and might be beneficial to
both Nations: Which he promised very seriously, and that he would write in the
Ambassadors behalf to all his Correspondents in the Council of State at Peking:
Then the Viceroy inquiring in the same manner as the other did about the
Presents and the Lading, the Ambassador fearing that some Contest might arise,
as formerly with the General, waved the Dispute, only replying, That they
would be all ready in good Season; but the Merchandise he did not concern
himself with: Whereupon the Viceroy said, Well, let it pass; but desired the
Ambassador to lend him his Chyrurgeon for a day or two, which he promised, when
Dinner being upon the Table, breaking off all further Discourse, the Viceroy
desired them to sit at his own Table, on his left Hand, which is there the
chief place, where they did eat in the same Dish, and drank in the same Bowl
with the Viceroy: So having been plentifully treated, they took their leave,
and returned to their Lodging.

At their going away, two Mandarins followed the Ambassador, telling him, That
the Viceroy returned him many Thanks for the Presents which he had sent in the
Morning, but durst not receive them as yet; therefore he desired him to send
for them home till they went to Peking: Whereto the Ambassador made Answer,
That they were only a few Trifles for his Children; and desired that they
would please to proffer them once more to his Highness, which they promised to
do; but however, toward Evening they were returned again with the same Excuse.

Next Morning, being the twenty seventh, the Ambassador consulted with his
Council of what had happened to him the day before, and asked what was further to
be done for the advancing of this great Embassy; and also read over the
Instructions given him in Batavia: after which, having seriously considered,
they unanimously concluded and agreed, That Nobel and Harthouwer should that
Morning go to the General, to tell his Highness, That the Ambassador
endeavoring to satisfy him in all Points whatsoever, therefore desired that
the Blyswiik and two Jonks might come up thither with the Merchandise and
Presents, and that then he should receive them.

But whilst they were yet busy about this their Resolution, three Mandarins
came to desire Nobel to come to the Viceroy, where the General also expected
him; thither he and Harthouwer went immediately.

At this time the Governor of Soansifoe sent the Ambassador as a Present a
couple of fat Oxen, besides other good Kitchen Provision.

Mean while Nobel and Harthouwer came back from the Court, and related, That
they still desired that the Merchandise and Presents might be brought ashore;
which they excused, urging the several Inconveniences; but told them that all
should be done in good time, when the Presents and Frigates might by unlading be
least damnified, concerning which they would come and Treat with his Highness
to Morrow.

The twenty eighth in the Morning, about daylight, the Secretary carried the
Message to the General, who at his return told, That having staid an Hour ere
he was admitted to his Presence, and having complemented his Highness in the
Ambassadors Name, he answered him roughly, saying in a teasty manner, That he
had spoke with the Ambassador two days since, and granted him as many Jonks as
he desired, for the unloading of his Goods; and come you now to ask more? Let
it be so (said he); I will supply them with Twenties, and if that will not
serve, with Hundreds; but in brief, none of their Ships shall come up the
River. Tell your Master (continued he) that I am a Man that keep my Word, no
Promise-breaker; therefore what I grant, they may be assured of. I know that
you are come hither from remote Countries, through long and turbulent Seas,
with Ships freighted with Merchandise; How then should I be so inhumane as not
to serve you in what I may toward the accomplishing of your Desires? But first
land your Presents, and when I have seen them, I will write in your behalf to
Peking. And the more to manifest my good Intentions, and the Love I have for
the Ambassador, I will suffer one of his Ships to come up to the Bridge, but
accompanied with my Jonks; for which Favor the Secretary returned him thanks in
the Ambassadors Name, promising to give his Master an Account thereof.

The Ambassador ordered Nobel and Harthower to go to the General so soon as it
was possible, and thanking him for his Kindness, further to request a Pass to
bring up the Blyswiik Frigate, and send two Mandarins to help them, that all
things might be done according to his desire.

The twenty ninth in the Morning the Comptroller Ruwenoort went with the
Chyrurgeon Hans Voorechter to the Court, to carry their Highnesses the
following Letters, and desire their Answers. The first being to the Vice*Roy
Singlamong, contained, That the Ambassador had sent his Chyrurgeon to his
Highness Service. The rest was written to the same purpose with the other
three, viz. That the Ambassador desired to know when his Highness pleased to
accept of a Visit, and treat about the Embassy.

The thirtieth nothing happened of Remark.

Next Morning two of the Generals Officers came to the Ambassador, and in their
Lords Name privately proffered him three hundred Tail (which they had brought
with them) for the Chain of Blood-Corral and Quilt, Goods which he desired to
be sent; on which the Ambassador smiling, returned, That he was no Merchant,
neither bought nor sold; but if the General would please to accept of those
Trifles as a Present, he would take their Reception as a high Honor; and if his
Highness hereafter might have a fancy to buy any Goods belonging to the
Hollanders, that their Merchant Nobel should furnish him: With which Answers
the forementioned Persons returned, to give an Account thereof to the General.

In the Afternoon the Viceroys Officers returned with many Thanks to the
Ambassador for his Presents, which his Highness had kindly received, and as a
grateful Return, had sent him eight Pieces of Chinese Brocadoes, which they
desired the Ambassador to accept, and he courteously received, though not
valued at above eighty Tail of Silver.

In the Evening after Prayer the Comptroller Ruwenoort delivered his first
Account of Charges and Expense, which the Ambassador gave to Putmans and the
Secretary Vander Does to look over, and also to inquire if the Provision should
be brought in by greater quantities than they used to have it before, it might
not be had at a cheaper Rate; thereby to be as saving as they could.

The first and second of September nothing happened worthy recounting.

The third in the Morning the Viceroy Singlamong's Intepreter sent the Chinese
Gienso to ask the Ambassador when he pleased to come to visit his Highness, and
show him the brave Horses, that he might give his Lord an Account of it;
Whereupon he was answered, That it was left to the Choice and Pleasure of his
Highness, and that the Ambassador was always ready at his Command.

In the Afternoon two of the Viceroys chief Factors came to Nobel, and told
him, That they had Order from his Highness to ask if the Company desired to
have much White Raw Silk; which if they had, his Highness would endeavor to
persuade the General, because the Transportation was strictly forbidden by the
Emperor; and that it might be observed, five Persons of Quality were sent into
every Territory bordering the Sea, from Peking; so that it would be very
difficult to get their Consents: Therefore they asked (a Price never heard of)
two hundred and fifty Tail for a Picol, desiring to have an Answer upon it
immediately, that they might give an Account to his Highness. Whereto Nobel
made answer, That notwithstanding the time did not permit to send to Japan, yet
they would exchange those Merchandises which they had brought with them, for a
Parcel of Silk, to carry to their Native Country; but he would have them to
know, not at such Prices; and therefore if they would not come nearer to the
matter, he would neither Treat about it, nor make any Proffer, desiring them to
be better advised: Whereupon they replied, That they had no other Order, and
therefore desired the Hollanders to consider of it, and so let it rest for that
time.

Mean while the General and Conbon's Factors also came thither, but made no
mention of the forementioned Business. The Ambassador to oblige them, and that
they might seek to get their Masters to affect the Hollanders, invited them to
Dinner; which ending, they, after they had been handsomely treated, with kind
Thanks took their leaves.

Not long after the General also sent two Mandarins to tell the Ambassador,
That he had been informed how the Hollanders in the Netherland Haven would not
hasten the unlading of the Emperors Presents as they should, because they had
only laden three Jonks full of Merchandise, and would not make use of the
other Jonks, which made their Highnesses doubt (as they said) whether the
Ambassador would go up to Peking, or not: They had writ to the Emperor of the
Ambassadors arrival; but now they must assure him, that they had seen the
Presents; therefore they desired a second time, that his Excellency would
please to send Order to the Ships, with one of their Vessels, that they might
immediately go about that Business: On which they were answered, That such
Orders had already been given, and that their Highnesses need not doubt of the
care and diligence that should be used in the Embassy; yet however, that he was
inclined for their satisfaction to send another Letter thither, which they
promising to tell the General, took their leave.

The fourth against the Evening four Jonks with Pepper arrived at the Bridge at
Lamthay, which they had taken out of the Blyswiik and Vlaerding Frigates. The
Persons that came with them gave an Account, That the Blyswiik Frigate lay at
Anchor between the Tower and the Bridge of Lamthay, and hoped that before the
next Morning she would also come up to the Bridge; and likewise that the
Constance was come safe into the Netherland Haven, and that all things were in
good Condition with the Ships, which the Ambassador was glad to hear.

The same day two Mandarins came to the Ambassador in the Generals name, to
inquire how many Men there were in the Blyswiik Frigate? If any Soldiers came in
her? And why they brought so many? To which they were answered, That there were
no Soldiers in her, and but forty seven Men in all, which were required to
govern the Ship, and other Employments: Whereupon they returned.

Mean while two eminent Mandarins sent from the General came to look after the
unlading of the Goods, for which the Hollanders prepared Boats and other
Vessels. The forementioned Mandarins said also, That if the Ship did not come
up to the Bridge that day, they would on the morrow fetch out the Presents with
their Barques, and then send her down again to fetch others.

All the Factors belonging to his Highness, except the chiefest, came likewise
to tell Nobel, That their Masters had agreed to deliver their Silks to the
Company; and that it was now time to Trade, because some Commissioners were
expected daily from Peking, at whose coming there would be no likelihood to
transport one Catty of Silk: Whereto Nobel made answer, That he would willingly
deal with them, but he must first see the Silk, and likewise agree about the
Merchandise; but if they demanded two hundred and fifty Tail, as they had done
the third Instant, it would not be worth the speaking of it. They having (as
they said) no other Order, departed.

On the twenty ninth of July a Fly-boat named the Poelsnip, the thirtieth, the
Nieuport Pink; and the fifth of August, the Overveen, came thither without
their Masts, which they had lost in a Storm about the Macaw Islands, and going
afterward to repair their Breaches at the Isle of Quemuy, the Tartar-Chineses
told the Commanders, That the Coxingan-Chineses had Besieged Quelang; and many
other things concerning that Isle.

The sixth in the Morning two Mandarins came to tell the Ambassador from the
General, That the Governor of Minjazen had advised him* that another Dutch Ship
had arrived in the Netherland Haven, which made his Highness desirous to know
what Ship it was, and if it came from Quelang, which if it did, it should
immediately return.

In answer to which, they were told, That the Occasion of the coming of this
Ship would be made known to his Highness by a Letter which was writing.

According to the Resolution taken the last Night, the Secretary went to the
Court to deliver the Letter, the Contents whereof were to this effect.

That the Ambassador could not but acquaint their Excellencies, That a small
Ship was arrived there from Quelang, bringing News, That four Months since the
Coxingans had Besieged the Fort there, but were beaten off with great loss:
Then he desired that he might send the said Ship again to Quelang with some
Necessaries, as Tar, Kadjang, Timber, and the like Necessaries. And lastly,
That all diligence was now used to get the Emperors Presents ashore, the
greatest part of them being already arrived at the Bridge in the small Holland
Vessel; concerning which, or ought else, he would be glad to speak with their
Highnesses, when they pleased to command him.

The Secretary came first to the General; but he having some Mandarins with
him, could not in Person grant him Audience, but sent one of his Factors to the
Secretary for the Letter, which was given him, and a speedy Answer desired upon
it.

After an hours stay, the forementioned Factor came to the Secretary, to
present him in the Generals Name with a Cup of Bean-broth, and tell him in
answer to the Letter, That so soon as the Mandarins (that were with his
Highness) went away, he would consult on their Request, and acquaintthe
Ambassador with his Resolution by his Mandarins.

From hence the Secretary went to the Viceroy Singlamong, where the Letter, as
at the Generals, was received by a Servant, under pretense, That the Viceroy
being indisposed, could not grant him Audience.

An Hour after, the Interpreter came also to give the Secretary a Cup of
Bean-broth, and tell him, That the Viceroy had understood the Ambassador's
Mind by his Letter, and had granted his Request, nay, would have done it, had
it been of greater concernment; but the Hollanders must first seek the Generals
Consent, which he doubted not but they might easily obtain: Whereupon the
Secretary acquainted his Highness with the General's Answer, who said, That it
was well, and he would speak with him about it.

His Highness also caused him to be asked, Why the Horses and Oxen were not
brought to his Court, since he had a great fancy to see them? and to desire
that it might be done about two days after. To which the Secretary replied,
That it was true, they had promised his Highness; but he had sent word, That
they should refer it till all the Presents were ashore, and that then he would
see them together: Whereupon his Highness told them, That the General had made
that Answer, and not He; and therefore desired, as before, to see them, whether
the Presents were ashore or not, two days thence: Which the Secretary promised
to acquaint the Ambassador with; and rising to depart, two Mandarins came from
the General, to inform the Viceroy of the Ambassadors Request, so that he was
commanded to stay a little. The Mandarins going away again, the Viceroy sent
him word, That the General had understood that those of Quelang were by the
Netherlanders furnished with Provisions and Water; but as for the transporting
of Timber, Stones, Tiles, and Nails, it could not be granted: However he had
prevailed so much, (alleging that they were but Trifles, which since Quelang
had been besieged, were wanting for the Repairing of the Houses) that by the
said Mandarins they had in the Generals Name granted the Ambassadors Request;
for which Kindness the Secretary humbly thanking his Highness in the
Ambassadors Name, took his leave.

In the Afternoon two Mandarins came again to the Ambassador, to give him an
Answer to his Request which he had made in the Morning, which they delivered,
after some Complements, in this manner: That the Netherlanders were Licensed to
transport what Provisions they had desired, Timber and Nails excepted, to which
his Highness could not consent; which contradicted that which the Viceroys
Interpreter had told the Secretary, viz. That the General and the Viceroy had
permitted it: But there were daily Commissioners expected from Peking, to
search those Havens; and that his Highness did not doubt but they would grant
it him.

Toward Evening the Blyswiik Frigate arrived at the Bridge of Lamthay, with the
Presents: The Ambassador also sent a Letter, with the Constance's Boat, to the
Merchant David Harthouwer, informing him, That the four Jonks laden with Pepper
out of the Vlaerding and Blyswiik, arrived there yesterday, but were not all
weighed: The Blyswiik Frigate had also been in sight, but durst not come to the
Bridge. The Proposal to unlade the Alphen into the Fly-boat, was liked very
well, and that then she might be brought in with care, and more safety; to
which purpose they should send the Polesnip to Sothia, to take in the Alphens
Goods (so to give little or no suspicion to the Tartars) and take as much
Pepper and other Goods out of her, as they could conveniently carry, and then
let her come up the River with it, because the forementioned Vessel should in
few days go with Provisions to Quelang.

The Ambassador judged it fit, and it would be convenient in that juncture of
time, to have a strict Eye upon the Concerns of Quelang, and therefore advised
them to Consult about it; to which purpose Harthouwer, Captain Vanderwerf, with
the Commander de Vlieg, were sent for to come up in the Blyswiik, and likewise
Captain Bitter.

The Blyswiik that Evening came up to the Bridge, and in the Morning intended
to Unlade her Presents, and two days after (if it were possible) she should be
sent to fetch the rest.

The seventh about Sunrising the Boat set Sail, and Orders was also given for
the Unlading of the Blyswiik.

In the Afternoon a Mandarin coming from the General, asked the Ambassador if
he would send the Provisions to Quelang by the Blyswiik, because his Highness
had not known that that Ship would have come up so high? On which he was
answered, That it should be done so soon as the Blyswiik had made one Turn more
to fetch the remaining Presents.

Toward Evening all the Goods designed for Presents were Landed out of the
Blyswiik, but it being too late to bring them into the Merchants Lodge, they
were forced under good Guards to lie in the Barques all Night: but in the
Morning, being the eighth, they were all brought into the Lodge.

The same day Putmans, Master of the Ceremonies, and the Comptroller, went with
the Horses and Oxen to the Court, to show them to their Highnesses, according
to their Request two days since. Coming home again they related, That they had
pleased their Highnesses exceeding well, and that Singlamong, to whose view
they went first, asked if they were wild or tame? to which they had answered,
Tame: He had also highly commended the Oxen, and had caused them to be carried
and shown to his Women, by whom they were beheld with great admiration: his Son
had also been Mounted on one of the Horses. After which his Father asked
concerning the Ambassadors Health; and also desired his Surgeon might come
to him the next day. The General had also viewed and liked them; asking
likewise about the Ambassadors Health, if he had any good Doctors? for if he
had not, he would send his; and why the Hollanders sent down the Boat without
leave, since he never had refused to grant them any of their Requests? and
withal when the Blyswiik Frigate went again to fetch the rest of the Presents?
Whereupon Captain Putmans replied, That the Ambassador was pretty well
recovered, and he knew not any thing to the contrary but that he had a good
Doctor; yet humbly thanked his Highness in the Ambassadors behalf for his kind
Proffer: why the Boat went down without leave he could not give any account;
but as to the Blyswiik Frigate, she was now Unlading her Pepper, and would at
farthest be gone again within two days.

The Commander of the Blyswiik Frigate complained to Nobel, that the Tartars
hindered him in the Unlading of the Pepper, he having called two Barquemen
aboard, which accordingly came; but the Tartars seeing them took them,
notwithstanding he interceded for them, and said that he was the occasion of
their coming, and caused them to be carried to Prison in Fetters, which made
Nobel send Ienko to complain to the Commissioned Mandarins about it.

Mean while a Factor was sent to Nobel from the General, to enquire about the
Ambassadors Health, and if he had any good Physicians, because his Highness
would else send him his.

In the Afternoon the Interpreter Ienko came with some Mandarins and Merchants
to the Blyswiik Frigate, to redeem the Prisoners, and give order for the
Unlading of her, which was begun immediately.

Next Morning, being the ninth, the Ambassador sent to the Viceroy Singlamong,
to excuse him, that he could not accommodate him with his Surgeon, because
he also was indisposed, but so soon as he amended he should be immediately sent
to him.

In the interim the Tiger Sloop arrived there with a Letter from the Merchant
David Harthouwer; in which the Ambassador was informed, that with the other
Officers he had thought it convenient not to let the Ship Alphen come into
Netherland Haven, because it was too dangerous to come thither against Wind and
Tide: which Resolution they acquainted the Commander of her with, that when he
thought convenient he might remove from Sothia to Tinhay; who had sent an
Answer, That he would observe it, and consider with his Officers about it, and
then send his approbation.

The fifteen Chests brought hither by the Polesnip, were put into the
Constance, and in the room of them they had Laden her full of Pepper out of the
Constance and Tiger, which weighed forty nine thousand six hundred sixty eight
Catties; by which means the Ships had made so much room, that they could not
conveniently come at all the Goods designed for Presents, so that they only
waited for the Blyswiik to Ship them in her.

The Polesnip Fly-boat was now ready to come up, if they had leave and a Pass
for her; but the Povi's Commissioners would not permit it without Orders from
above.

The Vlaerding had on the sixth instant Unladen thirty two thousand one hundred
forty five Catty of Pepper into a Chinese Jonk, which lay there still; so that
at last with great trouble they got to the Sandal Wood that was to be Presented.

In the Afternoon two Merchants were sent from the General, to enquire after
the Ambassador's health; which Visit he ordered his Comptroller to requite, by
giving them six Hens, five Gammons of Bacon, some Pomegranates, Chestnuts, and
Pears.

The same day the Ambassador desired the General, that he might have the use of
his Doctor but for a Day, because he was much troubled with Gripes in his
Bowels; upon which Request he came immediately and prescribed him something,
which he had no sooner taken, but found present ease.

The tenth in the Morning the Doctor came again to give the Ambassador some
more Physic. A Factor came also to enquire of his health, and if the Medicines
the Doctor had given had done him any good) to which he was answered, Yes, and
that the Ambassador had found great ease by it, desiring the Factor to thank
his Highness in his behalf; which he promised to do.

The Bliswyk and the Tigers Sloop were put off from going that day, and ordered
to stay till the next, because some Mandarins scrupled the carrying away of so
much Provision; about which they would first speak with the General.

In the Afternoon two Mandarins came into the Lodge with a Pass for the Bliswyk
Frigate, and the Tigers Sloop; and said also, That they were sent to Sail down
with the Frigate.

The eleventh the Frigate and Sloop set Sail to Netherland Haven.



On Sunday Noon, being the twelfth, two Factors came to the Lodge, to present
the Ambassador in the Generals Name with some Chinese Suckets.
Connemomy, and to tell him, That the Ambassador had been a considerable time
ashore, and that the Emperors Presents were not yet Landed: then the Ambassador
desired that his Highness would please to give order that they might be
suddenly delivered, because he much longed to see them; nor that they could
proceed in any Trade before the Goods were ashore, and likewise that then
preparations should be made for his Journey to Peking.

Whereupon the Ambassador sent this Answer, That the rest of the Presents would
suddenly be ashore, and that he thanked his Highness for his Connemomy, and in
requital of it desired him to take a few Conserves of Nuts, Cloves, and the
like: So having been well entertained by the Ambassador, the Factors took their
Leave.

In the Evening it was considered, That for several Reasons which the Governors
had alleged by their Factors, it might happen, so soon as news came from
Peking for the Ambassador to take his Journey thither, that their Highnesses
might press his going, and that they (nothing being as yet in readiness, and
all in a hurry) might be put to a great inconvenience; Therefore the
Ambassador, to begin betimes, proposed, If it would not be necessary to
acquaint their Highness's to morrow, That most of the Presents were ashore, and
the rest expected in few days; if therefore they might begin to Pack them, and
cause Chests to be made for them; of what bigness the Chests must be, and how
many Men must carry them, and also the Saddles and Furniture for the Horses;
and likewise if their Highnesses would please to send Commissioners before the
Presents? if the Sandal Wood, being very big, could be carried by Land as it
was, or in what Pieces it ought to be cut? that they must also carry several
other Goods with them to Peking to give to the Council of State, and other
eminent Persons; if they saw it convenient, to desire their Highnesses to
accept of the last Presents, being only Trifles, sent to them by the
Ambassador, because they had no Place in the Lodge to keep them; If their
Highnesses should chance to speak of Trading, to press it forward, and to order
that two Ships might about two Months hence be sent to Batavia, and from
thence to Holland, to give an account of the Ambassador's Proceedings, and the
like.

This the Ambassador and his Council agreed upon, and Nobel and Putmans ordered
to go and acquaint their Highnesses with it.

The thirteenth in the Morning Nobel and Putmans (according to the Resolution
taken the Night before) went to the Court to speak with their Highnesses. About
Noon coming home again they related, That they had not seen them, it being
their Full-Moon, and Singlamong indisposed; yet they had sent their Business to
them by their Interpreters, and received in answer, That when all the Presents
were brought ashore, their Highnesses must be informed of it, and that then
they would send their Commissioners, to see and be present at the Packing of
them; The Chests might be made for them, and about the bigness to contain a
hundred Catty weight; The Sandal Wood must not be cut, but sent as it came from
the Lord General Maetzuiker; The other Goods which the Hollanders would carry
with them to give away when an occasion did present, should be set down with
the Chests and Packs, that they might know exactly how many Porters they should
want.

The forementioned Trifles they could not receive before all the Emperor's
Presents were brought up. Because they did not speak with their Highnesses
themselves, they had not made any mention of the Business concerning Trade.

The fourteenth about Noon the Vlaerdings Sloop arrived there from Netherland
Haven, with Harthouwer and Captain Vander Werf, who related, That all things as
well in Sothia as Netherland Haven, were in good condition at their departure
from thence, and that all the rest of the Presents were taken out of the
Constance and Tiger, and put into the Bliswyk Frigate.

The fifteenth the Bliswyk arrived there with the rest of the Presents, and
also the Jonks with three hundred forty four Bags of Pepper out of the
Vlaerding. In the Blyswiik Frigate also came Captain de Bittor, who had been
Governor in Quelang.

A general report also went, that nine English Ships were on the Coast of
China, about the Isles Eymuy and Quemuy, and that they had been in Canton, and
desired to Trade there; but the Tartar-Chineses, not willing to take four
hundred Tail for the granting of them their Trade, were sent away from thence,
and were now come afresh to prosecute their old Design.

The Governor having sent word to the Ambassador by Nobel and Putmans on the
thirteenth instant, That so soon as the Presents were all Landed, he should
inform them of it; therefore he judged it convenient to advise their Highnesses
of the arrival of the remaining Presents in a Letter by the Secretary, that if
they pleased (about two days hence, when they were sorted) they might come and
see them in Person, or send their Commissioners, that they might make fit
preparations for them.

The sixteenth in the Morning the Secretary went first to the General, to
deliver him the following Letter in the Ambassadors Name, that the rest of the
Presents were now come ashore, and that the next day they would all be put in
order; therefore if his Highness pleased to come in Person, the Ambassador
would most kindly entertain him; or else send his Commissioners to see them.

In like manner he desired a Pass for the Boat, that she might go up and down
without being stopped to enquire the certainty of the News concerning the
English Ships.

No sooner was the Secretary's coming made known to the General, but he sent
for the Letter, and an hour after gave this Answer; That it was not customary
for the General to come in Person to see the Goods, but he would send his
Interpreter if the Presents were as the Hollanders had reported them, and then
consult whom he should send: as to what concerned the Boat, he would send a
Pass for her by his Mandarins.

The rumor was at Court, that the General intended that Afternoon to see the
Dutch Ship; to which purpose several Flags, Halberds, and the like, were stuck
in the Street.

From thence the Secretary went to the Viceroy's Court, where after some stay
he was brought into the Presence in a back Hall. His Highness having asked
concerning the Ambassador's health, and the Secretary given him a respective
Answer, delivered his Highness the Ambassador's Letter, advising him that all
the Presents were now Landed, and if his Highness pleased, to send
Commissioners to see them. Whereupon his Highness made Answer, That he was glad
to hear that the Presents were all safe ashore, and that he would not fail to
send his Commissioners the next day to see them: And after having drunk to him
in a Cup of Bean-broth, and entertained some frivolous Discourses within, the
Viceroy gave him leave to depart.

Mean while the General's Interpreter came with some Factors into the Lodge, to
bring an Answer on the Letter that was brought in the Morning to his Court,
which was after this manner: That a Pass should be brought for the Boat the
next Morning; but when she had made one Voyage, that they should always bring
the Pass to his Highness again, and at her departure ask for a new one.
Moreover the Interpreter said, That the General was not well pleased that the
Ambassador should desire him to come and see the Presents in his own Person;
yet the Interpreter had appeased and satisfied him.

Hereupon the Ambassador answered the Interpreter, That by the Discourse of the
People he had heard that the General would come himself to see the Presents,
and therefore had written, that he should esteem himself happy if it might be
so; but had he known, that either the Viceroy or General would have been
angry, he should not have done it. With which Answer the Interpreter took his
leave.

The remaining Presents were this day all brought out of the Blyswiik Frigate
into the Lodge.

The seventeenth in the Morning the same Interpreter that had been there the
day before came to the Lodge, to ask if the Presents were Landed; on which he
was answered Yes, and that they were brought thither the last Night, and they
only stayed till the Mandarin saw them.

At Noon an eminent Mandarin came to tell the Ambassador from the General, That
his Highness had heard that all the Emperor's Presents were going to be brought
to his Court, therefore asked him how many Coelis, which are Porters, could
carry them: Whereupon the Ambassador answered, That he knew nothing of it; and
withal, that the bringing of them to the General's Court could not well be
done, because of the bigness of the Packs of Sandal Wood, and other things: but
if his Highness desired it, he entreated him to send a written Order by his
Mandarins, they being not his, but the Emperor's Presents, and also that he
would not bear the blame if any of the Goods should chance to be damnifi'd by
their Carriage thither. Which Discourse prevailed so much, that the Mandarin
said, His Highness should only send for a Piece of each sort to see them. To
which the Ambassador answered, That all which his Highness should give order
for in Writing he would obey. Hereupon the Mandarin rising up replied, That his
Highness should send a written Order.

The eighteenth in the Morning, another Factor came into the Lodge, sent from
the Viceroy, to ask concerning the Ambassador's health: and amongst other
Discourses Nobel asked him what they should do concerning Trade? all the
Presents were now ashore, and the time come which their Highnesses had limited:
To which the Factor answered, That it would be convenient to send a Letter to
Singlamong about it, and therein express, That his Highness had for three years
together given them leave to Trade, and that he would also be pleased to do it
now, and assist them in it; and that Nobel might be admitted to speak with him
more at large about it; so made no question but all things would fall out
according to his desire. He asked moreover if the Hollanders would sell the two
hundred Bags of Pepper lying in the Storehouse to him. To which Nobel answered,
Yes, if they could agree. Mean while two Mandarins came into the Merchants
Lodgings from the General, telling them that all the Cloths, Perpetuana's,
Crown-Serges, and other Goods belonging to the Emperor's Presents, should on
the morrow (if the Weather permitted) by an Order from the Governors be fetched
to the Viceroy Singlamong's Palace, where all the great Persons would be ready
to see them; the Chests to fetch the Presents in were making ready, and as for
the bulky Packs that were not so curious, they should not trouble themselves.

The forementioned Mandarins were also empowered by the General (as they said)
to search the Holland Ships, if there were no more Pepper, or other Merchandise
in them, desiring that two of the Netherlanders would please to go along with
them, who at their Return related that all things were according to the Cargo.

Since now, according to the Governors desires, the Emperor's Presents were
brought ashore, and they had promised that the Hollanders should begin to
Trade, of which as yet they saw no likelihood, therefore Captain Nobel was on
Sunday the nineteenth sent with the following Letters from the Ambassador to
the Viceroy Singlamong and General, being to this purpose, viz.

That the Viceroy had known the Hollanders several years, and always showed
them respect and favor, and assisted them in obtaining Dispatches in their
Affairs. The Captain Nobel.
Houpou understood the last year from the Viceroy and Lipovi, That an
Ambassador must of necessity address himself to the Emperor this very year,
whereupon they should immediately drive their Trade; which the Houpou gave
account of to the General in Batavia; who thereupon has sent a Person of
Honor, one of his Council as Ambassador, and brought the Emperor's Presents
ashore upon your Highnesses desire, and promise, that so soon as that should be
done they would begin to Traffic; therefore the Houpou humbly desires, that
his Highness would be pleased to permit it, and give order to the Factors and
Merchants about it, that the Houpou may be the sooner ready to go with the
Ambassador to Peking, and the rather, because that two Months after the Date
thereof, two Ships must go to Batavia; by which the Ambassador must give an
account to the General there, and also to the Province of Holland, of his
success in that Empire. The Houpou was very desirous to send some Goods with
those two Ships, which he would buy of the Factors; therefore he humbly
requested that the Trade might now commence.

To which Nobel received an Answer from Singlamong, That he wondered at the
Hollanders hastiness, since the Ambassador was not to travel up to Peking till
the new Year, and that an Answer was expected from thence in twenty days;
therefore they must stay till that time, because the Cargo that they had
brought (which in respect of what the Hollanders carried into the Empire of
Iapan was very small) could be sold in five days; and that the forementioned
Ships might then go away time enough. However, his Highness by Nobel's
persuasions granted that they might conclude with the Factors about the Prices
for the Goods which the Hollanders intended to Vend there, and for those which
they should receive in Barter for them, and drive their Trade privately,
without publishing it before Orders came from Peking, because he knew not but
that the Emperor might desire all, or a part of their Commodities.

The General Siangpovi, to seem resolute and bountiful, promised to Nobel, That
so soon as he had seen the Presents, he would send his Factors to the Lodge to
agree with him concerning his Merchandise, provided the Hollanders asked
modestly, and not more than the value for them. He also boasted much of his
good inclination toward the Hollanders, because he had lent them his Jonks to
bring their Merchandise ashore, of which they had lost nothing; and that he
resolved from that time forward to continue his kindness, and endeavor by all
means possible to advance them. About the sending of the two Ships for Batavia
he seemed somewhat backward, because according to his judgment nothing of
consequence could be advised by them: but being somewhat better informed about
it, made answer, That the first Orders were expected from the Emperor in
fifteen days, therefore would have them stay till then. Their Highnesses also
asked courteously concerning the Ambassadors Health; and hearing of his
Recovery, seemed much to rejoice at it.

The Mandarin Han lavja came also to the Lodge to tell the Ambassador, that the
General had ordered him to go along with his Excellency as Guide to Peking, and
that four Standards must be made to be carried before the Ambassador in his
Journey, out of which two must be marked with Dutch, and two with Chinese
Characters; and moreover, that he had been informed the Governors in few days
would grant the Trade.

The one and twentieth and two and twentieth nothing happened worthy of note.

The twenty fourth in the Morning, a Mandarin came to the Lodge, asking if the
Ambassador did not know when the Chinese that came from Batavia went away? and
from what Place? if they were first carried over with the Holland Ships? and
what was their native Country and Names?

The Mandarin received in answer, That some went over the last year as Servants
with Nobel and Pedel to Batavia; and as to what concerned the rest, they came
thither from Canton, Tayowan, Chinkfieuw, Hoksieu, and other Places, both in
Ships and Jonks, but the Places of their Birth and Names were unknown to him,
because he had never inquired after them. They desired at Batavia to be
Transported to their native Country again, which was accordingly granted them.

The same Mandarin had a Letter given him, in which a Pass was desired from the
General, for the Blyswiik Frigate to carry down some Goods that were to be sent
to Quelang, and come up again with Merchandise; and likewise from the Vlaerding
Sloop.

The twenty fifth about Noon a Mandarin brought a Pass for the forementioned
Ship and Boat to go up and down the River.

The twenty sixth in the Morning the Comptroller made several Complaints to the
Ambassador, That the Chinese at the buying of the Necessaries for Quelang
(appointed by the General) had prevented the Person, who daily brought him
Flesh, Fish, Herbs, and the like, into the Lodge, from bringing any more as he
used to do, and had complained of him, and made him so odious to the Mandarins,
that they had put him and the Coelies Master (which had assisted the
Netherlanders in buying of Provisions for their Ships) into Irons; by which
means the Coelies, and other laboring People that worked in the Lodge, durst
not come any more thither, which put the Hollanders to a great inconvenience.

There also came an eminent Mandarin to the Lodge, to give order for the
Pressing of Jonks at Minjazen, to fetch the Merchandises out of the Ships.

In the Afternoon, it being fair Weather, the Blyswiik Frigate went away with
the Necessaries that were to be sent to Quelang, and also for fresh Provisions
for the Ships in Netherland Haven.

In the same Frigate Captain Vander Werf, and Vander Does the Secretary, went
down to take an account of those Chinese Goods which came over in the Dutch
Ships from Batavia, and seize on all their Moneys and Merchandise of any value,
because on the two and twentieth the Ambassador had found in one of the Chinese
Chests to the value of a thousand Rix-Dollers in Money, consisting in Spanish
Dollers and Iapan Boat-Silver, which was strictly forbidden in Batavia.

The Merchants Nobel and Harthouwer went in the Afternoon by the Viceroy,
General, and Conbon's direction, to Treat about the Trade. When among other
things Harthouwer and Nobel proposed, That upon Sale they must fetch the Pepper
and Sandal Wood out of the Netherland Ships in the Haven; which the Factors
refused, saying, That the Goods should be delivered to them in the Ambassador's
Lodge. But at last they agreed, That the Goods being fetched out of the
Netherland Ships, and brought up the River in Jonks by the General's Order,
were to be delivered on the Shore, on the hither side of the Bridge, after the
same manner as in former years. Then they desired the particular Parcels of the
Merchandise brought thither by the Netherlanders, and how many, and what Goods
they would have in Return of them; which they writ down accordingly in their
Notes, as China Root, ordinary Tee, Galya, Allom, Preserved Ginger, Hatten,
Gold, etc.

Seeing the great quantity of Allom and Gold Wire, besides Gold which the
Hollanders desired, they seemed to be much amazed, and judged, that the two
first sorts could never be afforded for the Prizes that were set down for them
by the Netherlanders; and demanded, why the Hollanders had not asked for Silk:
To which they were answered, That it could not be done before the Prizes were
settled on the Dutch Commodities, and that then an account might be made of
their Stock; which they seeming to approve of, soon after departed.

The twenty eight in the Morning, two of the General Povi's Factors came into
the Lodge, of which, one being Povi's Intimate, went with the Interpreter Apari
to the Ambassador, and desired him to give him some account of what he had
yesterday written to Povi: Whereupon his Excellency made answer, That amongst
other things, he would willingly speak with Povi concerning the Trade, and also
his going up to Peking: To which he replied, That he being his Favorite, could
do much in it; but he would advise to present him with some more Blood Coral,
which he dust assure would not be lost, and that about two days after, the
Ambassador might come to visit Lipovi, because that and the next were kept as
Fast-Days of the first Moon. The Ambassador hereupon answered, That he depended
upon the Noble and Heroic Disposition of the General, and therefore desired
his Highness to repose Confidence in him, as being a Person of so clear a
Spirit, as would endeavor to retaliate the General's Favors. So the Factor
being Presented with ten Yards of Red Cloth, and Vowing to serve the Ambassador
to the utmost of his Power, took his leave and departed.

The twenty ninth in the Morning, Putmans went with the Interpreter Ienko to
the General, to inquire if he was any ways busy, because that was the
appointed time for the Ambassador to visit him: Whereupon they were answered,
That the General was always employed, but that the Ambassador might come when
he pleased; which they at their return acquainting his Excellency, he instantly
went to Court, and Presented some Blood Coral to the General. Whereupon his
Highness told him, That he well knew the generous Nature of the Ambassador: Who
replied, That he esteemed the Favors and kind Receptions which he had received
from the General, that he was obliged to study Requital.

Then the Ambassador desired to know the time, when, and which way he should go
to Peking. Whereto he answered, That it was now the ninth Moon, and that he
might set forward on his Journey very suddenly.

Next, the Ambassador desired that they might begin to open Trade, that the
Houpou (meaning Nobel) might be ready to go along with him. To which was
answered, That the Presents must first be viewed, and that the Mandarins
thereto employed, had been four days busy about their Orders, which was now
done, and the Presents should be looked over in two or three days, and then the
Trade should Commence. Their Discourse ended, after a handsome Treat, the
Ambassador went very well satisfied to his Lodgings.

Coming to the Lodge, they were soon after visited by the Generals intimate
Factor, to tell them, that the General had considered about the Coral Chain,
and durst not accept of it; yet at length through his persuasions, and that it
came from the Ambassadors own Hand, he had taken it. The Factor likewise
desired a great Blood Coral, which was given him, in hopes that he might assist
them in their Trade.

The thirtieth in the Morning, the Ambassador sent a Letter by Putmans, and the
Interpreter Ienko, to the Viceroy Singlamong to this purpose.

THe Ambassador had long since heard, and now understood, that Singlamong had a
kindness for the Hollanders; therefore he hoped, that he would please to assist
him in all things hereafter, which would be no small Obligation only to
himself, but also to his Masters, and desired to visit his Highness, to speak
with him about the Journey to Peking.

Against Noon, Putmans came again to the Lodge, relating, That he could not
speak with the Viceroy, but after delivery of the Letter received answer, That
he should be busy four or five days, so that he could not give the Ambassador
Audience, and that nothing could be said about the Journey to Peking, till the
Presents were looked over, which would be done in few days; with which answer
Putmans took his leave.

Against the Evening, the General Povi's Interpreter came to the Lodge to tell
the Ambassador from his Master, that when the Presents were viewed, (which
should be done in a day or two,) he would desire the Ambassador to be free as
he would be to him, and to ask freely for what ever he wanted, who gave the
Interpreter five Yards of Red Cloth for his Message.

The first of October in the afternoon, the Mandarin Liu-lavja came with Orders
October.
from the General, to fetch all the Chinese from the Dutch Ships with their
Goods; and to that purpose desired a Note to the Commanders of them, to which
he was answered, that the Netherland Secretary was gone thither to search their
Goods, which Liu-lavja desired might be brought into the Lodge; whereupon the
Ambassador gave the Mandarin two Letters, one to Captain Vander Werf, and one
to the Secretary Vander Does, advising them, that the Chinese might be
delivered, provided they had been searched and examined before by the
Secretary, who if he found any thing of concern, should according to his last
Letter, secure it aboard till further Order, with which the Mandarin departed.

The second and third being Sunday and Monday nothing happened of note.

The fourth, the Ambassador had Audience granted him by the Viceroy, who after
Salutations, complained, that he was indisposed, having great pains in his Head
and Back.

The Ambassador first thanking him for the Honor he received by his presence;
then desired to know the time when, and what way he should travel to Peking: To
which his Highness answered, That if news came from Peking that day, he might
go on the morrow; whereupon the Ambassador desired that the Trade might
Commence, that Nobel and he might be in a readiness: To which the Viceroy
answered, That the Ambassador need not to trouble himself about the Trade,
because the sale of all the Goods they had brought might be dispatched in four
or five days; but they must first Pack up all the Emperors Presents, and bring
them to the Royal House, and that day on which they were brought they might
begin their Trade on the next. On this the Ambassador replied, He would depend
on his Highness's Royal Word, and therefore would not trouble him any farther,
but that he would give Order, that the Presents should with all speed be
brought into his Palace.

Then the Ambassador's Son presented him for his Daughters a great and small
Chain of Blood Coral, which he accepted; yet said, he durst not receive, but
that they were a Present from the Ambassador's Son, for his Children; and
though himself was much indisposed, yet he desired, that the Ambassador would
stay and refresh himself a little; which being performed, after Dinner, just at
his Departure, the Viceroy's Daughters, as a thankful return for the Coral,
Presented the Ambassadors Son with six Rolls of Silk Stuffs.

Coming to the Lodge, the Ambassador gave Order for the making of sixteen Cases
against the next day, to Pack the Presents in, and carry them to Singlamong's
Palace. Soon after, Liv-lavja came to visit the Lord Van Hoorn, telling him,
that he should go with him to Peking, but the time when, was yet unknown.

The fifteenth in the Morning, The Ambassador.
his Lordship sent a Letter by the Interpreter Ienko to the Conbon, advising
him:

THat he knew very well the good Inclination which he bore to his Contrymen,
and also that he had always assisted them, which they would ever acknowledge
with much Thankfulness, in regard the Conbon had for some time been very busy,
that he could not have the Honor to speak with him; now he desired, that he
might come to proffer his Service to him.

The Interpreter for all this civility, after their Proud manner, brought only
in return, an excuse of indisposition, and that in three or four days he might
give him a visit.

The sixth in the Evening, Ienko the Interpreter came to tell the Ambassador,
that the Mandarin Liv-lavja was come with all the Chinese from the Ships up to
Lamthay Bridge, and desired to know why he had detained some of their Goods; On
which the Ambassador answered, that he had express Order from the General and
Council of India, that he should do it, because the Chinese desired that they
might be only brought over with their Necessaries; therefore, if either Money
or Merchandise was found by them, it was forfeited, as it was likewise with his
own Men: Whereupon he replied, That the General resented, and that the Mandarin
Liv-lavja would speak with the Ambassador about it the next day.

Nobel also informed the Ambassador, that the Factor had told him that very
day, that he had privately been informed, that they would have suddenly news
from Peking; and also that the Ambassador should not go thither himself, but
that the Presents should be sent thither, and that he should stay in Hoksieu,
to Treat with the Governors about the Trade, which the Hollanders looked upon
as a Discourse without Truth or Reason.

The seventh and eighth, nothing happened of remark, but only some false rumors
that troubled the Ambassador, that the Emperor had ordered the Presents to be
brought to Peking, and he to stay at Hoksieu; and on the other side, Singlamong
was as much concerned at the seizure of the Chinese Money, which was forfeited
according to the Maritime Law.

The ninth about Noon, they received an account, that all things remained in a
good condition at Tinghay, and Netherland Haven, only some new Disputes with
the Mandarins and Messages concerning the Chinese forfeited Goods, which were
for the most part Silver, Camphire, Coral, and Seed-Pearl.

The tenth, the Blyswiik Frigate arrived at Lamthay Bridge, laden with Pepper,
taken out of another Vessel, and also the remaining Necessaries for the
Ambassador and his Retinue, likewise some Packs for his private occasions. The
Mandarins (which as Commissioners) had been down with the Frigate, and returned
in her, coming to the Lodge, were by the Ambassador presented with as much
Cloth, as would make each of them an upper Garment.

The eleventh, it was resolved in Council, to unlade the Tiger and Constance
with the first, and send them to Tinghay, there to make themselves ready to go
for Batavia, at the latter end of the Month.

Lapora the Factor informed the Ambassador, that the next day the Presents
would be brought to the Viceroy Singlamong's, there to be viewed; in order to
which all things were prepared.

The twelfth in the Morning, about Day light, the Netherlanders prepared all
the Presents in a fit manner to be carried to Court, expecting the Mandarins;
but in stead of them, the Factor Lapora brought what they little expected, that
they should not bring the Presents to Court, till further Order; by which
Dilatoriness, he perceived, that they were not willing as yet, to suffer them
to open and vend their Cargo: Therefore he proposed to his Council, If it would
not be convenient, for these Delays that he should show his Dislike by Letter;
and withal desired, that he might return aboard, until they had liberty to Vend
their Goods, or received Orders for their Journey to Peking, which they
approved.

But next Day, while he was preparing the Letter, Lapora coming to the Lodge,
he told him what he was about to Write, and resolved to send immediately; who
desired him by all means to forbear two or three days longer, to which he was
persuaded, which fell out the better; for the next Morning he sent for the
Presents.

At this time, the Ambassador heard there were many Vessels making ready at
Lamthay Bridge, whereby he judged, that they were preparing, that when tidings
came for him to come to Peking, then they might hurry him away upon a sudden,
which made him ask what Vessels they were, and who was to go with them? To
which the Interpreter replied, That they were in few days to go with some
Tartar Lords, and perhaps with the Ambassador to Peking; for which, and that he
might be the freer hereafter to acquaint him with the like, he made a Present
of five Yards of Red Cloth.

The fourteenth, in the Forenoon, the Emperor's Presents were carried to the
Viceroy's Court, accompanied with the Ambassador, Nobel, Harthouwer, Putmans,
the Secretary, and the whole Train, the Presents being carried before, were
followed by the Ambassador and his Retinue; who coming to the Palace were
brought to the Common Hall, to stay there while the General's coming, at last
they were called into the Presence Chamber, where the Viceroy and General sat
on Stools one by another, and next them on their left Hands, three
Commissioners sent from Peking, to inquire what Chinese had carried themselves
valiantly at the Conquering of Eymuy and Quemuy; which also after the
Hollanders were entered, took their leave, being Conducted by the Viceroy to
the Stairs descending into the Court, by which they supposed them to be great
Lords: The Ambassador was also desired to sit down on a low Stool at the
Viceroy's right Hand, and his Attendants in order next him; opposite to them
sat the Poetzjensy, the Magistrates of the City and other great Mandarins; the
Chests with the Presents standing just without in a Gallery. When the Viceroy
began with their usual Complement to inquire of his Health, afterward the
Chests and Packs with the Presents being opened, the Goods were taken out in
several Parcels, brought and laid before their Highnesses to see them; seeming
to be well pleased with them, especially some curious Lanthorns, and Celestial
and Terrestrial Spheres and Globes: Having satisfied their longings, and
pleased their curiosity with viewing and re-viewing, they commanded them to be
laid up handsomely, and in good order again: Which done, after some familiar
Discourses, they Treated them very pleasantly with store of good Liquor; when
on a sudden the General went away, being Complemented by the Viceroy to the
middle of the Stairs descending into the Court. But the Viceroy returning
again into the Hall, gave leave to the Netherlanders to depart; whereupon they
also went away: At their going out, Nobel was desired by Singlamong's Factor,
that he and Harthouwer would be pleased to come to his House, that they might
Treat with him concerning the Trade, which they promised to do. The Ambassador
having sent a Rundlet of Sack to the Viceroy, desired him to accept of it,
which he did, and returned him Thanks.

According to the Factors Request to Nobel the day before, he and Harthouwer
went the fifteenth in the Morning to his House, to Discourse with him about the
Trade: Soon after their coming, the Factor Rode to Singlamong's Palace; from
whence he in an hours time returned again, but could not come to any absolute
Resolution, only telling them, that he had a Parcel of Silk of about forty
Pikol, which he would willingly sell: Who said, That it might be done, but that
he would consider, that they could not send any Silk to Iapan that Year, but
that they must first carry it from thence to Batavia, and then send it to Iapan
the next Year, so that they should run a great Risk in sending of it to and
fro; yet nevertheless, if they would deal reasonably, they would take a
considerable quantity; asking the Price, which the Factor durst not tell,
because the Generals and Conbon's Factors were not there present, but promised
to consult about it, and let them know their resolution on the Morrow, when
they would come to the Lodge, and let them know the Prizes of all their Goods,
and so begin to Trade.

He also advised the Dutch Merchants, that they should go to the General, or to
his Factors, and give him an account of what they had done, which the
Hollanders did not think convenient, because they had not been with the
Viceroy, but went to his Factors, who also promised to come to them on the
Morrow, desiring that they would also acquaint the Conbon's Factor with it,
which was performed accordingly.

The Ambassador by the Interpreter De Hase, sent the General a small Rundlet of
Sack, which he kindly received.

Then calling to mind, that the Conbon was not at the looking over of the
Presents, and also having understood that he was not well pleased, the
Ambassador sending for his Factor, desired to know the reason: To which they
replied, That the occasion was, because his Presents which were delivered on
August 26. were much less than the Viceroy's or General's, which he took very
ill, being as great a Lord as Povi. The Ambassador somewhat troubled at this
Relation, entreated his Factors to desire their Lord that he would please to
admit, that he might wait upon him, and endeavor to give satisfaction; with
which they promised to acquaint him, and bring an answer the next Morning, as
he did, letting the Ambassador know he might come to his Master two days after.

The Interpreter Maurice having again been with Sibontok, to present him with
three Swords in the Ambassadors Name, which receiving with Thanks, he promised
to do the Hollanders what Service he could; and withal, gave notice, that
having Dined the day before at the Generals, He there understood of some
Mandarins, that the Netherlanders were in ten or twelve days to travel to
Peking, and that he had received his Commands to go before, and to wait for the
Ambassador at Iemping, being his Dominion through which they were to pass. He
therefore desired, that the Ambassador would please to bring with him some
Coral, Amber, Sword-Blades, Pistols, Muskets, Cloth, Perpetuanaes, Linen,
Looking-Glasses, some Gold Rings, and Sparks or Pebbles, which he had an intent
and desire to buy of him.

All the Governors Factors, except Singlamong's chiefest, came that day to the
Lodge to give the Prizes of their Commodities, and endeavor to make a Bargain.
Nobel and Harthouwer gave them account of these Merchandises, viz. Pepper,
Sandal-Wood, Arek, Cloves, Nutmegs, Lead, Tin, Calicutor-Wood,, etc.

The Commodities which the Factors gave the Dutch an account of, consisted in
Gold Wire, China Root, course Tee, Galiga, Allom, Quicksilver, Cubebs,
Preserved Ginger, Hatten, Gold: As for raw Silk, one of Povi's Factors said,
that the Netherlanders could carry none from thence that year.

Not long after, the Stewards appeared with a Pass for the Constance Boat, and
the Vlaerdings Ship, which set Sail at high Water, Laden with Provisions to the
Ships in Netherland Haven.

The eighteenth, the Ambassador went to visit the Conbon, where he was nobly
entertained; and after Dinner, the Cups merrily went round, Health pressing
Health, so long, till both sides began to yield to the Intoxicating Liquor.

The nineteenth about Noon, two Factors sent from the General, came to the
Lodge to present the Ambassador in their Masters Name with six Pots of Liquor,
in requital for the Rundlet of Sack, which they said was very acceptable to him.

The Ambassador asking them if they knew not whether any News was come from
Peking: They replied, That they knew of none, but that it was expected there in
five days time.

The twentieth in the Morning, the Governors Factors came a second time to
Nobel and Harthouwer, to agree about the Price of the Goods, but parted without
coming to a Conclusion.

In the Evening, a Seaman came ashore from Minjazen without the Tartars
knowledge, with a Letter sent from Captain Naelhout, who informed the
Netherlanders, That yesterday he was coming up in the Vlaerdings Sloop, but was
stopped at Minjazen, which necessitated him to go again to the Ships, and had in
the Night undertaken the Journey anew, hoping in the Dark to have passed by
Minjazen; but that also fell out contrary to his expectation, because the
Chinese that kept the Watch in a Jonk that lay in the middle of the Water, had
perceived and kept them there; so that they were detained at Minjazen,
therefore desired a Pass from the Ambassador to come to him, without which they
saw no likelihood of getting thither.

The Mariner further related, That all things about the Ships were in a good
condition, only the Tigers Men going ashore in the Crab-Hole, to cut Wood, one
of them was suddenly seized on, and devoured by a Tiger.

The Ambassador causing the Interpreter Ienko to be called, commanded him to go
betimes the next Morning to the Governor of Minjazen's Lodgings (who was yet
there) to ask him why he detained his People at Minjazen? And desire him, to
give Order, that his Men might pass; which if he refused, the Ambassador must
be forced to complain to the General about it.

The one and twentieth in the Morning, the Interpreter Ienko brought answer,
That the Governor of Minjazen was gone thither the last Night. The Ambassador
considering that the time appointed for the Ships setting forth to Batavia
began to approach, thought fit the next day to send a Letter about it to the
General; and also to desire a Pass for a Boat to go up and down the River, that
they might hear daily from the Ships, which then much concerned the Hollanders.

The two and twentieth, the Ambassador went to visit Singlamong's Son, and
present him with two Pieces of Black Crown Serge, four of fine Stuffs, four of
Linen; one Piece of Amber, weighing one Pound and an half, half a dozen of
Sword Blades; one Pair of Pistols, and a Fire-Lock, the Stock In-laid with
Silver. All which he received very courteously, and Entertained the Ambassador
after a Princely manner.

Mean while, the Secretary Vander Does went according to the Resolution taken
the day before, to deliver him the following Letter, viz.

It is very acceptable to the Ambassador to understand, that the Hollanders
should by him be esteemed as Children and Friends of one Family, of which the
Ambassador did not doubt, because Talavja's Word (from whom he had it) was like
a Rock, never to be moved; therefore he desired that the little Holland Vessel
might be delivered here, and sent down, because a Ship must be sent to Batavia
in eight days. He also requested, that his small Boat may come up again; and to
that purpose, that he might have a Pass, as in former Years.

To which the Secretary brought answer: That after he had made his coming known
to the General, he staid three or four Hours upon promise of Admission; yet at
last the Interpreter came to tell him, that Talavja was so extraordinary busy,
that he could not give him Audience; and therefore if his business was such
that he could not send his Message, he must come some other time: Whereupon,
the Secretary not being willing to loose his labor, gave the Letter to the
Interpreter, to deliver to the General, and desired him to tell Talavja, that
the Netherlanders at that time wanted a Pass, more than ordinary, for the free
going up and down of their Boats.

To which the Interpreter brought answer from Talavja, That he had read and
understood the Letter, but that some days since he had given a Pass for the
Boat and Sloop; which the Secretary answering said, That it was true, but that
Pass mentioned nothing, but to go from thence down the River, but not that they
might come up again; which appeared by one of them who was returning to Hoksieu
with the Commander of the Ship Riding at Tinghay, and was stopped at Minjazen;
and withal told him, That if the Ambassador had a Pass for a Vessel to go and
return, he must not deliver it but on an extraordinary occasion.

The Interpreter having related this to the General, his Highness sent word to
the Secretary, that he would send for the Mandarin Liu-lavja, and by him send
the Netherlanders such a Pass as they had the last year, with which they might
go and come when they pleased.

The twenty third, nothing happened worthy relating.

On Sunday, being the twenty fourth, because the promised Pass was not come to
the Comptroller, Ruwenoort and Interpreter De Hase, were sent to the Mandarin
Liv-lavja, to see if he had it ready, and if not, to repair to the General for
it. These coming to the Mandarins House, not finding him at home, went to the
General, and let him know the occasion of their coming; Who sent them answer,
That they should go to the Mandarin Liv-lavja, he having Orders to give out the
Passes: To whom making application, the Mandarin told them, That he would come
to the Lodge, and bring them a Pass for a Boat to Sail up and down the River;
but when they intended to send any Provisions down, they should only send him
word by their Stewards, and he would grant them a particular Pass for that
purpose. The General also sent back his Interpreter with the Hollanders, to
tell the Ambassador, that no Ships might go to Batavia, before they heard from
Peking. But to this they answered nothing, as knowing, that the General could
not prevent the going away of their Ships, but that they were highly prejudiced
by not having a Pass, they being desirous to know the condition of their Ships
every day; and that he would please to make Talavja sensible of the injury he
should suffer by it.

The twenty fifth in the Morning, Liu-lavja and Haykong came to the Lodge,
bringing with them a Pass for a small Vessel or Boat to go and come empty, up
and down the River, which they gave to the Ambassador, saying, That when a
Vessel had been down, and up again, they must return the Pass to Liv-lavja,
till another went away, and that then they need only to fetch it again, which
the Ambassador promised to do.

About Noon, the Factor Lapora came with a Tartar to the Lodge, to acquaint the
Ambassador, that a small Letter was come thither from Peking, and that his
Excellency might now prepare himself for his Journey; because upon the coming
of the Emperor's Letter he would immediately be sent away, and the Trade should
Commence.

The six and twentieth in the Morning, the Secretary went to Singlamong's
Court, to request him, If Nobel might be permitted to speak with his Highness
about some business of great Concern: He was also Ordered as he past by to go
to the Conbon, and to Present him with some Elephants Teeth in the Ambassador's
Name; Who refusing them, said, He durst not as yet receive them, but he humbly
thanked the Ambassador for his kindness.

At the Secretaries coming to the Court, he was informed, That the Viceroy was
gone to the Generals, so that he returned home without effect.

The twenty seventh in the Morning, the Secretary went again to the Viceroy,
to entreat his Highness, that Nobel might come to visit him; whereof being told
by the Interpreter, he sent word, that being troubled with Gripes, he could not
grant him Audience; and also that he should be busy for four or five days
about extraordinary Occasions, and therefore could not let the Houpou come to
speak with him; but so soon as the News came from Peking, which was daily
expected, the Viceroy would so order his Affairs, that the Houpou might come
and see him when he pleased. The Secretary was also commanded to call on the
Mandarin Liu-lavja, for a Pass for the Blyswiik to carry down Provisions for
the Ships: To which Liu-lavja made answer, That he could give Passes for small
Vessels to carry Provisions to the Fleet, but not for so great a Ship; yet he
would go to the General to procure a Pass for her, which if he could get, he
would send it by a Mandarin that should go down with the Frigate on the morrow
following.

The twenty ninth in the Morning the Viceroy Singlamong's Chief Counselor
came to the Lodge, with three other great Lords, to see the Horses and Oxen,
which they were much pleased with, and were entertained very nobly by the
Hollanders.

In the afternoon arrived the Vlaerding and Blyswiik's Sloops, from Netherland
Haven, with Captain John Naelhout, informing them, That all things were in
safety and good condition, both in Netherland Haven, and at Tinghay.

The thirtieth, because the promised Pass for the Blyswiik did not come, Nobel
went to the General to desire it, and also to give Order for the making a Ship
ready to sail to Batavia (which ought to have been gone fourteen days before)
that so soon as News came from Peking, she might set Sail, alleging, it
required two or three Weeks before she would be fit to go to Sea. He went
likewise to the Mandarin Liu-lavja, to show him the Pass which was brought back
by the Sloop, according as they had promised him, and to desire it again,
because another Boat was to be sent down the next morning.

But Nobel could not come to speak with the General, being very busy about
other Occasions; but was informed, That the Mandarin Liu-lavja had Order to
prepare the Passes: Whereupon Nobel going to the Mandarin, was told, That the
Pass for the Ships had been writ some days, and was at the Generals to be
Signed, which he would not fail to bring as soon as done.

The one and thirtieth, being Sunday, the Ambassador sent Ienko once more to
desire the Pass for the Ships from the General, but could not come to speak
with him, which made him go to Liu-lavja, who had promised to bring it.

The Viceroy Singlamong's Factor came the same day to tell Nobel, That his
Highness for some days had been very busy, which had prevented him from
granting Audience; but now being somewhat better at leisure, he desired, That
if he had any thing to request, he would come to him.

The first of November in the Morning Singlamong's chief Factor sent a
Messenger November.
to Nobel, that according to the appointment made the day before he might come
to Court, where he was expected; whereupon he immediately went thither, with
Captain Naelhout, that according to the Ambassadors Order they might acquaint
his Highness, First, That they were informed no Silk could be transported from
thence that Year; and also, that others, on the contrary, said, That the
Factors should not Trade with the Netherlanders, unless they would take their
Raw Silks at high Rates against the Dutch Commodities: Besides, that he
understood, that the Ambassador upon the receipt of the Emperor's expected
Letter, should immediately begin his Journey; and that therefore he must be in
a readiness, which was impossible to be done, because Nobel, who necessarily
must go up to Peking with him, must first be there present at the driving and
finishing of the Trade; besides, that in the four following Months the River
could not be Navigated, because of the Ice. Lastly, Four Months the River
Hoksieu in China not navigable.
to desire his Highness, That he would be pleased to assist the Hollanders in
the Trade, that so the Ships might be sent to their respective Places; the
more, because two of them must on necessity go to Holland. After which, the
Viceroy asked concerning the Ambassadors Health, and then answered, That the
Emperor was very glad that the Hollanders came to Trade in his Dominions: As to
what concerned Silk, it was forbid to be transported; but if the Factors could
agree with the Hollanders for a Price that might be to their satisfaction, they
would allow the Transportation of it. He wished also, That the Prices of their
several Commodities might be speedily agreed on. Hereupon Nobel (in regard the
Factors seemed so shie in bidding a good Price, told the Viceroy, That if he
had brought too much Pepper or Sandal-Wood thither, they might only take as
much as they wanted, and that he would carry the rest away again; adding
moreover, That it was but reason the Hollanders should sell for advantage now,
in regard of the vast Expense of their present Embassy. This was immediately
answered by his Highness, saying, That they might be supplied by him, as he had
done in Canton to former Ambassadors. Concerning the Ambassadors Journey to
Peking, which will be in the approaching Winter, he ought to furnish himself
with good Furred Clothes; and where they could not go by Water, they should
have Horses and Palakins to travel by Land: And that the Hollanders ought
rather to bring more of their Commodities thither, than carry any away from
thence. Whereupon Nobel presented his Highness, in the Ambassadors Name, with
the Chain of Blood-Corral, which he so long desired, and accepted with many
Thanks: Then taking his leave, he was conducted into another Chamber, and
treated very nobly with variety of Dainties.

In the afternoon the Steward Onquemoy came to the Lodge to acquaint the
Ambassador, That the Pass was brought for the Ship to go down with the
Provisions; but that the Governor of Minjazen had it, to whom it must have been
delivered at its passing by Minjazen: Whereupon the Ambassador sent the
Interpreter De Hase to the forementioned Governor, to ask if any thing was
specified in the Pass, for a Boat to come up again, to bring News from the
Ships: To which the Interpreter Hase at his Return brought this Answer, That he
could not speak with the Governor himself, but his Secretary had told him, That
the Pass made mention of nothing else, but to let the Ship and Sloop go down,
but not come up again.

The Ambassador not satisfied with such an answer, the next morning sent the
Secretary Vander Does to know the Contents of the Pass; but not being permitted
to speak with the Governor, he only brought back word, That the Pass contained
no more than what was told the Interpreter the day before; and therefore if the
Netherlanders desired another Pass, they must go to the General for it.
Whereupon the Secretary was immediately sent to the Mandarin Liulavja, to
desire the standing Pass which he had promised to make, for the Boat to go up
and down the River, and send it together with that for the Ship; and withal
tell him, how necessary it was for them constantly to know the Condition of
their Ships and People: But the Secretary coming thither, and being informed
that he was gone to the Lodge, returned home.

In the afternoon the forementioned Mandarin came with the desired Pass, drawn
after the same manner as the former had been; but a while after the Interpreter
Ienko, sent from Liu-lavja, came to fetch the Pass again, under pretense that a
Name was forgotten, which must needs be put into it, promising to return it
immediately.

The same day the Factors came to the Dutch Merchants Lodgings, to conclude an
Agreement about the Prises of their Merchandise; but parted again, without
making an end.

In the evening the Ambassador sending for the Interpreter Ienko, showed
himself much dissatisfied that he did not return the Pass for the Vessels to go
to and again, he having promised, That so soon as a Name was put in, it should
be re-deliver'd: To which he answered, That Liu-lavja had commanded him to ask
for it, because the Mandarins Name which was to go down with it, was to be
inserted; and why it was not brought again, he knew not.

The same day Captain John vander Werf set Sail in the Blyswiik to Netherland
Haven, where by the Ambassadors Election he was to bear the chief Command, and
observe all Transactions, and keep things in good order.

The Treasurer acquainted the Ambassador, That the fifty Picol of Kadjang, and
twenty Gammons of Bacon, were not yet brought for the Ships, because the
Steward had told him, That there was an Order that no Kadjang nor Gammons of
Bacon might be transported: Whereby the Ambassador seeing, that seldom any
Provision was sent to the Ships without the greatest trouble imaginable, judged
it convenient to write a Letter to the General, to this purpose.

That the Ambassador had always found Talavja kind and affable, and therefore
thanked him: That he likewise knew that he had much Business, wherefore he
would not be troublesome to him: That the Holland Seamen must in this Mouson be
provided for with Meat and Drink, or else they could not live: That the
Ambassador had continually been put to much trouble to get fresh Provisions;
therefore he desired, that the Husbandmen might every eight days carry
Porkers, and the like fresh Provisions, with their own Vessels, and sell them
to the Ships, which would save both him and Talavja a great deal of trouble.
This Letter Nobel and the Secretary Vander Does carried to Court, to deliver it
to the General; but coming to the City Gates, they were stopped by the Watch,
who said, That Order was come from the General, not to let any Hollanders into
the Town; whereupon they resolved to return, which the Guards seeing, called
them back, and suffered them to pass to the Generals, whither coming, they sent
him word of their being there, for which he sent to know the Reason; whereupon
they delivered the Ambassadors Letter to his Interpreter, who brought them this
answer, That Talavja was very busy, and could not grant them Audience; but
that he permitted the Netherlanders to carry as much Provision out as they
pleased, first giving an account of it to the Mandarin Liu-lavja, that the
General might afterward sign it* But he did not understand that any Person
should buy all manner of Goods, and carry them aboard, without being willing
that the Waiters should perform their Office, in searching the Ship, whereby
they should give an account of what they transported; and likewise, that they
must use their own, and not Chinese Vessels.

Mean while the Interpreter Ienko brought back the Pass for the Sloop to go up
and down the River. The Blyswiik Frigate, the Water being somewhat fallen, stuck
about a Cannon-shot from the Bridge, where she was forced to stay till
High Water.

The fourth there was nothing done, but a Dispute concerning the Waiters
stopping the Frigate, and clapping her aboard with four or five of their best
Jonks, and that some Mandarins desired she might be brought back to the Bridge.

The next day all the Governors Factors came to the Lodge, but went away again
without speaking any thing concerning the Trade.

In the evening the Vlaerding Sloop arrived there again from Netherland Haven,
with a Letter from Captain John Vander Werf, where he found the Polesnip that
came from Quelang riding at an Anchor; wherefore he thought it convenient to
send his Book-keeper thither, to acquaint his Excellency with it by a Letter,
and to advise him, That all things about the Ships were in good condition, and
also that they had not seen any Ships either going to or coming from Iapan.

The fifth in the Morning the Ambassador sent the Interpreter Ienko to the
General, to acquaint him with the Fly-boats arrival, and also to desire that
Nobel might come and speak with him. The Interpreter returning with two
Mandarins, told the Ambassador, That the General was so busy about some
private Concerns of the Empire, that he could not give any public Audience.
Mean while a Ship did afterward come thither from Quelang, which the General
had privately permitted to go away again with Provisions and other Necessaries;
but she was now returned, which his Highness did not understand, and therefore
the Ambassador must give immediate Order for her to be gone. Hereupon the
Ambassador answered the Mandarins, That it should be done; and desired them to
bring a Pass for the Sloop to go to and fro to carry Tidings, which they
promised without fail to perform.

The sixth, a Servant bringing a Pass from the Mandarin Liu-lavja, for a Vessel
to carry Provisions to and again, said, That the Sloop must at farthest go away
the next Morning.

The seventh against noon, with the Ebb, the Vlaerdings Sloop went down with
certain Writings, kept by Caroli their Clerk and Maurice the Interpreter; but
they returned again, telling, That the Governor of Minjazen would not suffer
any fresh Provisions, as Hogs and Fruitage, to be carried down; whereupon the
Ambassador commanded them to take nothing but the Papers and Writings.

The tenth in the morning Ienko the Interpreter related, That a Chinese Jonk
sent from Batavia to Hoksieu with Pepper and Sandal-wood, was forced (not being
able for contrary Winds to reach her desired Port) to put into Huiting, there
being about forty Chinese in her: The Master of her coming by Land, had been
in Hoksieu to attend the General, but was returned with his Letters, without
effecting any of his proposed Designs.

In the afternoon a Clerk belonging to the Conbon's Secretary came to bring the
Hollanders a Copy of what had been done concerning their Business in Peking,
and also said, That a Currier was come before with Letters, and that in a few
days the express Orders would be there; which News he supposing would be very
acceptable to the Hollanders, he had endeavored to be the first Person that
should bring it. The Ambassador gave little credit to this Report, by reason of
the meanness of the Person that brought it; but told him, If his News were
true, he would remember him with a Present, which he supposed he wanted.

In the evening the Conbon's Factor came, confirming the News which the Poor
Man brought in the morning, and wished the Ambassador Joy in his Masters Name
with the Good Tidings: Whereupon the Ambassador immediately sent to the
Mandarin Liu-lavja for a Pass for the Blyswiiks Sloop, that she might go and
see if the Fly-boat which was ordered to stay at Tinghay till the twelfth
Instant, could yet be found to carry this News to Batavia: To which purpose he
immediately wrote a Letter, enclosing the Copy which came from Peking, to be
Translated at Batavia, he having no time to do it himself: But the desired Pass
came not.

The twelfth in the Morning the Ambassador sent the Blyswiik's Sloop down with
the forementioned Letter, to which he added the Reason why he could not send
before. Mean while all the Governor's Factors came to wish the Ambassador Joy
with the Good Tidings he had received from Peking, moreover desiring, that they
might have leave to Trade with the first.

It was also reported, That Commissioners were come to Complement the Liquean
Agents, and Present them in the Emperor's Name, because it was not thought
convenient to let him come to Peking.

In the Afternoon the Vlaerding's Boat, with the Blyswiik's Sloop, returned,
coming too late to overtake the Polesnip, she having set Sail for Batavia that
morning.

In the evening the Interpreter Ienko told Nobel, That he was ordered the next
Morning to go to the Commissioners that were come from Peking to Complement the
Liquean Agents; but what it was for, he knew not.

The thirteenth the Ambassador sent Ienko to the Mandarin Liu-lavja, to know
the Reason why no Provision might be sent down in the Boat: In Answer to which,
he brought word, That Liu-lavja promised on the morrow to go to the General in
their behalf.

On Sunday in the evening, being the fourteenth, Ienko informed Nobel, That the
General had sent for him to go to the Commissioners about the Liquean Business,
because he had not been there the day before, according to their Request: But
now going thither, the Commissioners asked him if the Hollanders had no
Blood-Corral, little Dogs, and other Trifles to sell: To which Ienko had
replied, That he knew not; but was sure they had Pepper, Sandal-Wood, Cloth,
Crown-Serge, and other such like Commodities.

The fifteenth against Noon, Singlamong's Interpreter came to the Ambassadors
Lodging, who asked him concerning the News that on the eleventh Instant came
thither from Peking, and what the Viceroy thought of it; but he seemed to be
ignorant thereof, which made the Ambassador show him the Letter, and ask him a
second time whither it was true or not, desiring him to take the Copy, and show
it to the Viceroy.

And because the Pass for the Boat to carry down Fresh Provisions was not yet
brought, and that the Steward which furnished the Hollanders with all such
Necessaries, had so often deceived them by delays; therefore it was judged fit
to send a Letter to the General, and therein advise him what trouble they had
continually before they could get any Provision sent down.

The seventeenth in the morning the Mandarin Han-lavja came to visit the
Ambassador, who among other Discourse asked him, If when he desired to speak
with the General, he must send notice into the City? To which he replied, That
such was Talavja his Order.

Against Noon the Pass was brought for the Boat, so that the Provisions were
immediately put aboard, That she might be ready to go off at High Water.

The Ambassador wrote a Letter with the Provision to Captain Vander Werf,
advising him of the whole Intrigues of that Place: Notwithstanding all which,
in the Evening Stulburgh and Smitsen came to tell them, That the Chinese would
not let the A kind of Corn.
Kadjang pass, saying, It must first be grown'd, before the Netherlanders
should transport it; supposing, since they carried such great Quantities out,
that they might sow it in some other place: Whereupon although the Ambassador
himself went to the Steward Onquemoy, yet he prevailed no more, but that the
Kadjang was weighed, and ten Picol sent aboard, with some other Provision for
the Ships.

The same day the Commissioner sent from Peking to meet the Liquean Agents,
came to the Lodge to see the Horses and Oxen, whom the Hollanders civilly
entertained.

The eighteenth in the morning Hanlavja the Mandarin came to acquaint the
Ambassador, That the General would speak with him as soon as he pleased, and
that he might bring the Presents.

In the afternoon the General sent the Ambassador two Letters written from the
Emperor at Peking, concerning his Business; which having perused, they
consulted about the delivery of the Presents.

It was judged fit, that those intended for the Viceroy Singlamong, should be
delivered to him first, he being the Chief in Quality: Upon which Result, the
Ambassador immediately sent Factor Lapra thither, to complement his Highness,
and deliver him the Presents sent from Batavia: But the Viceroy being busied
about entertaining the Emperors Commissioner, nothing for the present was done
in it.

The nineteenth in the forenoon the Netherlanders preparing themselves, first
went to the General with his Presents, where coming, and being seated as
formerly, after complemental Salutes, the Ambassador thanked him for his kind
Writing in the Hollanders behalf to Peking, and told him, that they had brought
the Presents along with them, sent to his Highness from the Lord General and
Indian Council, which they entreated him to accept: But Siangpovi refusing,
said, That till such time as the Emperor had his, and they were returned from
Peking, he could not receive them; but advised the Ambassador to have all
things in a readiness for his Repair to Peking, which he believed would be
within ten or twelve days. Whereupon the Ambassador desired, That in regard of
the present Winter, and for that the Trade was not finished, it might be put
off till February. To which Talavja answered, That in the Journey the Emperor's
Orders must be followed and observed in all Points, and that the Ambassador
ought to have all things in readiness: As to what concerned the Trade, he would
be assistant to him, that it might speedily be finished: And notwithstanding it
was a Custom, that the Ambassadors must first deliver their Presents, before
they were permitted to Trade; yet because the Hollanders were come from such
remote Countries, and also that they might the better defray their Expenses, he
granted them to Trade before they went. Then after a handsome Treat, with many
thanks to his Highness for his Kindness toward them, they returned to the
Lodge.

The twentieth about daybreak the Vlaerding's Boat arrived there from
Netherland Haven, with the Commanders Hendrick Bommer and Peter Iohnz de Vlieg:
The Pilots Mate also delivered a Letter to the Ambassador from Captain Vander
Werf, advising him, That he had received all the Provisions sent with the Boat
in safety; but he doubted that they lay in some danger, because several Jonks
of War came daily Cruising there, and several Guards were placed between the
Straits of Minjazen, and more Guns planted every where.

The same day, according to Order, the Lord Hoorn went with the Presents to
Singlamong's Palace; where coming, and some Complements passed, the Ambassador
requested his Highness to accept of what he had brought; to which he answered,
That since the Business went well at Peking, he kindly accepted of them, and
ordered them to be delivered to him. Then he asked Nobel, who was there
present, if he had not put them in the right way, when he told them, That if
they sent an Ambassador to the Emperor, they could not miss their Desires? and
that for the future they might rely on his Judgment. The Ambassador asking his
Highness how he would please to Order his Journey, and when it would be?
replied, That the Letter from the Hopous and Pingtouws was expected there in
five or six days, to provide Coelies, which are Porters, Vessels, and other
Necessaries for his accommodation, and that then he should know exactly when he
was to set forth. After the Presents were opened before him, and he seeming to
be well pleased with them, he asked the Ambassador, spying some rich Furrs
amongst the Goods, if there was cold Weather in his Country? who answered Yes;
and pointing at the Furrs, said he should Clothe himself well with them. After
a slight Caress the Hollanders desired leave to depart, which was granted
them, his Highness excusing himself, that because of his Distemper he could not
be present to Entertain the Ambassador, who with all his Attendants went again
to the Lodge.

The one and twentieth the Conbon's Factor came to tell the Ambassador, That if
he pleased, he might that day come and speak with his Master: whereupon the
Ambassador laying hold of the opportunity, went immediately thither; coming to
his Palace, and the first Ceremonies passed, the Ambassador desired him to
accept the Presents, which with much persuasions and many arguments he did.
Then the Ambassador desired him, that since he had always assisted the
Hollanders, he would now also be pleased to continue his favor by Letters of
Recommendation to Peking in their behalf; which he promised.

The one and twentieth and two and twentieth the Governors Factors came again
to Nobel to Treat with him about the Price of their Goods, yet returned without
making any Conclusion.

The twenty third nothing happened worth observation.

The twenty fourth the Generals Factors came to fetch their Majesty's Presents.

And now in regard the time began to approach when the Dutch Ships were to Sail
from the Coast, and the Emperors Letter came thither the eighteenth Instant,
yet the Ambassador had not received the least benefit of it more than before,
because the Chinese Merchants, so long as no other Bills were put up before the
Lodge than what had been there ever since his coming, they durst not come to
buy the Netherland Commodities; therefore he wrote a Letter to the General,
That since the Emperors Letter was come from Peking, he did not doubt but the
Trade might be driven, and Proclamations of his Majesty's Letters be put up, as
in their former Years; and also that the little Ship might be suffered to go
down to fetch some Merchandise. This Letter translated into the Chinese Tongue
the Interpreter would not carry; neither were the Hollanders suffered by the
General's Order to come into the City; wherefore it was unanimously concluded,
That the Ambassador should immediately in Person go to the General, and tell
him the Contents of it verbatim, with many other things; and if his Excellency
should be stopped at the City Gates, he should return without taking any
further notice, and then send away the Blyswiik without a Pass.

The Ambassador hereupon made himself ready to go to the Court; but going to
sit in his Sedan, or Palakin, there were no Coelies, or Porters to be had to
carry it, the Mandarin that kept the Guard at the Lodge having forbidden them:
Yet resolving to prosecute his Design, he went thither on foot, notwithstanding
it was above an hours Walk: coming to the City Gates he was stopped a little,
because the Soldiers that were on the Guard would first send to acquaint the
General with it before they would let him in: whereupon he going back a little,
asked the Guards if they had order to keep him out? who though they made the
former Answer, yet suffered him to pass; whereupon sending notice to the
General of his being there, after several Excuses he was admitted and brought
before him; by whom being placed, he desired him to excuse the Hollanders for
being thus troublesome to him, as being forced thereto: for whereas they hoped,
that after the coming of the Emperor's Letter they should have been permitted
to drive their Trade, and enjoy more freedom than before; on the contrary, it
was worse and worse: for their Letters could not be delivered, nor their People
admitted into the City: nay more, the Mandarin that had the Guard of the Lodge
had forbid the Coelies to do their duty to himself. To which the General
answered, That he never forbid the Coelies, nor had given order to keep him out
at the Gates; but that it was only meant to the Seamen, that came to buy
several things in the City which he would not suffer. Then the Ambassador
delivered him the Letter writ that Morning; which having read, he answered,
That the little Ship might go down freely; to which purpose he would send
either a Pass or a Mandarin. The Trade granted by the Emperor he also permitted
them in the same manner. Moreover he would order other Bills to be writ, and
put before the Lodge, that the Netherlanders might Trade with whom they would;
but they must remember not to buy any Goods which in the Proclamation were
forbidden to be Transported, viz. Silk, Pelangs, Panjes, and the like Stuffs.
And as concerning their Merchandise, they held them up too high, etc.

Nobel hearing him speak of Trade (which was his Business) answered, That they
did not set too high a value on their Commodities, but that the Factors would
not give so much for them now as heretofore, and if they should dispose of
their Goods at their Rates they should lose by them; therefore desired his
Highness to send other People to deal with them, not being willing to have to
do with his Factors.

Hereupon the General seeming to be somewhat displeased, diverted the
Discourse, asking the Ambassador when he would take his Journey? he replied,
When the Trade was finished; also that several Goods to be given to the Council
must be fetched from Netherland Haven: To which he made no Answer, but looked
strange when he heard the Council of State mentioned.

Then the Ambassador told him by his Interpreter, That as he would be obedient
to his Highness in all things, and govern himself, according to the Custom of
the Country; so he hoped the General would give order that he might not lose
his Reputation, nor be slighted; desiring his Highness to take notice, that he
was the Representative of the Netherland Nation, and would rather die than his
Masters, the States of Holland, should suffer any Reproach through his
miscarriage. To which he replied, That no such thing was intended, that should
either be a prejudice to their Honor, or dissatisfaction to himself as their
Ambassador. Whereupon he requested, that his Highness would give order to his
Factor for the sudden dispatch of the Trade, as he would also to Nobel.

In the Afternoon the Mandarin Liu-lavja came to the Lodge, being sent from the
General to the Ambassador, with two exact Copies of the Letters from Peking,
who asked him if he would sell all his Commodities there, or carry them to
Peking? To which he answered, That he would vend them there. Moreover, the
Mandarin desired to have a List of his Followers that were to attend him in his
Embassy to Peking, that he might provide Coelies for him. He promised also to
bring a Pass for the Ship the next Morning; and likewise Bills to stick up
before the Lodge.

The twenty ninth and thirtieth nothing happened of note.

In the Evening the first of December the Blyswiik set Sail, Laden with several
December.
fresh Provisions for the Ships in Netherland Haven and at Tenhay.

Next Morning Harthouwer and Vander Does went with the Boat to Netherland
Haven, to take an exact account of all the Money and Goods seized on and taken
from the Chinese, and to send them with the ten Chests of Silver belonging to
the Company, with the Blyswiik Frigate to Lamthay near Hoksieu, where the
Ambassador resided with his Retinue.

The fourth the Factors, after having some days before agreed on the Prices of
the Goods, began in the presence of the two Mandarins, Liu and Liu-lavja, to
weigh and receive the Pepper at the Lodge.

The Ambassador also the same day writ to the General to this effect:

THe Prices of the Merchandise are now agreed on, and the two Ships may come
into the River up to the Town; but the great Ship at Tenhay must deliver her
Goods there: That the Ambassador depends upon Talavja's goodness; wherefore he
was emboldned to request, that the two Ships might come one by one up to the
Tower: to which purpose he desired they might have Passes, that so the
Merchandise might be taken out of them with the more convenience and celerity:
That if Talavja would please to order, that the Pepper and Sandal Wood might be
weighed by the Factors below in the Ships, the Ambassador would take it as a
great favor.


This being carried by the Interpreter de Hase, he received this Answer, That
the General would speak with the Factors about it, and then send his Resolution.

The fifth they spent in weighing of Pepper.

The sixth the two Chinese from Batavia came to the Ambassador, desiring that
they might go with him as Interpreters to Peking, having been detained with the
rest of the Prisoners two Months in a Spanish Jonk in Hoksieu, and now set at
liberty upon Security.

The seventh nothing was done.

The eighth in the Morning the Ambassador sent the Interpreter de Hase to the
General, to have an Answer of the Letter sent to him the fourth Instant.

The same day Harthouwer and the Secretary Vander Does came with the Vlaerding
Boat from Netherland Haven, and gave an Account to the Ambassador, That they
had done all things there according to his Excellencies Order; that the
Vlaerding was Unladen of all her Pepper, and the Blyswiik Laden full with
Calicutor and Sandal Wood, so that there was nothing remaining in the Vlaerding
but a little of the forementioned Woods, a small parcel of Tin, and some Lead,
with which they had left the Blyswiik at the great Tower. The seized Chinese
Goods and Moneys they had opened, and added the Coin to the Ambassador's
Accounts. When going down to Netherland Haven they saw Warlike Preparations, of
which making enquiry, they told them that thirty Coxingan Jonks were seen
hovering near the Point of Hoitang: whereupon the Governor of Minjazen received
order, not only to put himself in a posture of Defense, but also to drive them
from the Coast. From thence being got to Netherland Haven, toward the Evening
the Mandarin which kept Guard with the Jonks came aboard the Vlaerding, to
inform them, That several Coxingan Jonks were come to Tenhay, who
counterfeiting themselves carried the Tartars Colors, and that two of them had
put in to Netherland Haven, and he left them there at his coming from thence:
Wherefore the Vlaerdings Boat went thither with the Secretary by the
Night-tyde, to give notice thereof to the Alphen, one of their Vessels, Riding
at an Anchor there, to keep good Watches, and be very careful. When the
Secretary arrived at Tenhay, the Seamen of the Alphen informed him, That the
Night before fifteen Coxingan Coya's (which are little Vessels of forty and
sixty Tun, with a single Mast) had viewed their Ship, but at the firing five
Guns at them they all fled; besides twenty four great Jonks, which only showed
themselves about the Islands, without making any attempt upon their Ship.

The fifth in the Morning fifteen Tartar Jonks coming out of the Hole, Sailed
to the Crocodile Islands, and returned again in the Evening, with intention to
run in at Tenhay; but those of the Alphen firing their Cannon prevented their
Design.

The same day the Interpreter de Hase (who had been sent the fourth Instant to
the General) came back with his Interpreter, to tell the Ambassador in his
Masters Name, That the Ship might freely come up to the Tower, and that he
would write about it to the Governor of Minjazen; and asked moreover, if the
Ambassador would be ready against the twenty fifth Instant to repair to Peking:
To which the Ambassador sent the following Letter as an Answer to the General,
which was to this effect:

THe Ambassador thanks Talavja for his good Inclinations. The Pepper which was
in the Lodge, being about two thousand three hundred Picols, has been
delivered to the Factors; therefore the Ambassador desires that Talavja will be
pleased to order the Factors, that the Allom, Gold-wyre, and other Commodities
may be delivered to the Hopou; that in a little time one of the Ships may Sail
to Batavia, and the Ambassador make himself ready for his Journey to Peking.


About three days after the Ambassador and his whole Retinue were invited to
come to the Viceroy on the eleventh Instant to a Wayang, desiring him also to
bring his Musicians along with him, because he had a great desire to hear them.

The eleventh in the Morning Singlamong's Factor came to the Lodge to wait upon
the Ambassador according to the Invitation: who coming to the Court, and being
conducted to the common Hall, there came some Chinese to him, which two years
since had deserted Coxinga, and submitted to the Tartars; who with the
Netherlanders were also conducted into the Presence, and placed opposite to
each other on his right Hand. He having inquired after the Ambassador's Health,
said that he had no time till then to entertain his Lordship, but seeing so
fair an opportunity, of relaxing from public Concerns, he desired that they
might rejoice and be merry together. Whereupon the Tables being spread with
variety of Dishes, whilstt hey sat and pleased their Palats with diversity of
Acates; their Eyes also were feasted with mimick Entries of several
Antimasques; when the Viceroy desired some of their Music, and to hear their
Musicians Play, which filled up the Intermeans with great satisfaction. Thus
having spent most part of the day with a continued Feast, and variety of
Divertisements, the Ambassador returning Thanks, and they being all in good
humor, took his Leave, and in the Evening went to his Lodgings.

About Noon the next day the Mandarins, Liu and Lavja, came to demand the
detained Chinese Goods, urging many Reasons to that purpose. But the Ambassador
answered, That he neither could nor durst restore them, till he had Orders from
Batavia. Which Demand and Answer raised a great Heat on both sides: Whereupon
the Ambassador, by the advice of his Council, sent a Letter to Talavja, the
substance whereof follows:

THat the Ambassador has always received favor and respect from Talavja, for
which he is very thankful; yet he has now sent twice to command him to restore
the Goods belonging to the Chinese that came from Batavia: The General well
knows, he was desired to take notice, that the Chinese have driven a private
Trade formerly in the Holland Ships, and with their Commodities; therefore the
Lord General had directed the Ambassador to observe them strictly and prevent
it: That his Highness would be pleased to consider, that the Ambassador cannot
restore them without order from his Masters; therefore he desires the General
to have patience till he had writ to them and received their Answer: That he
shall, according to Talavja's Pleasure, use all means possible to persuade that
the Goods may be restored, and then he shall be satisfied, and the Ambassador
be blameless.


The General's Factor came the same day to invite the Ambassador to another
Feast or Wayang, and desired him in his Masters behalf that he would bring his
Music with him, because he was very desirous to hear them. To which he
answered, That he would be there at the appointed time, and satisfy his
Masters Request.

The fifteenth in the Morning the Interpreter Ienko went with the
forementioned Letter to the Court, to show it the General: from whence
returning he brought in Answer, That his Highness expected him at Dinner, and
then he would talk further. But before he went he advised with his Council,
what was best to be answered, if the General should first move the Business,
and ask where the Goods were? what they amounted to? where they would leave
them while they took their Journey to Peking? and if they intended to restore
them or not? 'Twas judged convenient, that to the General's Question, Where the
Goods were? the Ambassador should answer, Aboard the several Ships: The value
of them, and what they were? They would give an account of at convenient time:
concerning the restoring them, he should say, That it could not be done without
order from Batavia: and if he asked where they would leave them? to reply, That
the Money should be made use of for their Expenses; but withal to assure him,
that no part of it should be diminished, but upon Orders from Batavia be
repaid.

Hereupon the Ambassador went to the Court with all his Attendants: where
coming, and having stayed a short space in the common Hall, they were conducted
into an Antichamber near the public Place of Audience: where the General sat
on a Stool before a Table, with other Tables standing on both sides of him,
furnished with several Dishes. The Ambassador was placed next Talavja, and his
chief Followers on Benches on each Hand of him; when being all seated, they
were served very plentifully with variety of Meats and Drinks, and betwixt
their Courses Farces presented to them, whilst the General drank very freely,
and pressed the Hollanders to turn up their Bowls and be merry. After having
spent some time, the Ambassador's Music was ordered to Play; with which the
General was much delighted. The time approaching for their departure, the
Interpreter bid the Ambassador speak to his Highness about the Chinese Goods:
which caused him to ask if he had received the Letter which he had sent to him
in the Morning? who replied, Yes, he had, and understood the Contents. Moreover
he said, That in the time of the War some of the Chinese Inhabitants fled,
which now in time of Peace came to their Country again, bringing with them
what by long trouble and labor they had got together: He had spoke with the
Viceroy about it, who also thought it was an unhandsom action to detain their
Goods; and therefore he would have them restored, having an Inventory of them
from the poor Men they were taken from.

The Ambassador in answer thereto replied, That he would not contest with the
General, but that he could not, nor durst restore them, but if he would take
them by force he might. To which the General making no reply, changed his
Discourse, saying, That a Chinese Jonk coming from Batavia was cast away before
Canton, whose chief Commander very well knew the Ambassador and Constantine
Nobel: wherefore he asked if that Jonk came in company with them from Batavia?
and if the Ambassador knew any thing concerning it? who answered, That he was
ignorant of it, much less that they came with them from Batavia. Which
Discourse ended, the Ambassador desired leave to depart, which was accordingly
granted.

The same day the Conbon's Factors came to invite him on the sixteenth to a
Feast, or Wayang, to which he promised to come.

The sixteenth nothing passed worthy of observation, only the Factors
delivered some Allom.

According to the Invitation on the fifteenth by the Conbon's Factors, the
Ambassador went thither with his Attendants; and coming to his Palace he was
conducted into a Hall, when after a short stay, because some Mandarins were
busy with the Conbon, he was called into the Presence Chamber, where the
Tables were ready covered; and being bid Welcome, was desired to sit down at a
Table, standing on the left Hand, and his Attendants each in their respective
Place, where they passed the time in Feasting till the Evening, when the
Ambassador took his Leave of the Conbon and departed.

BUt now to digress a little concerning their Chinese Wayangs, or Stage Plays;
Trigaut.
Trigaut reports that they are strangely delighted with such Divertisements;
and the Actors on the other side have an extraordinary faculty therein, so that
an incredible number of their Youth maintain themselves by Acting, every where
showing both Comic and Tragic Presentations.

The first Inventer of their Drammaticks, who (as they say) not only writ, but
taught them Action, and how to tread the Stage, was one Sheeking; who for his
merits in such Poesy stands ranked in no mean Place amongst their Gods, and
held in especial Veneration by the Actors; for they never begin their
Interludes before a solemn Invocation and Offering made to him their chief
Deity; nay, so much are they devoted to his Worship, that the meanest amongst
them wears his Effigies, or Medal, hanging by his Side, always imploring that
he would please to strengthen their Memory, and quicken their Fancy, to Act and
Personate well their Parts, never regarding to understand their Author, more
than ours do: but in such esteem did the Chinese hold them, that all their
Thanksgivings for their Deliverances and Victories, are instead of Christian
Devotion and solemn Praises, set forth in glad Eulogiums, adapted to the
several Stories, with various Personatings on the Stage. Some are such as
having a kind of License, strolling from Town to Town through the Empire to
erect Stages; others have Theaters settled in the chief Cities, and sent for
from thence upon all occasions, to Act such Plays as are desired, at all
celebrated Feasts to heighten their Entertainments: To which purpose they have
a Book with a Catalogue of what they are ready to Act, being commonly true
Stories set forth in a Poetical Dress. They deliver their Parts in a kind of
Tone betwixt Speaking and Singing, such as we call Chanting, varying according
to the Argument and Humor they present. Their Habits when they represent
Tragicks are very gaudy; their Comicks as ours, according to their Matters. But
although they observe all the Decorums and Ornaments of the Stage as much as
any in Europe, yet none, even of the meanest Chinese, in their Lives and
Conversations are more debauched and vicious.

The eighteenth nothing happened of any note, being spent only in the receiving
of China Roots and Quicksilver.

The nineteenth the Secretary at his going out met accidentally with two
Hollanders, which seemed to be Strangers, and were carrry'd on traveling
Chairs made of Canes, who saluted the Secretary with taking off their Hats, but
passing by a great pace, as in transitu, he had no time to speak to them.

The Interpreter de Hase acquainted the Ambassador, that he had heard from some
Chinese, that a Holland Ship was arrived at Sincheu; who making enquiry after
it, was informed that two Holland Ships lay at Sanchefoe; and also that two
Hollanders belonging to the said Ships were that Morning gone to the General.

In the Afternoon the Mandarin Liu-lavja came to tell the Ambassador from the
General, that he was to take but twenty of his Train with him to Hoksieu:
whereupon the Ambassador asked if the Horses and Oxen should not be brought up
to Peking* for then more Men would be necessarily required? but he would leave
it to the General to order as many as he pleased. He also asked if there had
been no Hollanders with the General? he replied, That when he came from
Talavja's Court he saw two Hollanders stand at the Door, which were come
thither by Land from Sincheu, but that he knew not in what Ship they came
thither.

The twenty fourth in the Morning the General's Interpreter came to the Lodge,
to tell the Ambassador from his Lord, that the Vessels, Horses, Coelies, and
all things necessary for the Journey were now ready, therefore asked when he
would please to set forward? Moreover he said, That a Mandarin was come from
the Viceroy Singlamong, to know the time; and that he did m^h wonder what made
the Netherlanders so dilatory in the Journey, which at first they were so hasty
for; therefore he desired them to appoint the certain Day, that he might
acquaint his Master. Which the Ambassador thus answered, That there were some
Goods yet remaining in the Ships which were for the Lipovies, that must be
unladen and packed up before he could go; and also the Trade must be finished,
and the Factors Goods be delivered, because the Hopou Nobel must go with him.
On which the Interpreter asked, how long time it required before all could be
finished? In a short time, replied the Ambassador, it may be done, if they
ascertain their Weights, and deliver their Silk according to the Patterns.

While they were arguing these Matters, the Mandarins, Liu and Liu-lavja came
to the Lodge with Orders from the General; in which he commanded that the
Netherlanders should restore the seized Chinese Goods; which were to this
purpose:

THe General of Fokien helps his Natives. Liu and Liu-lavja, both Mandarins,
have acquainted the General in Writing concerning the Batavian Chinese Goods,
detained in the Netherland Ships; which the General sends this Mandarin to
fetch thence: To which purpose the Ambassador is hereby desired to send one of
his Servants to go down with him to show the Goods, that they may be taken
away: When they are come hither, the Chinese shall set them down Piece by
Piece, and show them to the General; then after further Orders from the Emperor
they shall be delivered to the Owners. The Chinese are also commanded to keep
an exact account of what Goods are brought up of theirs in the Barque to
Lamthay.


Hereupon the Ambassador told them, that Nobel, Harthouwer, and Vander Does
should go to the General, to ask if that were his Will and Command: To which
the Mandarins replied, That they would stay and go with them, to hear Talavja's
Order, and govern themselves accordingly. The Mandarin Liu-lavja also said,
That two Hollanders which had been at Tayowan, were now at the Generals, and
asked if the Ambassador knew them? who answered, How should he know them, when
he had never seen them; but desired that they might be shown to some of his
Servants, who might perhaps know them.

Dinner being ended, Nobel, Harthouwer, and the Secretary Vander Does, went
with the forementioned Orders to the General; into whose Presence after some
stay being admitted, they asked if that was his Highness's Writing and Order?
whereupon he answering Yes, pointed to the Seal, saying, That it was his, and
none else gave such a Mark; and therefore he wondered why they detained the
Goods; but there were two Hollanders come thither, which he would give them. To
which they replied, That as to what concerned their Contrymen, if his
Highness did restore them, they would be thankful for it; but they could not
deliver the Chinese Goods without Orders from Batavia; that the Ambassador had
seized them in the Lord Maetzuiker's Name, being brought by the Chinese
against his Order, in stead of Necessaries; therefore if the Ambassador could
restore them again without his knowledge, they desired his Highness to
consider: who replied, That he was a great Lord, and also one of the Lipous, he
did not desire the Goods, but was obliged, they being his Subjects, to speak
for them: whereto was answered, That the Ambassador was also a Person of
Quality, and one of the Indian Council, neither did he desire the Goods, nay,
rather wished they had not been brought aboard; but since it was so, he could
not let them go without Order: whereupon the General said, He should let the
Business rest, till News came about it from the Emperor; but when his Imperial
Majesty commanded the Netherlanders, then they must restore them whether they
were willing or not: then changing his Discourse, asked when the Ambassador
would go his Journey; and all the Coelies, Horses, and Vessels being now ready,
he could not imagine what was now wanting; he had writ to the Emperor three
times that the Ambassador should come up, but he saw as yet no likelihood of
it, therefore knew not what he might think; whatever they had requested of him
he had granted, yet still they came with new Desires, so that he knew not how
to deal with them, nor could imagine why they came thither; and that they now
gave him cause to think they were a People, on whose Words was no depending,
saying one thing to day, and another to morrow. Hereupon he was answered, That
they stayed only for the Trade, because the Hopou Nobel must go to Peking, but
before he could go the Trade must be finished. To which the General replied,
That he had granted them to Trade, he had provided Barques and Jonks for the
unlading of their Commodities; nay more, that one of the Ships might come up to
the Tower, that they might make the quicker dispatch: and it was true, that he
had commanded no Quicksilver should be Transported, because the Emperor had
forbid it; however, he would have winked at it; but because the Netherlanders
had told some of his Mandarins, that they had got it from the Viceroy, he
would have it taken away again, and not suffer one Conderin weight to be
Transported. As to what concerned the other Commodities A Conderin is a small
Chinese Weight.
which were not prohibited, the Netherlanders might carry out as many as they
pleased. Whereupon he was answered, That they did not know who had told any of
his Mandarins that the Quicksilver was bought of the Viceroy, but that the
Factors were the occasion of all those Differences, because they hindered them
in their Business: the Ship lying at the Tower would by this time have been
unladen, if they had proceeded in weighing the Goods as they ought; but they
used false Weights, which the Netherlanders finding out, left the Ship and went
ashore. To which the General answered, That the Pepper in the Ship was mixed
with Sand, and therefore the Factors had used such Weights: The Netherlanders
(said he) would have the repute of fair Dealers, but they are none; for to
mingle their Pepper with Sand and Water was no honest part. To which they
answered, That they knew nothing concerning any such thing, therefore they
would willingly go with any of his Factors Aboard to view the Pepper, in which
if they found either Sand or Water, they would undergo both the penalty and
scandal: In the mean time they urged that they might carry out the Quicksilver
for that time, since it was already Shipped. To which the General made no
Reply, but only that his Factors should the next Morning go Aboard and agree
with them, that the Ambassador might the sooner go set forth to Peking.

The two Europeans were according to Liu-lavja's Promise shown to the
Netherlanders, and found to be Renegado's; the one being the first, that
deserting the Castle Zelandia, on the Island Formosa, went to the Chinese;
which at the first questioning they acknowledged. And according to their
Relation, they were on the eighth Day of the twelfth Moon, in Formosa, and were
come in a Chinese Vessel from thence to Trade to the Coast of China; that only
one Renegado was alive in Tayowan. But the Netherlanders being just at that
instant called to the General, had not time to examine them further; but taking
their leave of him, they desired that they might take the Renegado's along with
them to the Lodge; which the General refusing, said that he must first examine
them.

The twenty fourth in the Morning came the Mandarin Liu-lavja to the Lodge,
with Orders from the General to fetch the Quicksilver out of the Blyswiik
Frigate. Whereupon the Ambassador desiring him to stay a little, wrote the
following Letter to the General.

THe Ambassador knows very well that Talavja is a Person of Honor, and just*
and therefore he is assured, that when he shall be rightly informed of all
things, he will be satisfied. And as to the Quicksilver and Pepper, he hoped
that Dispute was over; That the Ambassador wishes to go to Peking with the
first opportunity, and therefore desires that the Factors may hasten the
unlading of the Ships, that the Presents which are for the Lipous and Lavja's
may be Packed, and put into a readiness.


With this Letter the Interpreter de Hase went to the General, but brought no
other Answer than this, That the Ambassador should shortly know his Mind.

The Emperor's Factors having been with Nobel, they told him, That they would
not deliver any Silk, but pay him for his Commodities with ready Money; and
likewise that they would not go to the Tiger Frigate for any more Pepper.

A Mandarin came also to tell the Ambassador in the Generals behalf, That he
must so order his Business, that within ten days he might go to Peking; and
likewise asked for the Names of those that were to go with him.

The twenty fifth in the Morning the Council resolved to make preparation for
the Packing of the Presents, according to the Inventory written by Nobel on the
eleventh Instant, that the General might see the Ambassador resolved to go; and
also that Nobel and Harthouwer should go to the Factors, and ask them if they
would go down to receive any more Pepper or not? and likewise to speak with
Singlamong's prime Factors concerning the Silk, and tell him, That the
Ambassador was to take his Journey a few days hence; therefore they must in
short declare their Intentions, that the Hollanders might govern themselves
accordingly; and also endeavor to make them abate the Price of the course Silk;
in which Case they should be empowered to make an Agreement. Moreover it was
concluded, that a List of the Names of those Persons that were to go to Peking
should be sent to Talavja, being in number twenty seven Hollanders and six
Blacks; all which was accordingly performed.

In the Afternoon two Interpreters came to the Lodge from the General to tell
the Ambassador, That the Quicksilver must be taken out of the Ships again,
because it was publicly known, and would come to the Emperor's Ear, who had
prohibited it: but hereafter if they kept it private, the Netherlanders might
carry out as much as they would. To which the Ambassador answered, That there
were Mandarins gone to the Ships to fetch it out; and if the Ship should chance
to be gone to Netherland Haven, he would give order that the Quicksilver
should be kept in it and brought up again; for which he promised to be Security
till it was done. Moreover the Ambassador bid them tell Talavja, That they were
now busily Packing up their Goods, to be ready against the limited time of ten
days; therefore he desired him to command his Factors to make an end of the
Trade.

In the Afternoon, a Seaman came in a Batziang from Netherland Haven, with a
Letter from Captain John Vander Werf, Dated the twenty fifth instant, from the
Vlaerding Frigate; by which he advised the Ambassador, that three Mandarins were
come from the General aboard the Vlaerding, and commanded him, that he should
not take the Quicksilver out of the Blyswiik, till further Order; Wherefore he
desired to know, what he was to do in that affair.

Hereupon the Ambassador wrote immediately an answer: That since the General
had prohibited Quicksilver, he might let it remain in the Blyswiik, and with
the rest of the Goods out of the Vlaerding; and what was more wanting, to make
up her full Lading, he might take out of the Constance, and (as soon as he
could) also come himself.

The six and twentieth, the Lord Van Hoorn observing that the sending away of
the Vlaerding could be no longer put off, wrote a Letter concerning it to this
purpose to the General.

THe Ambassador shall never fail to acknowledge Talavja's Favors in all A
Letter to the General Talavja.
things, and accordingly, makes himself ready, that he may with the first
opportunity go to Peking, and therefore as a token of his Respect, he gives
notice to Talavja, that in four days time, a Ship shall go to Batavia; as also,
two more a little after; therefore if his Highness will please to write to the
Lord General and Indian Council in Batavia, it will be well, but it is at his
own option.


With this Letter Harthouwer went to Talavja, who being busy about other
affairs, so that he could not speak with himself, he sent the Letter by his
Interpreter, and bid him tell his Master, that the reason why they had some
days since desired that the other Ship might come up to the Tower was, because
the Factors would not receive the Pepper out of that Ship there present.

The Interpreter coming back, brought this answer.

THat having received the Ambassador's Letter, and understood the Contents The
General's Answer.
of it, he would the next Morning send him an answer by some of his Mandarins;
but let him know before, that not above twenty Persons in all could go with the
Ambassador to Peking, because the Emperor had so Commanded.


He also caused the two Mandarins that were to go with the Hollanders to tell
Harthouwer, that if they had ought else to request of the General, they should
do it speedily, because they had Order to grant it.

Mean while, Nobel went to the Governors Factors to receive Money of them in
stead of Silk; Who answered him, That they would pay their Debt within three or
four days.

At the same time, the Viceroy and General's Interpreters came to tell the
Ambassador, that it would be necessary to be ready for his intended Journey in
five days. To which Van Hoorn answered, That he would endeavor (if possible) to
obey their Highnesses Commands, having already put the business in good
forwardness.

The two Mandarins which were appointed to go to Peking, came to have the List
of the Names of his Attendants. Nobel desires a Pass for the Blyswiik Frigate.


In the Morning, being the twenty ninth, Nobel according to their resolution
taken the day before, went to the General with a Letter, to desire a Pass of
him for the Blyswiik Frigate to go down again: The Contents of which were as
follows.

THe Ambassador hopes that Talavja will not be offended for coming again
Nobel's Request to the General.
to beg a Request of him, being now ready to set forth toward Peking; in which
regard, and for that he must write all his business at large to the Lord
Maetzuiker in Batavia; therefore the Ambassador desires, that the small Vessel
may go again to Tinghay, to take the Goods out of the great Ship, and that he
will please to grant a Pass for her, and the Boat with fresh Provisions; and
also that he will send half a dozen Jonks with them to fetch Goods from Tinghay
to Lamthay, that then they might finish their Trade, and the Ships go away; for
which the Ambassador shall most highly be oblieg'd to Talavja and the Emperor.

The Ambassador has understood by the Hopou, that two Netherlanders are
brought Prisoners to Talavja, which he desires may be permitted to come and
speak with him.


Nobel coming back, related that he could not speak with the General, but sent
him the Letter by his Interpreter; Who brought answer, That he should not fail
to hear from him in the Afternoon; which was accordingly performed: for the
Mandarins, Liu and Liu-lavja, came to the Lodge to tell the Ambassador, That
the Netherland Ships must be unladen in five days, and the Constance Frigate
might freely come up to the Tower, that they might the sooner be unfreighted;
but no Ship might go away before the seized on Chinese Goods were come ashore;
that all things must be ready for their Journey in fifteen days; and that three
and twenty Hollanders might go to Peking, but not more. The Secretary, because
he was a Scholar, might not go to Peking with the Ambassador, but the General
would give order for two Interpreters. For the unlading of the Alphen at Tenhay
the General would send six Jonks thither with the Blyswiik; and likewise a Pass
for the forementioned Frigate to go down again.

To the rest of their Desires Talavja had sent them no Answer.

The General's trusty or chief Factor, called Liu, came two several times to
The General's Factor's Proffer to Nobel.
Nobel the same day with another Story, That if they would, they should only
address themselves to him, and he would do their Business; and that his Master
had so much ready kindness for them, that he aimed at nothing more than to
please their King Maetzuiker, by giving them all the dispatch and satisfaction
he might.

To this civil Proffer (which the other Factors had chosen him to present)
Nobel's Answer.
Nobel replied, That they would willingly deal for some Silks, if they would
let them have the best, as they would do by them. Whereupon the Factor replied,
That he would consult with the rest, and doubted not but to please them.

But as to that part of Siangpovi's Resolve, That nothing should be done unless
the Chinese Goods were restored, the Ambassador and his Council considering,
unanimously agreed, That the Goods should be put into such a posture, that they
might take them and convey them from thence, as if by force, leaving an outward
Door locked, on purpose to be broke open.

The thirtieth in the Morning the Interpreter de Hase, according to yesterdays
Resolution, went to Talavja's Court to him with a Letter, which was to this
effect:

THat the Ambassador congratulates Talavja's noble Disposition, in granting
that the Ships shall be unfreighted. The Ambassador will endeavor to be ready
to go to Peking in fifteen days. He will satisfy Talavja about the Chinese
Goods, that then the Holland Ships may go to Batavia; upon which he desires
some private Conference.


This Letter was no sooner delivered, but there came Orders quite contrary,
That the term of fifteen days was too long for their departure; That no Ships
should Sail from thence before the Ambassador's return from Peking: At which
the Ambassador much startled, replied, That it seemed very strange to him; for
yesterday the Mandarins, Liu and Liulavja, had told him quite otherwise; so
that he knew not what to say, or which to believe, for sure they could not both
be the General's Order.

On the one and thirtieth the Ambassador sent Nobel and Vander Does to the
General, to ask him if he would write any thing to the Lord Maetzuiker by the
Ship that was the next Morning to set Sail for Batavia, and to assure him, that
since he had been pleased to command no Ship might go to Batavia, before the
seized on Chinese Goods were brought ashore to the Lodge, That the
forementioned Goods were not in that Ship; but if he would please to send any
of his Mandarins they should be shown him where they were, that if he would he
might take them, and they satisfy Talavja in all Points; and likewise that the
Ambassador would be ready in eight days to go to Peking; in the mean while
desiring him to give order for the six promised Jonks, and a Pass for the
Blyswiik, that with the Jonks she might go to Tenhay, and there unlade the
great Ship.

Nobel and Vander Does going to the Court, and having acquainted Talavja with
their coming, he sent for his chief Factor Liu to receive their Message; Novel
and Vander Does Discourse with the General.
of which having notice they were admitted, when the General told them, That as
to what concerned the Ship, it could not go away before the Ambassador went to
Peking, it being customary there, that any Vessel which brought an Ambassador,
could not be dismissed till he had made his Address in Person to the Emperor.
To which they replied, That the Ship was sent to Batavia only to give an
account of their Proceedings hitherto; which ought to have been done two
Months since, according to their Orders, but it was put off upon his
Highness's desire; but now it neither must nor could be any longer delayed,
because the Lord General, during the Ambassador's arrival there, having
received no news of his Excellencies Adventures and success in his Embassy,
would not know what to think, and they coming to Batavia, suffer for their
supine negligence.

The General replied, He advised the Hollanders not to let the Ship go away His
Answer.
without his Order, because there were Jonks in Netherland Haven to prevent
her; which would cause some clashing, and perhaps mischief might be done, which
was much better to be avoided; neither should their stay be longer than two
days at most: in which time the Viceroy Singlamong would come home again, with
whom he would consult, and then send for Nobel to the Court, and give him their
Resolution. Concerning the Chinese Goods, he desired them not, they might leave
them aboard, or bring them ashore as they pleased themselves, till Orders came
from the Emperor. That he had given order for the Jonks, and also a Pass for
the Blyswiik, but he made no mention of the time limited for the Ambassador's
departure, only that when he came to Peking, he should strictly observe what
he said or did.

Then the Hollanders asking the General for the two Renegado's, he replied,
That they were conveyed to Canton, where, they said, their Parents and Friends
lived; and withal, that they were no Hollanders.

Whilst Nobel and Vander Does were at the General's, the Mandarin Liulavja came
again to the Lodge about the Chinese Goods, but was sent away again till their
return; when they were informed of Talavja's Order, and told, that it was
convenient to take the Goods out of the Blyswiik (in which they were) and bring
them ashore: whereupon Liu-lavja desired to go thither, that having seen them,
he could give the better account thereof to Talavja; which being granted, he
and two other Mandarins went with Nobel and Vander Does to the Blyswiik, lying
about half a League from the Bridge; from whence they returned with the Goods
in the Evening.

The first of January, Anno 1667. the Blyswiik Frigate set Sail, laden with
Goods January 1667.
for the Coast of Coromandel, consisting in course Tee, Chests of Gold-wyre,
Blyswiik Frigate sets Sail.
Allom, and likewise Quicksilver, sent Aboard by the Factors the day before.
The Commanders of the Frigate had order, that after the delivery of the Goods
into the Vlaerding, they should immediately steer to Tenhay, to unlade the Ship
Alphen into the six Jonks.

The second in the Morning Captain John Vanderwerf went with a Batsiang to
Netherland Haven, to make himself ready, and prepare the Vlaerding to Sail for
the Coast of Coromandel so soon as the Ambassador should give order. He had
also three Letters given him; one for the Master of the Alphen lying at Tenhay,
to acquaint him of the six Jonks coming to unlade his Ship, and likewise to
order him to hasten the Business; the second was to the Master of the
Constance, Peter Iansz de Vlieg, by which he was commanded with all speed to
come to the great Tower to unlade there, that the Ships might be cleared for
their departure; the third was to the Governor and chief of the Council at
Malacca; by which he was advised of the Ambassador's arrival in China on the
third of August, and his Landing on the twenty fourth at Hoksieu; on which day
he also had Audience granted him by the three prime Governors; that an Order
was come from Peking; the Trade driven, and so brought to pass, that the
Vlaerding Frigate was got ready with her Lading on the first of January, to set
Sail for Malacca.

About Noon the Mandarin Liu-lavja came to the Lodge, being sent (as he said)
Liu-lavja comes to the Netherlanders in the Lodge.
to see the Chinese Goods and tell their Money; which the Ambassador would not
suffer him to do, saying, That if Talavja would take the Goods from him, they
might do what they would with them. Moreover, this Mandarin told them, that the
Hollanders must be ready in eight days to go to Peking, and that not above
twenty four Persons should go along with him; and that three days hence he
would come and take an account of all their Packs and Chests.

The third nothing happened, but that a Parcel of Pepper and Sandal Wood was
delivered to the Factors, as also the next day after.

Furthermore, the General promised, so soon as the Viceroy Singlamong was come
home, to speak about the Ships going to the Coast of Coromandel, and that then
he sending to Nobel would give him an account of it: But this was hitherto not
done, and three days already passed since Singlamong's coming home, and no
Person come from Talavja to call Nobel; Therefore it was judged convenient
(since the utmost time for the Ships departure was at hand, and that it already
was the fourth of January) to send Nobel and the Secretary Vander Does the next
Morning to the General's, to put him in mind of his Promise, and also tell him
that the Ship must go away the day following, though no order was given, which
they desired his Highness would not take ill. Nobel and Vander Does go to the
General.


The fifth in the Morning Nobel and the Secretary went to the General, but
found him not at home, being gone to the Viceroy's; but having stayed a little
while, he returning: by his Interpreters they acquainted him with the occasion
of their coming. To which he answered, That he had spoke with the Viceroy
about the Ships going away, who would not by any means permit it; and advised
them to go to him themselves, to see if they could persuade him to it, which
they did; but coming thither could not be admitted to his Presence: for
Singlamong, informed of their coming, sent them word, that they should come
again the next Morning (because at that time he was troubled with the Gripes,
and weary with Travel) and that then he would give them Audience. On which it
was resolved to give their Highnesses full satisfaction, and to put off the
Vlaerdings departure so long.

Mean while the General's Factor called Thesin, came to tell the Ambassador,
That he had understood of his Master, that the Ship might be gone, but that
Hogenhoek must first speak with the Governor of Minjazen about it.

In the Afternoon the two Mandarins, Liu and Liu-lavja, came to the Lodge with
an Order from the General, to fetch all the Chinese Goods from thence, which
was to this effect:

I Give order to Thesin and Haykong, that they carry the Batavian Chinese to
the The General's Order for the seized Batavian Chinese Goods.
Ambassador, that they may see their Goods; and that then these Mandarins shall
deliver them Parcel by Parcel to Tsiong and Sinshong, who shall be careful to
look after them till farther order, that they may not be diminished. If the
Hollanders have opened the Chests, and taken any thing out of them, it is very
ill done; therefore if any of them be missing, Thesin and Haykong must speak
with the Ambassador about it, and desire him to restore them. Moreover an Order
is expected from the Emperor, which when it comes, the Goods shall be again
restored to the Batavian Chinese.


On which Order, without asking for them, they took away those Goods Are
carried away.
that were nearest at hand, and of small consequence, opening the Chests, and
carrying them to their appointed Places; which they also thought to do with the
Money and primest Commodities, standing in the Secretaries Chamber, had not the
Ambassador prevented them; for the Netherlanders would not deliver those
themselves, but only showed them where they were; from whence they fetched
their own Servants, and went to convey them out of the Lodge; which again was
hindered by the Ambassador, who would first have the Goods weighed, and the
Money told to them: He would moreover have a Receipt of them for so many
several sorts of Commodities and Money for the use of the Batavian Chinese,
which the Mandarins after having looked them over performed, and then went away
with them.

These Goods taken away by force, and the General's Order, it was thought
convenient to Copy out the Receipt signed by the Mandarins, and carry it the
next Morning when Nobel and Vander Does went to the Viceroy, to the General,
and to tell him that the Mandarins, Liu and Liu-lavja, had by his Order taken
the Goods out of the Lodge, of whose number and quantity they had, according to
the Mandarins Receipt, brought him an account and Copy, that if the Goods
hereafter should be diminished, the Netherlanders might be blameless.

The sixteenth in the Morning Nobel and the Secretary went to the Viceroy
Nobel and Vander Does come to the Viceroy.
Singlamong, to speak with him about the Ship; before whom after a little stay
they were brought to have Audience. After he had, according to the Tartars
Custom, inquired of the Ambassador's Health, Nobel and Vander Does told him the
occasion of their coming, viz. That the next day a Ship must go to Batavia. To
which at first he said nothing else, but that they must speak with Talavja
about it, till which time they must defer her going. Whereupon the
Netherlanders told him, that the Ship must upon necessity go to Batavia, and
her going could not be put off any longer, because, according to the Lord
Maetzuiker's Order to the Ambassador, the Ship should have been gone two
Months sooner, to carry news of their safe arrival, and what they had done in
the Trade* and that the Ambassador was to take his Journey to Peking in four or
five days, at which the Lord General would be highly pleased. To which the
Viceroy replied, That they might let the Ship go away privately without
telling any Person of it, and make themselves ready for their Journey; which
done the Viceroy would impart something to them. Morever his earnest Request
was, That nothing might be writ to Batavia of what had hitherto happened.

From thence Nobel and Harthouwer went to the General, that according to Nobel
and Harthouwer go to the General.
yesterdays Resolution they might show him the Receipt for the Chinese Goods;
but before they went thither they sent a Soldier to the Ambassador, to tell him
the Viceroy's Answer. Coming to the General's they were forced to stay a
considerable time before any Person came to them; yet at last one passing by,
they took occasion to send notice of their attendance: who brought them answer,
That he knew of the fetching of the Goods by the Mandarins, Liu and Liu-lavja,
in which they had done very well; and withal that he was busy about his
Offerings, therefore could not grant them Audience, which Cannot be admitted
(...) have Audience.
made them not deliver the Receipt, but return home.

Van Hoorn being informed of the Viceroy's Answer about the Ship, returned,
being on his Way going to Singlamong's prime Factor, who had invited him to a
Feast and Wayang, or Play, in Person to send away the Vlaerdings Boat, which
waited only for order when the forementioned Ship should set Sail. To which
purpose he wrote a Letter to Captain Vander Werf, That the Viceroy had at last
consented that he might set Sail with his Ship, therefore he should put to Sea
with as much silence as he could, without looking for any thing.

The Indian Council at Batavia seemed much concerned to hear News of the
Ambassador's success in China; whom at his coming from thence they had
commanded, that he should endeavor from Peking by Moskou, if it were possible,
to send advice to the States of Holland. Therefore it was judged convenient on
the fourth to send with the Vlaerding (for because of the Differences between
the Governors Factors and the Hollanders, about the receiving of the Goods and
delivering of Silks, they had lost their hopes of sending the Tiger time enough
to Batavia, that from thence she might Sail with the last Ships Letters sent to
Holland.
that were bound for Holland) a Copy of the Letter written to Batavia, and sent
by the Polesnip on the eleventh of October, that from Malacca it might be sent
through Persia by Land to Holland: and likewise the Copies of the Letters which
had been written were also sent to go thither with the Tiger. Besides which Van
Hoorn also sent a Letter apart to the Lords before mentioned, which served as a
cover for all the other. The said Letters, though open, were sent to the
Governors Balthazar Bort and Paviljon, with Orders to send them away with all
speed. Bort was also commanded, that if an opportunity did present it self
there, to send Copies of those Letters that were directed for Holland, to the
Indian Council at Batavia. Van Hoorn Dines with the chief Factor.


After the Boat was sent away with the forementioned Letters, Van Hoorn went
again to the chief Factors House, where he was nobly entertained. At their
departure Nobel and Harthouwer led the Factor into a private Room, and asked
him if he would let them have any other Silk? which he much scrupled at,
fearing lest it might be discovered; yet if they would faithfully promise not
to speak of any such thing, or make mention thereof at Peking, he would deliver
them some: which the Hollanders on the other side as much scrupling, they broke
off farther Discourse, and so parted.

The next Morning they went again to the Factor about the same Business, and
told him, That before their Journey to Peking the Hopou must make all things
even; that the Tiger being unladen, must go again to Netherland Haven; and the
Alphen would also be suddenly delivered, therefore they must now either receive
Money or Silks to divide and lade into the Ships. Moreover, as they passed by
they called at the Viceroy's, and asked him when his Highness would be at
leisure to permit the Ambassador to come and confer with him about his
addressing himself to the Court. Whereupon the prime Factor seeming to be
somewhat dissatisfied, asked if ever they remained in their debt, that the
Hopou should so much press their settling and making even of Accounts before he
went to Peking, with many other Discourses to the like purpose; yet at last
promised they should have Money the next Morning, it lying ready for them: with
this Answer the Netherlanders took their leave; and as they passed by went to
the Viceroy's Court, who sent them word that the Ambassador might within two
days come and speak with him about the Embassy.

Mean while two Mandarins came to the Lodge to tell the Ambassador from the
General, That he must make himself ready for his departure at farthest in seven
days, demanding a List of the Names of the Persons, and number of the Packs,
Chests, and other things that were to go with him; which immediately was
delivered to them. The Ambassador receives order to go his Journey.


The eighteenth two Mandarins came to the Lodge, to ask the Ambassador why he
did not set forth on the twentieth of their Moon? To which he answered, That
all things had been and were ready, and that it was not his fault, having
stayed only for an Answer to the Request about the Ships setting Sail. Then
the Mandarins replied, The Generals do give leave that three Ships may depart,
and also that the Blyswiik might fall down; wherefore they must prepare for
their Journey, because the General was not satisfied that they stayed so long.
Neither did the Hollanders stay after these good tidings, but immediately
Shipped off all their Goods, and prepared to begin their Voyage.

In the Morning, being the nineteenth, four Mandarins came to the Lodge, two
sent from the General, and two from the Viceroy, to drink to the Ambassador's
health and good success in their Journey, and at Peking also, informing them
how they should carry themselves there: and also two Interpreters, Ienko and
Liulako, which came with the Mandarins, being sent by their Highnesses to
observe the Hollanders Transactions; nay, they were to do nothing without their
advice, because they knew the Custom of the Country, and also what was best to
be done, or otherwise. The Netherlanders willing to be led by them, answered,
That they would endeavor in all things to give the Viceroy and General
satisfaction: Whereupon the Mandarins took their leave, being Presented each of
them with a Piece of Crown Serge.

The Merchant Harthouwer had a written Order given him, according to which he
was to govern himself during the Ambassador's absence, and likewise the Names
and numbers of the Persons that were to stay with him in Hoksieu.

The twentieth in the Morning, after all their Goods and Necessaries were Leave
Hoksieu.
Shipped in thirty eight Barques, they went away with the Flood, and came about
Noon to Hoksantiouw Bridge, two Leagues distant from Lamthay, the Suburbs of
Hoksieu; where they found the Vessels, with their Mandarin and Guides lying at
Anchor. Here the Netherlanders were forced to stay till all their Barques came
thither. Harthouwer and some other Persons which had accompanied the Ambassador
to this Place, returned in the Evening.

They were no sooner gone, but several Mandarins came to ask the Netherlanders
But twenty four Hollanders are suffered to go to Peking.
how many their Train consisted of, being two and thirty, whereof five were
Negro Boys. To which they replied, That neither the Viceroy nor General would
suffer above twenty four Persons in all to go, because it was written to the
Emperor so many should come.

In the Afternoon about four a Clock the Hollanders, being twenty four in
Ambassador proceeds on his Journey.
number, that belonged to several Offices, went at the Flood with about fifty
Barques Westerly up the River Min* and came in the Evening about seven a Clock
to an Isle, lying about a Cannon-shot from the Village called Unwono, where
they stayed that Night, being got a League to the Westward.

The two and twentieth at Daybreak they set Sail again, and about nine a Clock
passed Howtong, a Village lying on the right-side of the River, In the
Afternoon they Sailed by Petjong, Hongia, and Tiksoya on the same Shore; they
came in the Dusk of the Evening before Congimon, having that day by Rowing and
Sailing gotten five Leagues more to the Westward.

All the forementioned Villages were thick built with Houses, that were little
better than our Huts or Hovels, but the adjacent Fields abounding with Rice and
store of other Grain.

The three and twentieth in the Morning they proceeded, (the Wind still
favoring them) and about nine a Clock passed by Binkin, a Village by some
called Mincing, three Leagues from Congimon, standing behind a Hill a little up
in the Country, on the left-side of the River Min.

This Town is adorned with fair Buildings, and a high Steeple, which appears
with its Spiry top above the Mountain, and seen by all those that pass by it.

In the Afternoon they had in view Anike, Siaivang, and Twavigh; the first of
which Towns lies on the right, and the other two on the left Hand, the last
being about three Leagues from Binkin: at four after Noon they arrived at
Chukaw, where they rested that Night, to get Coelies to Tow their Boats,
because the Stream ran very slack, having that day made six Leagues and a half
more Westerly.

The Verges of the River here are nothing but hilly and barren Cliffs.

The twenty fourth in the Morning, the Wind at North-East, they got two Coelies
for every Vessel, and going on their Journey about eight a Clock passed by
Caukawa, a Village on the left side of the River, a League from Chukaw, and in
the Evening Landed at Poutcham, where they saw some decayed Houses, having that
day gained, though with no small danger of Rocks and strong Water-falls, three
Leagues.

The next Morning, being the twenty fifth, they left Poutcham, and about two a
Clock in the Afternoon passed by Tiongopan and Iunchiam, both lying on the left
side of the River, the last being two Leagues distant from Poutcham; and in the
Evening they came over against Ukekaun near a Watch-house, having not gotten
above three Leagues all that day, because of the Sholes and contrary Current.

The twenty sixth in the Morning putting forward, they were drawn up over
Sholes and Rocks, which by the violent Precipes and fall of the Stream seemed
very dreadful, and not without imminent danger, as appeared by the Barque in
which the Comptroller Ruwenort was, which Rowing about as they supposed for
advantage, ran on a Rock and sunk immediately; yet most of the Goods were
saved, though we^. In the Afternoon they reached Kantang and Poinpang, Villages
standing on the right side going up, and in the Evening Landed near a
Watch-house called Bokkay; where they reposed that Night, having gone but two
Leagues and a half that day, and with great trouble.

The twenty seventh about Daybreak they weighed, and before Noon saw several
Priests Houses and Hamlets, built on the hangings or declivings of the
Mountains, and in the Afternoon about four a Clock they came to Seghia and
Siong, two Villages opposite one to the other, about two Leagues from Bokkay;
from whence passing on they arrived at another Watch-house called Soujong,
where they stayed the following Night, having with great danger gotten two
Leagues and a half to the West.

The twenty eighth in the Morning they came between two great Towers about nine
a Clock, each standing on a Summit fronting the other on the side of the River;
behind which appears the City Iemping, or Ienping, or Ienpingsoe. The
Ambassador passing through the Bridge, was by two Mandarins, sent from the
General of that Place, called Sioubontok, invited to Dinner to his Palace;
whither he went with some of his Attendants: So soon as he came with his Barque
to one of the City Gates, he was kindly received by Sioubontok, and nobly
Entertained after the Chinese manner with variety of Dishes, and several
Entries of their Wayangs, or Stage Plays.

No Discourse of any concern happened here, only Sioubontok asked if the
Netherlanders had Quelang? and how many Men kept the Place? Which the
Ambassador answering according, and taking his leave, went in the Evening
Aboard; where they sound some fresh Provisions, sent thither by the General's
Order, consisting in Oxen, Swine, Hens, Ducks, and Herbs, for which the Beaters
received five Crowns of Silver; and the Ambassador, according to the Custom of
the Country, gave the Wayang Actors, and also the Servants that attended him
at the Table, five Dollars apiece.

In the Evening Sioubontok came in Person Aboard, and a little after the
Governor of the City, being a comely proper Man, with a long Beard, Habited
after the Chinese manner in Mourning for a deceased Relation, both welcoming
the Ambassador and Haulavia the Mandarin that was sent with him as his Guide,
who would not come to Sioubontok's Feast, though invited several times. After
the Netherlanders had given them a taste of their Spanish Wine, and they viewed
the Horses and Oxen, and Sandal Wood that were to be presented to the Emperor,
they took their leave and walked to their several Houses in the Dusk of the
Evening. Sioubontok after his departure sent the Ambassador some Geese, and six
Picol of Rice. After which he sent the Interpreter Maurice Iansz Vis, to the
General Sioubontok, to enquire how the Netherlanders Business stood at Peking,
because Maurice was very familiar with him, having been his Servant when he was
a Prisoner amongst the Chinese. Maurice at his coming back brought word from
Sioubontok, That the Netherlanders were in great esteem at Court, and that he
doubted not but they would obtain what ever they desired: but there were some
great Persons at Peking which they must seek to please and get their favor, by
which they need not doubt to have all their Requests granted. Moreover he
desired Maurice to entreat the Ambassador in his behalf, that when the Emperor
should chance to speak with him about the conquering of Tayowan, (which without
doubt he would do) that he would please to speak in his behalf, that he might
go with them to the subduing of the Place, because he had a Wife and Children,
and several Goods there.

The twenty ninth in the Morning, Sioubontok sent more fresh Provisions, as
Poultrey, Swine, Sallet Herbs, and Provender for the Horses; for all which the
Secretary Vander Does went and presented him in the Ambassadors Name with a
Fowling-piece, a Pair of Pistols, a Couple of Knives, a Chain of Amber Beads,
one Piece of Amber weighing ten Ounces, ten Dutch Else of fine Cloth, and
likewise an Inventory of the Presents designed for him, which if he would not
accept now, he might receive them at the Ambassador's Return. The Secretary was
also commanded to desire Sioubontok to instruct the Netherlanders how they
should carry themselves to the four Zoetaysings which he had spoken of to the
Interpreter Maurice, and likewise inform them of some other Lords that might
assist them in their Business in Peking.

The Secretary at his Return related, That he had shown Sioubontok the
Inventory of his Presents, who said he would receive them with many thanks;
proffering moreover his Service to assist the Hollanders in what ever they
pleased to desire of him. After some Discourse the Secretary asked him
concerning the four Zoetaysings, or Great Men, and what Lords they were best to
address themselves to in Peking? Whereupon commanding all his Attendants to
avoid the Presence, he replied, That when the Netherlanders came to Peking,
they must endeavor to gain the four chief Counselors, or Zoetaysings favor,
(who during the Emperor's Minority were Guardians, or Protectors of the Empire)
which was very easily be done, if they did but employ some faithful Persons to
intercede for them, and in their Name Present them with Money and Gifts, which
they loved very well: To which purpose, that he might assist them, he would
send a Letter with them to Peking, to a certain Mandarin which was in great
Repute there, and was formerly one of his Deputies, who would on his
Recommendation be very serviceable to them; and that he had also Presented some
prime Counselors each with a Negro Boy, which were also his Friends, and would
aid the Hollanders in their Business; They should not repose too much
confidence in the Proffers of several Persons pretending to belong to the
Court; for many cunning Villains would come and persuade them to believe that
they were such and such great Lords which they were not, as he himself had
found when there in Person, therefore they ought to have a great care that
their Followers were not talkative, which might prove a great disadvantage to
their Business: but if they could get into the four Counselors of States
favor, they could but ask and have; for whatever they requested would
certainly be granted them. There are also (said he) several Officers belonging
to the Council, to which he would recommend them and their Business. Whereupon
the Secretary taking his leave, thanked him for his good advice, and so went
Aboard.

The Presents designed for Sioubontok being brought to Land, though not without
some difficulty, were by Captain Putmans carried to him, who sent the
Ambassador twenty Pieces of Stuff for the Clothing of his Retinue, and some
Fruits, in return for them; whereupon the Stuffs were immediately distributed
amongst the Men.

In the Afternoon Lunlakko the Interpreter brought the Ambassador from his
Ambassadors Expenses.
Mandarin twelve Pieces of Chinese Boat-Silver, to bear his Expenses, telling
him it was by the Emperor's order; and also that the Ambassador was at such
Places to have twelve Condarins, or fifteen Stuivers; Nobel, fourteen
Condarins, or twelve Stuivers; Putmans, twelve Condarins, or ten Stuivers; all
which Money it was thought fit to refuse: but because the Mandarins and
Interpreters durst not receive it again, saying, That what the Emperor had
commanded must be obeyed; and if they would not accept of it, they might keep
it and return it in Peking: Whereupon it was delivered to the Comptroller
Ruwenoort to keep till they came thither.

The City Ienping, or Ienpingfoe, the next to the prime City, or Metropolis of
The City Ienping.
the Province of Fokien, lies at the going up of the Stream on the right Hand,
or on the Westerly Shore of the River Min; from whence it makes a handsome
Prospect on the side of a Hill, the Edifices rising gently by degrees.

This Mountain is for the most part inaccessible, making the City rather a
Fortress, and to be esteemed as the Key of the whole Province.

The City is a League long, but not above a Mile and a half broad, full of fair
and large Buildings. Every House is furnished with Water conveyed from the
Mountains in Cane Pipes, the like not elsewhere to be seen in China.

All Provisions are to be had there in great abundance, and at a cheap Rate;
the Streets and Houses also thronged with Inhabitants.

On the East side of the City two great Rivers, the Min and Zi, uniting their
Waters, make a great Lake; through which Ships come thither from all parts of
the adjacent Country. Each of these Rivers has a fair Bridge; and in the City
are three beautiful Temples.

Most of the course China Paper is made here; but the whitest and finest sort
in a Village called Siege, three Leagues beyond more Westerly, which is all
that is there of remark; only this City boasts that her Inhabitants speak the
most elegant Phrase of all the Chinese, and therefore it is called the
Mandarins, or Court Language.





That Night the Netherlanders lay a little from the City near the opposite
Shore; from whence they Rowed and set Sail the thirtieth in the Morning to
Honjong, a Village about a League from Ienping, where all their Fleet
Rendezvouz'd, having had a narrow and dangerous Passage thither. Hence they set
Sail again about nine a Clock, and in the Afternoon* passed by Louquon,
Hoeyong, Linkentome, and Tafa; the two first of which lie on the right, and the
two last on the left side of the River, about half a League distant one from
another.

In the Evening they anchored before Ongsoutow, having that day gained three
Leagues in a Northerly Course.

The one and thirtieth in the Morning setting Sail again, they passed by a long
Village called Bonsjouko about eight a Clock, and at ten by the Village
Liucuir, Posjen, and Ubaka; the first and last on the right side, and the
second on the left.

In Ubaka much Paper is made, which appeared by several Vessels that lay
Freighted only with such Goods to go up the River.

About Noon they saw Konchian, Sioeukke, and Tayping; the two first on the
right, and the third on the left side of the Stream, close by one another.

In the Afternoon about three a Clock they came to Chiakiang, where they Rode
till the next day.

The next Morning, being the first of February, they set Sail again, and in
February.
the Afternoon passed by five Villages, viz. Siejokaun, Itantauw, Bayapo,
Siema, and Filictauw; the two first lying on the right, and the two last on the
left side of the River; and about Noon they arrived at the City of Kienning, or
Kienningfoe, where the Horses were immediately put ashore, because the Barques
in which they came were judged too big to carry them up any higher; but not
getting any smaller that day, they were set up till the next Morning.

Here the Netherlanders had the Gates shut against them, being not permitted to
enter the City; so that they were not able to get any fresh Provisions; nay,
none were suffered to sell any thing to the Netherlanders without the
Interpreters leave, who acted as Comptrollers wherever they came, and
especially Ienko, as appeared by a Soldier that belonged to Sioubontok, General
of the City* Ienping; who having bought some Fruit for the Ambassador, and
bringing it to him, was, so soon as the Interpreters were informed of it, taken
by the Mandarins Order, and tied Neck and Heels together, and had not the
Ambassador interceded for him, they had sent him a Prisoner to Hoksieu, where
he would have been severely punished; but the Ambassador at last prevailed so
much that he was set at liberty.

The second, after the Vessels were prepared to carry the Horses, they were
immediately imbarqu'd again, and all safely put Aboard; the Tartars being
highly pleased with them, had dressed them so neatly, that they were slick as
Glass.

In the Evening the Mandarins which were the Netherlanders Guides, presented
them with some boiled and roasted Meats.

Thus having gotten all things in a readiness, they left the City Kienningfoe
on the third, the Governors thereof being so surly, that they not once bid the
Ambassador welcome, or wished him a good Journey at his going from thence, nor
presented him with the least Provision, which no way grieved them, who by that
means kept their Chests locked.

This Kienningfoe being the fourth, and so one of the most eminent Cities in
The City Kienningfoe.
Fokien, lying on the Eastern Shore of the River Min, is something inferior in
Beauty and Riches, but not in bigness to the Metropolis Focheu, and larger than
Ienping, but not so close built, because several Cornfieldsd are enclosed
within her Walls. The Streets are all Paved with Pebble, and very full of
Inhabitants, that drive no other Trade but making of course Paper. They are
Ruled by two Governors, which sway alternately, the one not so much as once
daring to contradict the other in his time.

China affords several sorts of Paper, made of several Materials, viz. of the
Body and Leaves of Cane-tree, Cotton, Silk, and Flaxen Clothes: that which is
made of Cotton is not altogether so white as our French Paper.

In the County of Vuchaufu, belonging to the Country of Huquang: They make
also great quantities of Paper, of the Canes and Leaves, which grow there in
great abundance.

In the Forenoon having left Kienningfoe, they passed by Gaetchan, Maschetany,
and Petchin, Villages lying close together on the left side of the River; the
last lying about a League from Kienningfoe. In the Afternoon they saw by the
Village Kekau, Vazoeo and Gautauw; the two first on the right, and the last on
the left side of the River. Toward Evening they came before, and Landed at a
ruined and decayed Village called Chiaphong, where they remained all Night.
Here they directed their Course almost North, having a little of the West.

The next Morning, being the fourth, leaving Chiaphong, they passed by
Chincheuw, seated on the right side of the River, a League from Chiaphong; and
in the Afternoon by several Hamlets, Houses and Pagodes, that stood here and
there apart from the rest, along the Margents of the River. In the Evening they
arrived at a ruinous Town called Sjovova, on the right side of the River,
having that day gained but two Leagues with great trouble.

The fifth in the Morning setting Sail again, they left the Villages Tachoe and
Pagou on their left hand, and in the Afternoon passed by Swinckin, situate on
their right hand; and arriving at Suchiap about three a Clock they Landed,
having that day gained two Leagues and a (...).







The sixth in the Morning leaving Sichiap (where they had changed their
Coelies, or Pugs, for the Towing forward of their Vessels,) they passed by
Tintenna, Cholunga, and Leantong, three Villages seated on the right hand. In
the Afternoon they ran by the Villages Losjouwa and Sichem, built on the same
side; and toward Evening anchored opposite to the Village Hochiechien, having
gained three Leagues that day.

The seventh proceeding on their Journey, they passed Hoesuna and Nagan, and at
Noon arrived at Quiquan; where they stayed for the Vessels that brought the
Horses, which by reason of the shallow Water could not get up the River so
fast; but at last arriving, the Masters of them complained, that by drawing
over the Sands they were grown very leaky, and that it was impossible to go any
further with them before they were mended and trimmed up a new; for which cause
it was judged convenient to put the Horses ashore, and send them by Land to
Poutchin, by others called Puchin, a good Town not above five Leagues from
Quiquan. The Horses being got safe ashore were set up till next Morning. The
Comptroller Ruwenoort, Interpreter Maurice, and the four Grooms, were ordered
to Ride them thither; and also twelve Chinese Soldiers by order of their
Mandarins were sent to conduct them. That Night the Vessels lay at Anchor
before Quiquan.

The eighth they left Quiquan at Daybreak, and about Noon passed by the
Village Souswenna, standing on the left hand: soon after they got sight of a
great* Town called Swipia, near which appeared several ruined Houses, and also
a large, but broken and decayed Stone Bridge; and about four a Clock they came
before Chintewa, a Village lying on their left hand, a Mile from Swipia, and
toward Evening dropped Anchor near a Watchtower, about which were built a few
Houses, having that day with great danger gained three Leagues.

The ninth in the Morning weighing, they passed by two Villages called Gotanga
and Quotinha, the first lying on the right, and the second on the left hand: at
Noon they saw a Temple, which being built over a Moat, or Sluice like a Bridge,
under which at High Water Vessels might pass, was round about adorned, after
the Chinese manner, with Imagery, to which they ascended by a pair of Stairs
raised on one side of it. After Noon they passed Saloekia, and several other
Places ruined in the last War, only some Pieces of Walls remaining. The Night
approaching, they cast Anchor before a Sandy Plain, about a League from
Poutchinfoe, having with much ado that day gained three Leagues.

The tenth in the Morning they set Sail about eight a Clock through a broken
Bridge, formerly laid cross the River, and about Noon came to Poutchin, The
City Poutchin.
the fourth eminentest City belonging to Kienningfoe. Here the Comptroller
Ruwenoort came to the Ambassador, to tell him that the Horses came safely
thither the last Night, and were put into a Stable joined to the House,
prepared for them to stay in, till the Coelies were come to carry the Emperor's
Presents. The Ambassador commanded the Secretary to ask the Mandarins that were
come with him, because the Houses prepared for him and his Attendants were very
old and rotten, and scarce fit to Lodge in, if he might stay so long in the
Barques till such time as the Coelies were come up, and they ready to go
farther. But the Mandarins said that it could not be, because all the Goods
must be taken an account of, that they might see how many Coelies they should
want to carry them. Whereupon they found it convenient to Land all their Goods
the next Morning, and put the Oxen ashore that Afternoon. In the Evening the
Netherlanders were presented with some fresh Provisions, by some Mandarins
belonging to the Conbon of Hoksieu, and likewise by their Mandarine Guides; for
which Van Hoorn (they having presented him several times before) gave them a
small Piece of Plate.

The eleventh in the Morning all the Presents were unladen and carried to
Presents Landed*
the House prepared for that purpose, which was not only very old, but of no
convenience, the Rooms being so bad and so few, seeming rather a Hogstye than a
Dwelling House: but they no way able to better themselves were forced to be
contented. In the Evening order was given to watch the Goods, because they were
constrained to lie in open Places, incident to filching Pilferers. Every Person
was also strictly commanded not to stir abroad without the Ambassador's leave,
thereby to show the Chinese, who had forbid the Hollanders from going into the
City, that they did not value it, there being nothing to do for them.

The thirteenth the chief of the Coelies, as the Mandarins their Guides
informed the Ambassador, came to his Lodging to take an account of the number
of the Chests and Packs, and to see how many Coelies would be requisite to
carry them: after the weight and number were written down, they found that they
should want six hundred Coelies for the carrying of the Presents and other
Goods.

The fourteenth in the Morning both the Mandarins came again, with Ienko and
Liu-lako the Interpreters, to the Netherlanders in their Lodging, to tell them
that the number of the Coelies for the carrying of the Goods far exceeded the
number expressed in their Warrant given them by the General, because only two
Persons were allowed for the carrying of a Pack or Case, whereas now there were
several amongst them which two Men were not able to carry, and thereupon would
want two hundred Porters: and moreover, that the Mandarins of the City durst
not do contrary to the General's Order; in allowing them more Coelies than was
expressed in their Warrant. Whereupon Van Hoorn replied, That if the Hopou and
Pimpous in Peking had given such Order, it was well: Moreover, he would pay for
the Carriage of what was over and above that which was mentioned in the Pass;
and that it seemed strange to him, since in Hoksieu the number of the Cases and
Packs that belonged to the Embassy were delivered in Writing to the General's
Officers, which had seen them, and might well have discerned that there were
several Chests amongst them which could not be carried by two Men: but it was
no great matter, for if they got no Coelies they were the less obliged: Nay, he
knew the former Ambassadors never wanted Men to carry their Goods, and had also
much more honor and respect shown them than was done to him, never traveling
through any Place but they were fetched in, and nobly entertained by the
Governors thereof; whereas now on the contrary the Gates were shut up against
him, and he forbid to come into the City. To which the Mandarins made no Reply.

Mean while the City Mandarin who commanded the Coelies, came in Person to the
Ambassador; whereupon a Contest began between him and the Mandarine Guides;
which being no way pleasing to the Ambassador, he said that he would have no
Quarrel about the Emperor's and his Goods, for he would pay those Coelies which
were wanting above the number expressed in the General's Warrant: Whereupon as
many Coelies were provided as they wanted; and the Ambassador wrote a Letter to
the General in Hoksieu to this effect:

THat the Ambassador would never forget the many great Favors which he received
from his Highness in Hoksieu, and does not doubt but that he will continue the
same: In return whereof, he desires that Talavja might be assured, that neither
in the Court at Peking, nor any other Place in the World, he would seek or do
any thing to his disliking or disparagement. That himself has well arrived at
Chinkon in Pouchin, and finds that he wants more Coelies than are expressed in
the Pay or Warrant granted him, whom if his Excellency think fit, he will cause
to be paid by the Hopou in Hoksieu.


This Letter delivered to the Mandarins, the Ambassador asked when they should
proceed on their Journey? to which they answered, Two days hence. Then he
inquired if the Horses and Oxen might not be sent away before, because the Oxen
traveled but slowly: which being granted, they prepared all things
accordingly. But in the Evening a Chinese Secretary, called Sinko, said that
the Mandarins caused Frames to be made to carry the Oxen, because it would be
impossible for them to go over the Mountains: at which the Ambassador seemed
very well satisfied, and accordingly put off their going.

In the Morning, being the sixteenth, Hiu-lavja, one of the Netherlanders
Mandarine Guides came with the Frames for the Oxen to the Ambassador's
Lodgings; who asking him when they should go from thence? replied, Two days
hence: Then he desired to know the reason why they must stay so long, because
the Mandarin had on the fourteenth Instant also told him, That he should go two
days hence: Whereupon he said, That it was because the Coelies which they
wanted above the number mentioned in the Pass granted by Talavja, was not yet
allowed by the City Mandarins, who had promised, that within two days all
things should be ready, himself wishing that the Hollanders were gone. To which
the Ambassador replied, That he knew that the Lepous were somewhat displeased
about their so long tarrying at Hoksieu, being detained there by the Viceroy,
therefore it would be very inconvenient to lose more time there; so that if the
Lepous should chance to ask him about it in Peking, he could freely declare
that it was not his, but the Mandarins fault, who made him wait for Coelies.
Which Discourse prevailed so much, that Porters were immediately sent to carry
the Sandal Wood, with which they walked before, it being very troublesome for
its length and heaviness to be got over the Mountains.

The eighth in the Morning an hundred Coelies came to the Ambassador's Lodging,
to tie and pack up the Presents to be carried in Burdens, and to go with their
Loads before with the Horses and Oxen; with which the Secretary Vander Does was
also ordered to Travel before; the Ambassador, Nobel, and the rest intending to
follow them in the Afternoon: but because one of the Horses had received a hurt
on his Head above the left Eye, the Ambassador thought it convenient to stay a
day or two longer in Poutchin, and to keep one Horse more besides the
forementioned, to see in that time what could be done to him, and then give
order for his stay, or taking along with him. Whereupon the Secretary, with two
Horses, the Oxen, and the hundred Coelies, with their Loads went before, Nobel
and Putmans being ordered to follow him in the Afternoon; but because the tying
up of the Goods spent too much time, it was deferred till the next Morning.

The Horse being pretty well recovered, the Ambassador went from Poutchin The
Ambassador leaves Poutchin.
the one and twentieth in the Morning; and having traveled half a League by
the Village Olian, and in the Afternoon by Sisanly and Singan, and some Pagodes
or Temples, toward Evening came to Guliaen, where they reposed that Night.

The next day being Snowy and Rainy, they rested themselves in expectation of
fair Weather.

The twenty third the Sky being pretty well cleared, notwithstanding the
Mountains were still covered with Snow, the Ambassador leaving Guliaen
proceeded on his Journey, and in the Morning passed over a high Hill, and so
through Huysjounton, Hangsion, Outangay, Ontongne, Kieumoe, and Ousalinga; from
whence they saw diverse Pagodes built on the Declivings of several Mountains. In
the Afternoon they traveled in sight of the Villages Movana, Loutiatona,
Golinga, Longkia, Kiekova, and diverse Hamlets and Temples, of which very many
stand all along this Road; amongst whom they saw one on the top of the Mountain
Liougtouw, and called by the same Name.

Here are the utmost Limits of the Province of Fokien and Chekiang, or
Chetchiang, between both which the forementioned Temple stands; so that now
leaving Fokien, they entered into that of Chekiang, and going on came toward
the Evening to a Village called Limathova, having that day traveled five
Leagues, four in the Territory of Fokien, and one in that of Chekiang.

This Province, though less than others, yet exceeds all the rest in fertility
Territory* Chekiang.
of Soil, delightfulness of Prospects and Riches, beginning in the South under
twenty seven Degrees and five Minutes Northern Latitude, and extending
Northerly to thirty one Degrees and twenty five Minutes, a Tract of sixty five
Leagues, the greatest breadth from East to West being almost of the same
length. It borders Easterly on the Sea, where the shortest Cut is to Iapan, and
not above a days Sailing, as some say, with a fresh Gale of Wind; in the South
and South-West, upon Fokien; in the West and North, upon Nanking, and likewise
touches with a small part upon Kiangsi. It is divided into eleven great
Division.
Counties, almost as large as some Provinces (for one of them being Hancheufu,
and the chiefest of them, is ample and powerful enough to be a Province or
Kingdom) viz. Hangcheufu, Kiahingfu, Hucheugfu, Nienchufu, Kinhoafu,
Kieucheufu, Chucheufu, Xaohiugfu, Ningpofu, Taicuheufu, and Vencheufu, having
several great and small Towns, to the number of eighty three, belonging to
them, besides unwall'd Places, and an incredible number of Castles and populous
Villages.

The chief Tract of Land called Hangcheufu, borders Northerly on Hucheufu, and
Kianhingfu; in the East, at the River Chee, between Kianhingfu and Xaohingfu;
in the South, at Nienchufu; and in the West, at Nanking.

In ancient times this County belonged to the Viceroy of V. and was afterward
possessed by the King of Cu, and by the Family of Chin named Cientang: by the
Emperor Sui it was first styled Hangcheu; by the Family Tang, Iuhang; by Sung,
Lingan; but the Taimingian Family restored this Country to its old Name.

This Division contains eight Cities, of which Hancheu is the chiefest, the
rest* are Huining, Tiuquang, Inlang, Liugany, Yuum, Sinching, and Changhoa.

The second County called Kiahingfu, every where watered with Rivers and Lakes,
borders in the East, upon the Sea; in the South, upon a part of the Ocean, and
part of Hangcheufu; Westward at Hucheufu; and in the North, at Sucheufu and
Sungkiangfu, the Territory of Nanking, and a part of the Lake called Tai.

This Shire contains six Cities, viz. Kiahing, Kiaxeny, Hayeni, Pinghu, Cungte,
and Tungchiang.

The Metropolis Kiahing was formerly a small City, and subject to Sucheu; but
growing in Riches and Greatness in the Reign of the Taimingian Family, it was
made the Head City, or Metropolis, and changed its former Name Siucheu to
Kiahing.

The City Kiahang, being the most Northern of the whole Province, lies as if it
were Moated about with Rivulets of Water, full of stately and well built
Structures, flourishing with variety of its own Product, having in all Places
Riches and Plenty. All the Streets of the City are Arched, under which they
walk as in a Piatzo, or Exchange, free from Wind and Weather, and sheltred from
Sun and Rain. Without the City are several Triumphal Arches erected; and on the
West side near the River, in one peculiar Place which they Sail by with their
Ships or Vessels, stand sixteen of these Arches in a Square, all built of
Marble. Athwart the River stands a Bridge of Marble, with many Arches, seventy
Paces long, and likewise a Tower thrusting forth toward the Sky, nine
Pinacles or Spires. All the Shores without the City are wharfed with square
Freestone; of which also the lesser Bridges are made that lead over them:
There are forty more fair Bridges leading to several parts of the City, besides
a great many less, scarce to be numbered.

The third County being Hucheufu borders in the East with Kiahingfu; in the
South, upon Hangcheufu; in the West, verges the Province of Nanking; in the
North, at the Lake Tai.

This was formerly a Kingdom of it self, and nominated Tung; which first was
possessed by King V. and afterward by Ine, then by Cu.

The Family Cyn gave this County and its Head City the Name of Uching; that of
Tang called it Hucheu, that is, The City of the Lake, because of the
neighboring Lake Tai; for Hu signifies a Lake, and Cheu a City: the Royal Line
of Sung named it Chaoking; but the Taimingian Family restored the old Name
Hucheu.

Here are five Temples, the chiefest of which stands within the City Walls:
they were founded in honor of the five first Emperors.

This Division contains six Cities, viz. Hucheu, Changhing, Tecing, Hiaosung,
Unkang, and Gankie. Hucheu is not only the chief, but reckoned one of the
biggest, and flourishes in Trade and Riches: It is adorned with many beautiful
and large Buildings.

The fourth Niencheufu, is a mountainous and rough Country, and borders
Eastward on the River Chee; South, at Kincheufu; the West, on Nanking; and the
North, on Hancheufu. It was formerly called Suntu; next by the Family of Han,
Lecheu; and lastly by that of Sung, Niencheufu. It contains six Cities,
Niencheu, Xungan, Tungliu, Suigan, Xeuchang, and Fuentui.

The Metropolis Niencheu stands upon a rising Ground, between the Singan and
Chee; which two Navigable Rivers before the Walls conjoyn their Waters.

The fifth Kinhoafu, touches North and East upon Xaohingfu and Taiche^fu; in
the South, upon Chuche^fu; in the West, conterminates with Kincheufu; and the
remainder bounded by the River Chee. Names.


King Loang called this with its Metropolis first by the Name of Kinhoa, that
is, Venus Flower; for the Chinese say that the Goddess Venus striving here
with another which they call Vuniu, (that is a Masculine Woman, and the same
which the Poets call Pallas) a Flower; which obtaining, they styled her
Kingsing, that is, Golden Star, and the City received the Name of Kinhoa, that
is, Venus Flower.

This City Kinhoa was formerly very populous, and full of well built Edifices;
but in the late Tartar War, in which they held out a considerable time, was in
a manner buried in Ruins: yet nevertheless it is almost re-erected, and
especially one Stone Bridge on the West side has obtained its former luster.

This County has eight Cities, Kinhoa, Lanki, Tungagang, Yui, Iungkang, Vuy,
Cities.
Pukiang, and Tanki.

Near the small City Lanki you may see another Bridge over the Chee, some few
years since rebuilt, and now much better than the former burnt by the Tartars.

The sixth called Kincheufu, being the most Southern of all this Province,
Borders.
borders in the East at Kinhoafu; in the South-East, at Chincheufu; in the
South-West, upon Fokien; in the West, on that of Nanking; and in the North, at
Niencheufu.

In the time of the Kings Reigns, this Province with the two former suffered
diverse great Changes and Alterations: the Family Cyn, after they had taken all
China, called its Metropolis Taimo; Han named it Singuan; and the Family Tang
gave it the Name which it now has. It contains five Cities, viz. Kincheu,
Lungyeu, Changxan, Kiangzan, and Kaihoa.

The City Kincheu lies on the Eastern Shore of the River Changyo, three days
Journey from Fokien, between steep and troublesome Mountains to pass over.

Paulus Venetus calls this City Kugui, according to the Tartar pronunciation,
(with whom he traveled in an Embassy thither) who in stead of Cheu, say Gui,
both Words signifying Great City; wherefore Paulus may easily have made Kugui
to be Kuicheu.

The seventh Division or Shire Chucheufu, environed with several high
Mountains, Borders.
borders in the East at Veucheufu; in the South-West, at Fokien; in the
North-West, at Kuicheufu; in the North, upon the County Kinhaofu.

In the time of the Kings this Country was also subject to various Revolutions
and strange Alterations: The Family Tang gave it the Name of Hocheu; the
Taimingian, that of Chucheu.

This Chucheufu contains ten Cities, of which Cheucheu is the Metropolis; the
Towns.
rest are Cingtien, Ciniquun, Sungyang, Sunchang, Lunguven, Kingyven, Iunko,
Sivenping, and Kingning, besides three famous Temples.

The City of Chincheu, which is very populous, lies upon the River Tung, which
falls into the Sea, and able to carry Ships of good burden.

The eighth Tract of Land, being Xaohingfu, borders in the East, with Ningpofu;
Borders.
North, upon the River Cientang; in the West, at that of Chee, and opposite to
Hangcheufu; in the South, at Kinhoafu and Taicheufu.

The Family Sung first gave this Country the present Name Xoahing; but it was
formerly by the Family Tang called Iucheu. It reckons seven Cities, Towns.
Xaohing, Siaoxan, Chuki, Yuyae, Xangyu, Xing, Sinchang.

The City of Xoahing, though not so big, yet in handsome Buildings exceeds the
Metropolis; being seated in a pleasant Plain Moated with fresh Water, very much
resembling Venice, the Water gliding through every Street, which are all
curiously Paved, and the Walls of the Houses all built of Freestone, which in
China is very rare, and scarce to be seen in any other Place in the whole
Empire. The Bridges also over which they pass the River and Lake, are all built
in the same manner, being very numerous. The Banks of the River, which extends
it self to three days Journey, are on each side wharf'd and walled in with
Stone of the Quarre: at the end of which appears a great Dam, that receives and
keeps the Waters, which swelling to a convenient height, Vessels that come
thither, are with little help floated over into another Stream.

This Current serves only to bring small Vessels up to the City Ningpo, for
the great ones go about by Sea.

Near this City are also many Triumphal Arches; for building of which they have
ready accommodation, because the Quarres that serve all China are close by
their Doors.

The ninth Division called Ningpofu, borders in the East with the Sea; in the
Borders.
West, with Xaochingfu; South, upon a River flowing between this and the County
Tancheufu.

The Kings Iue gave this and its Metropolis the Name of Iungtung; the Family of
Yang, Nungcheu; those of Sung, Kingchyven; but at last by the Taimingian,
Ningpo, that is, Reconciler of Strife.

The Kings of Han brought this Country under the Territory of Huiki.

Ningpofu has five Cities, viz, Ningpo, Cuki, Funghoa, Finghai, and Siangxan.

Not far from Ningpo lies a Promontory, which the Portuguese formerly very
Towns.
much frequented, who corrupted the Name to Liampo.

Some say, that from this Point in serene Weather they can discern the
Mountains of Iapan; whereas the most exact Chinese Cards or Maps make the Sea
much broader than to discover any such Prospect.

The Metropolis Ningpo, situated close by the River In, boasts store of handsome
Buildings. On whose Eastern Shore stand several Triumphal Arches, and two
Steeples with seven Galleries one over another: The Banks of the said River are
all raised of Freestone; at the end the Water is also stopped with a Stone
Dam, over which they hale the Vessels into a larger Channel.

In the little City Cuky are two Bridges, one with Stone Supporters, and great
Pieces of Timber three hundred Rods long: another which is very high, and all
of Stone, stands on three Arches.

The tenth County called Taicheufu, being a great Tract of Land, verges Borders.
Eastward with the Sea; Southward, with Vencheufu; Westward, with Kinhoaf^;
Northward, with Xaohingfu and Ningpofu.

In the time of the Kings this Country belonged to V. afterward to Iue; but
was at last by the Family Cyn brought under the Territory of Minching. The
Family Han gave it the Name of Changan; Tang, of Haicheu; and soon after Names.
that of Taicheu, which it retains to this day.

This Country comprehends six Cities, viz. Taicheu, Hoanguien, Tientai,
Cienkiu, Towns.
Ninghai, Taiping.

This City Taicheu is situate on a Hill, lying on the East side of the River
San.

The eleventh called Veucheufu, conterminates in the East at the Sea; in the
Borders.
South, with the Territory of Fokien; in the West, at Cucheufu; in the North,
at Taicheufu.

This Country is for the most part very mountainous, but has in the South,
before you approach the Hills of Fokien, a large and spacious Plain.

Formerly this Country belonged to the Kings of Iue; afterward to those of V.
King Loang gave it the Name of Iungkia; and was by the House of Tang first
called Tunkia; and soon after Voucheu; by Sung, Xuigan; and lastly by the
Taimingian, Veucheu.

This Province Veucheu possesses six Cities, viz. Veucheu, Xuigan, Locing,
Ping, Towns.
Yang, and Taixium.

The City of Veucheu, seated on the River Iungkia, because it is also like the
Metropolis Hangcheu, standing on a Morass Soil, and adorned with many fair
Edifices, is by the Inhabitants called Little Hancheu.

The City is very populous, and a Residence for many Merchants, whose Ships
find good and safe Harbors in the great River Iungkia; the Sea ebbing and
flowing up to the City Walls.

Near the Seashore in this Territory are fifteen Garrisons, built against the
Fortresses.
Incursions of the Iapanners, and safeguard of the Sea, viz. in Veucheufu, Nan,
Ningtung, Sining, Huigan, Tunchi, Cumen, Puohin, Xetic; in Taicheufu, Sinho,
Cioki, Ninghai; in Ningpofu only Tinghai; in Kiahinfu, Hiacing, Kinexan, and
Chincam.

Several Isles neighbor this Country, inhabited by Husbandmen and Islands.
Fishermen, of which Cheuxan is the greatest; the next are Chanque, Chaopao,
besides several other lesser. Cheuxan lies directly East from the Metropolis
Hancheu, opposite to the River Cientang, in thirty one and thirty two Degrees
Northern Latitude, thirteen Leagues from the Main Land, and has in length from
North to South sixteen, and in breadth eight Leagues. When anciently the
Chinese King Lui, worsted by the Tartars, and flying with his scattered Forces
to this Isle, from all Parts many of the Chinese flocked thither, so that ever
since, what was before inconsiderable, has been a populous and well planted
Isle, for they number in this small Isle above seventy Towns and Villages, most
of them verging the Sea in such Places where Inlets and Bays make convenient
Harbors: neither wants their King a considerable Fleet, which keep his Coast
safe from the Incursions and Landing of the Tartars Horse, wherein they are
most formidable. And the Tartars as much in awe of the Islanders, keep
continual Guard in the Fort of Tinghay, raised on the Main Land, with a Fleet
of Crusing Chinese.

Before the Province Taicheufu, near the Garrison Cioki, lies an Island called
Ychoan, which is, Precious Circle, so called for its convenient Havens, the
whole being in a manner so surrounded with Mountains; it breaks off all Winds,
leaving only a Gap, or Entrance for Ships to come in at.

The whole Province of Chekiang is every where cut through with Rivers,
Rivulets, and murmuring Streams, some brought in by Art, others of their own
accord.

Most of the Channels of those Rivers which run Southward, fall in such order,
as if Nature on purpose had contrived their Course; so that the Traveller may
pass through the whole Territory either by Land or Water which way he will,
still supplied with all conveniences.

The River Che, from whence this Country has its Name, runs from the River
Che.
South to the North, and divides it exactly in the middle, in an Eastern and
Western Canton: but it changes its Name at Hangcheu, and there is called
Cientang; and again where it takes its original out of the Mountains in the
Province Hoeicheufu, they name it Singan.

The eighteenth day of the eighth Moon (which is our October) a prodigigious
Spring-tyde happens worthy of admiration; for it is only on that day, and
begins to flow exactly at four a Clock in the Afternoon, and comes with a Head
at the first appearance, high and strangely mounted above the Waters, and
suddenly turns Topsi-turvy what ever either by neglect or carelessness lies in
the Way; roaring extremely in his ascent, beyond the loud murmur of Cataracts
or Water-breaches, to which, as a wonderful spectacle, where they have secure
places, the Magistrates, Strangers, and a great number of People resort to see
(though horrid) the annual Spectacle.

The River Ho takes its Original near Cinijuw, the third substitute City to the
seventh Province Chucheufu, and from thence follows by the Metropolis Kuihoa to
the City Lanki, where it disembogues in the Stream Che.

The Rivulet Lung begins Westward of the City Seuchang, from whence it flows to
Chucheu, where it comes with its Waters near the River Tung, and there is
called Vonxa.

In the Prime County Hancheufu, near the City Changhoa, on the Mountain
Cienking, is a Lake, though not very great, yet famous for the Golden-colour'd
Fishes taken there, which the Chinese from their color call, Kinyu.

In the same Shire, Eastward from the Metropolis, lies the famous Lake Sikin;
Lake Sikin.
between which and the City Walls is a fair Street, Paved with Stone, and
almost a Mile long, where they divertise themselves, in stead of Walks of
Pleasure. The whole Lake Walled in, comprises about five English Miles in
compass, and upon the adjacent Hills, (supplied with various Rivulets and
Fountains) appear several Temples, Palaces, Cloisters, Colleges, and the like.
The Banks of the Lake, which is the Foot of the Mountain, are Paved on the top
with Freestone, and ath wart the Lake lie several Bridges, so that they may
walk over it, and see the Lake in all places. The forementioned Ways are all
Planted with diverse shading Trees, and accommodated with Benches, Arbors, and
the like, for the convenience of such as walk there, when they are weary to sit
down and repose. The Water in the Lake being so translucent and clear, that
they may see the smallest Stone in the bottom.

This Lake has no Out or Inlet for Vessels to pass, but only a Sluice, by
which the Water swollen too high by assiduous Showers, is discharged: Yet
nevertheless, it bears many Pleasure-Boats, built on purpose, which may rather
be called Golden floating Palaces, being so richly Gilt, and also curiously
Painted; in which they accustom to keep their great Feasts, Revels, and other
delightful Pastimes.

These Vessels thus furnished, Sail about the Lake without fear of Wrack or
Tempest, so that it is no wonder, why the Chinese call this place and City A
Delightful Garden, or Earthly Paradise.

In the County of Kincheufu, near the City Kaihoa, is a little Lake called
Pehiai, Lake Pehiai.
from the white Crabs which it produces, for Pehiai signifies White Crabs.

In the Territory of Ningpofu, near the City of Tunghoa, appears Yapou a small
Pool Papou its strange quality.
Pool, but very deep, whose Water, if the Chinese Writers may be believed, has
this quality, that when they have a mild and prudent Governor, it becomes much
clearer than Crystal; but if a Tyrant or an Oppressor of the People, dark and
Cloudy.

In the County of Kiahingfu, the Chinese catch a Bird in Harvest which they
Bird Hoangcio.
call Hoangcio, that is, Yellow Bird, which being killed, they steep in Wine
made of Rice, and is sold as a Dainty all the Year.

The Territory of Ningpofu has by reason of its nearness to the Sea, great
plenty of Fish, which they dry in the Sun without Salting. They also have
abundance of Oysters, Crabs, and Lobsters, with which they supply the whole
Empire of China. The Shepherd Fish they catch all the year, and in the
beginning of the Spring, another Fish called Hoang, that is yellow, which will
not keep an Fish Hoang.
hour out of the Water without tainting. But because the Chinese account them
a great Dainty, and an excellent Fish, they preserve them with Ice, and so
bring them to the Market.

The Country of Chekiang abounds with Tigers; those on the Mountains A strange
quality of a Mountain.
near Kutien, do no hurt to Humane Creatures; whereas on the contrary, those
that frequent the Neighboring Woods are very Ravenous and Wild, which taken and
brought to the forementioned Mountains, become tame and innocent as the former.

In a Pond of about two hundred Paces in Circumference, lying on Mount
Sienking, in the County of Hiangchefue, the Chinese catch Fish of a Gold
Color, wherefore they call them Kinyu, for Kin signifies Gold, and You, Fish)
with a bright and glistering Skin; but chiefly their Backs are speckled as with
Gold; they are never bigger than a Man's Finger, and have a three forked Tail,
but not dangerous; the Chinese account them as a great rarity, preserving them
in their Houses and Gardens, in several Vessels made for that purpose. The
Grandees often take these Fishes with their own Hands, which in their presence
(as if they knew who was their Lord, and what a pleasure they did to their
owners, by sometimes showing themselves) often play, and leap up and down above
the Water. One of them though so small, costs commonly three or four Crowns.

In the eleventh County Veucheufu, are a strange kind of small Oysters, which
Oysters.
are sowed there in Marshy Grounds; for taking the Oysters they first dry, then
stamp them small, which Powder they cast up and down the Fields like Seed, from
whence grow other Oysters of a most delicious taste.

Through all the Country are plenty of Swine, Sheep, Poultry, and Fowl both
tame and wild.

In the County of Kiahing, belonging to the Province Chekiang, grows in Fruit
Peci, its strange quality.
standing Waters, a round Fruit called Peu, which is not much bigger than a
Chestnut; the Kernel lies covered with a gray Skin, but appears very White in
the middle, full of Juice, and of a pleasing taste, somewhat harder than an
ordinary Apple, and tartish: If you put a piece of Copper with this in your
Mouth, it will so mollify the Metal, that you may chew it with the Fruit, as
we do Bread with our Meat.

In the County of Kinhaofu grows a small Tree with a Flower, which the Hour
Mogorin.
Portuguese in India call Mogorin; it is very white, not unlike the Iasmyn,
though much fuller of Leaves, and of a more pleasing scent; so that a few of
these Flowers perfume a whole House, wherefore it is not undeservedly held in
great esteem by the Chinese, who in the Winter preserve the Tree in Pots
filled with Earth. In the same Country grows another Plant, called Kieuyen,
which Tallow Tree.
produces a kind of Fat, of which like Tallow, very good and white Candles are
made, not Greasing the Hands when touched like the ordinary Tallow Candles.

This Tree is of a pretty bigness, and in Leaves and shape not much unlike a
Pear Tree; it bears white Blossoms, which when fallen off, a round Cod succeeds
as big as a Cherry, covered with a blackish thin Skin; under which is a white
Pulp, which when grown Ripe, and the Skin breaks, appears; these being pulled
off, are boiled in Water, which melting, the Body turns to Fat, and when grown
cold, becomes hard like perfect Tallow: From the remaining Kernels, they
Extract very good Lamp-Oyl, so that this Plant supplies them, both with Lamps
and Candle light. In the Winter, the Leaves become red, which looks very
pleasant, because many of them growing together, show like a blushing Wood.
Lastly, the Leaves falling off are a most excellent Food, because of their
fatness, for Sheep and Cows, which by Eating them, thrive in an extraordinary
manner.

In the County of Chucheufu, near the City Kingning, grow great Thickets of
Canes and Rushes in the River Lupeu, by the Chinese with a general name called
Che, (for there are several sorts of them) and by the Indians, Mambu, which the
Portuguese have turned to Bambu, and the Netherlanders to Bamboes. There also
grows in most places all manner of Herbage and Grain, and in the County of
Kinhoafu many great Plums, which they Transport to other parts.

In the seventh Shire, being Chucheufu are many Woods and Wildernesses of
Pine-Trees, whence the Chinese have their Timber for the Building of Houses
and Ships: They say, that near the City Sunghiang, that is, Earth of Pine,
there are such thick ones found, that eighty Men cannot Fathom; nay, some whose
hollow Wombs contain thirty or forty Men.

In the County of Ninchufu, their Hills produce store of Copper Mines.

In Kinhoafu, they make the best Drink that is in all China of Rice and Water;
and in the same place are also the chiefest Gammons of Bacon, which bear a
great esteem through all the Empire. There is likewise a sort of Gum, in the
Chinese Tongue called Cie, or Cia; and in the Portuguese, Cairo, which drops
out of the Trees, and is very like Turpentine; the Chinese gather and color
it how they please, the best bears a Gold color, and the next to that Black;
before it is quite dry, it yields an infectious Smoke or Damp, which causes a
swelling in the Faces of those that are not used to it.

The curiosity and excellency of this shining Gum, Europe has long since been
acquainted with by those Chests and Coffers brought thither out of Iapan and
China, for they both color all their Wood-work over with it, and also their
Ships, Houses, Tables, Bedsteds, and other Household Stuff.

The Revenue which this Province pays yearly to the Emperor amounts to Reven^es
paid by this Province to the Emperor.
what may seem an incredible sum of Money, viz. two hundred fifty one thousand
two hundred ninety nine Bags of Rice; three hundred and seventy thousand four
hundred sixty six Pound of raw Silk; two thousand five hundred seventy four
Roles of Silk Stuffs; seventy eight hundred thousand four hundred ninety one
Bundles of Straw; besides the ordinary Customs paid to the two Custom-Houses,
standing in the Metropolis Hangcheu: First, for the Merchandise in the North
part of the City. Secondly, for the Wood in the South part; for the Chinese
use much Wood for the building of their Houses, Ships, Coffins, and the like;
and the Wood-Merchants being vast rich People, pay no small part of their gain
to the Emperor. Moreover, this Province sends yearly four Imperial Ships,
called Lung-ychuen to the Emperors Court, laden with Silk Clothes or Stuffs,
wrought after a peculiar manner.

These Silk Stuffs are interwove with Gold and Silver, and also with the
Pictures of the Bird called Funguang, Dragons, and the like: None are permitted
to wear these Stuffs, but only the Emperor, and those of Imperial Blood; unless
his Majesty out of a peculiar favor, gives them leave; and these badges of
Clothes distinguish them from meaner People, as much as our Badges of the Cross
and Garter, or the like, be marks of Noble Orders.

There are those that reckon the yearly Revenue of this Province to amount to
above fifteen Millions of Crowns, fifteen hundred thousand Ducats, or seven
hundred and fifty thousand Pound Sterling.

BUt to return again to our Ambassador, who proceeded on his Journey the
Mountains Iakoling.
twenty ninth of February, traveling over the Mountains of Iakoling, which
because of their steep ascent make carriage difficult and dangerous. On the
tops and sides stood several Pagodes or Temples, built after a strange manner,
and surrounded with Trees: But at last leaving them behind, they past through
the Villages Sambathova, Sagebatauw, Longhia, Longzango, Poangtiou, and
Hachova, where they were drawn upon a float of Canes, over a River, which
divided Hachova into a Southern and Northern part, in which last the Hollanders
took their repose that Night, having that day gained a League and a half to the
North.

The twenty fourth in the Morning, leaving Hachova, they traveled the
following part of the day through Kolontja, Quanimg, and Souzinhova, and in the
afternoon came to Pinhoea, where Putmans, Vander Does, and the rest that
traveled before, met the Ambassador, and told him of their safe arrival there
the day preceding, and also that the Goods designed for Presents were already
Shipped in twenty seven Vessels, and that others lay ready to take in him, and
the rest of the Goods: Whereupon, Van Hoorn was no sooner come into the Village
beforementioned, but he gave order for all his Necessaries to be Shipped off
immediately, and likewise caused the Oxen to be Imbarqu'd, that they might go
forward on their Journey the next Morning. The Horses were forced to go five
Leagues further by Land, because there wanted convenient Vessels to carry them.

The twenty sixth about Noon, after all things were ready, they set Sail from
Puchoeu, going North-East up the River Chang, with a Fleet of about forty
Vessels, amongst which were ten that carried the Mandarins Guides.

About three a Clock, they came to the City Tjanchia, otherwise called Changxa;
T^anchia, Sunthia*
and having Sunthia, a pretty Village on their Larboard, cast Anchor that Night
about three quarters of a League from Tjanchia, before a Sandy Plain, having
gained two Leagues that afternoon.

The twenty seventh in the Morning, they Weighed, and passed between two Towers
adorned with seven Galleries, one over another, built after the Chinese manner,
for a safeguard of that place; and likewise by the Villages Poetza, Sangsa,
Singhia, Mocthauw, Ponvasa, Vanksivoe, and Vansoe; the first four on their
Starboard, and the last on their Larboard: And in the afternoon Sailing by
eight Villages more, standing on both sides of the River, (of which the Pilots
knew not the Names) they arrived at Sinkkia in the Evening, where they staid
all Night, having gone that day with the Currents on several Courses above five
Leagues.

The twenty eighth in the Morning about Daybreak, they set Sail again, and at
nine a Clock Landed at the City Kitsjouw, or Kutchieuw, otherwise called
Kiucheu; here they changed their Vessels.

The first of March, all the Goods were Shipped again into other Vessels. At
March.
Noon, two private Persons of the City presented the Ambassador with some fresh
Provisions; in return for which, they received six Else of Gingerline colored
Cloth, which Putmans carried them; for which, they again in the Evening sent
twelve Tail of ready Money, and three Silver Cups; but the Ambassadors modestly
refused the Presents, and thanking, sent them back.

Kiucheu, the sixth City of the Province Chekiang, lying on the Eastern-Shore
City Kiucheu.
of the River Chang, three days Journey by Land from the Territory Tiokien,
over steep and difficult Mountains, seems pretty large, yet but meanly
Inhabited, and of small Concourse, and so having little or no Trade, yet the
Streets are handsomely Paved, and all Provisions very cheap.

The second in the Morning, they left Kiucheu, and about nine a Clock passed by
Sigajum, a Village lying on the right side, at the going up the River, in a
pleasant place, surrounded with Arable Grounds: The remaining part of the day,
they Sailed by abundance of Villages standing along the River, a little way up
into the Country, and in the Dusk of the Evening arrived at Loujujenne, where
they staid that Night, having that Day gained five Leagues on several Courses.

From Loujujenne, having gotten two Coelies to Tow every Barque, they Weighed
again the third in the Morning; and coming a little way from the Village, they
saw a stately Tower built after the Chinese manner, with jutting Stories.

The Country every where well Manured, was also full of populous Villages. In
the afternoon they came to Lanqui, where their Goods and Persons were again to
be put aboard other Barques. Soon after their arrival at this place, the
Governor came to welcome the Ambassador, and present him with some fresh
Provisions. This being the first Town where the Hollanders had received so much
civility from the Governors; their Journey that day was three Leagues.

The Shipping of the Goods into other Vessels was referred till the fourth,
because of the Rainy Weather. In the afternoon, the Lord Ambassador entertained
the Governor, who in the mean while sent him in a Calf and a fat Weather, and
other Provisions, besides four Vessels of their Beer. This Mandarin showed
himself very courteous to the Hollanders, for which kindnesses he was presented
with five Else of fine Cloth.

The fifth in the Morning, the adjacent Hills were all covered with Snow; but
the Weather growing fair, their Goods were put aboard, and all things made
ready to go away the next day.

The sixth, they left Lancqui before day.

This place, though not large, yet makes a handsome show, being well built, and
very populous, occasioned by the many Trading Vessels that come thither. It is
pleasantly seated all along the River side: Hither abundance of Allom is
brought from Humsie.

In the forenoon, they passed by the City Sansjenne, a League and a half from
City Iansjenne.
Lacqui: On the left side as they went up the River, the Shore near the Water
rises very high, and not inhabited, but in the Valleys stand some few Houses
and Villages.

In the Evening they came to Ponkousong, where they staid all Night, leaving
the City Niencheufu on their left Hand a quarter of a League, having that day
gained five Leagues.

The next Morning, two hours before day, the Mandarin Guides caused the Drum to
be beaten, that all might be ready to be gone immediately, which they did; but
the Vessel in which the Ambassador was, struck upon a Sand, so that the rest
which were behind, were ready to fall foul upon his Ship, such was the force of
the Current; but daylight coming on, they got off again, and passed by diverse
Villages, Temples, and Hamlets, and also by a Pagode, in which stands the Image
of a Philosopher, called Nienchlin.

With the Dusk of the Evening, they arrived at Tungh, where they staid that
Night, having gotten seven Leagues that day, by Steering several Courses.

The eighth in the Morning they set Sail again, and in the forenoon saw on
their left Hand the River Tu, which glides toward the City Cinsung, or
Sinchung, which having passed it, divides into two Branches, and at last
discharges his Water into the Grand Che.

This City being the seventh, in order to the Metropolis Hancheu, lies on the
City Sinching.
North side of the Tu, pretty close built, and surrounded with Plowed Lands.

In the Evening they arrived at the City Fojang, or Fujang, situate on the
West City Fujang.
side of the River Che, and Northward from the Stream Fuchun, which takes its
Original a little Westward from the City Liengan, and joyneth its Waters
Southward from Fujang, with those of the Che. The Ambassador having gotten five
Leagues forwarder on his Journey that day, lodged in Fujang that right.

The ninth in the Morning, they left Fujang before day.

Here the River Che is about two English Miles broad, yet has but few Villages
on its Banks, most of them standing more up into the Country, by reason of his
overflowing in great Rains; every where Manured and Planted with Fruit Trees.

In the Evening they arrived at the South Suburb of Hangcheu, or Hancsieuw,
Chankeeuw, the Suburb of Hancheu.
called Chankeeuw, half a Leagues distance from Hangcheu; here all the Goods
were forced to be Landed, then carried to the North Suburb of Hangcheu, where
they were again Shipped, so that they staid there the following Night.

The next Morning, being the tenth, Huilavja, one of the Mandarin Guides, went
to acquaint the Governor of the City with the Netherlanders coming, and to
desire Barques for their further Voyage: He returning again in the Evening,
told the Ambassador, That the forementioned Governor intended to invite his
Excellency the next day to Dinner, and that the Pinghtouw, or third Person in
Office would do the like the day after, and give speedy Order for the preparing
of the Barques.

The same day, the Mandarin Guides, for the trouble they had already had, and
to oblige them the more, were by the Ambassador, each of them, presented with
five Else of Cloth.

The next Morning, being the eleventh, the Ambassador and his Council Consult
what to present the Governor withal.
considering, that the Governor would that day invite them to Dinner; and also
if they should obtain the free Trade, what good this person might do them,
judged it convenient, if he did invite them to take and present him with the
following Gifts.

Ten Else of Red Cloth, two Pieces of Perpetuanaes, four Pieces of Linen, a
Fowling-Piece, a pair of Pistols, two Sword Blades, two Perspective Glasses,
and a String of Blood Coral.

But the Invitation came not that day, because Huilavja said a grand Tartar was
come from Peking, with whom the Governor was in private consulting about State
Affairs.

Some Mandarins coming to visit and welcome the Ambassadors, were kindly
entertained by him. The same day, above six hundred Horse were Ferry'd over the
River Che.

The twelfth in the Morning, the Pinghtouw, or third Person of State in
Hancheu, Pingtouw visits the Ambassador.
which had the Command over all the Vessels, came aboard the Ambassador to bid
him Welcome, and also present him with a fat Weather, a Porker, some Poultery,
Rice, and other fresh Provisions; desiring to be excused for his delay in not
coming to visit the Ambassador sooner, being hindered by some grand Mandarins,
that were lately gone up from thence to Peking, who had taken all the greatest
Vessels with them, yet he should be careful, that the Ambassador should be well
Accommodated, and that he would willingly invite his Excellency to Dinner, but
durst not, before he had been at the Governors, but then he would be bold to
desire him to come and be his Guest; for which kind proffers, he was civilly
Entertained; and having seen the Horses and Oxen, he took his leave.

In the afternoon, the Interpreter Genko came to tell the Netherlanders, that
the Governor of Hancheu had inquired of him how the Ambassador was placed at
his Entertainment by the General in Hoksieu.

The next Morning, being the thirteenth, several Horses came to the Ambassadors
The Ambassador goes to the General.
Vessel, to fetch Him and his Retinue to the Governor's Court, whither he went
in a stately Equipage; taking those Presents with them, which they resolved to
give him two days before. Coming to his Palace, they were after a little stay
brought to his Presence, and the Ambassador Welcomed by the Governor; who said,
this Embassy would be very pleasing to the Emperor. Then he asked where the
Pepper and Sandal-Wood grew? How big Holland was? How far distant from China?
If there was any Silk in Holland? and many more such Questions, to which his
Excellency answered him accordingly. Then the Tables being spread, they were
desired to sit, and plentifully entertained.

Thus having spent some time, the Ambassador delivered him a Note of the
forementioned Presents, and with a Complement, desired him to accept them;
which having read over, he excused himself, that he could not accept the
Presents, because he had never done the Hollanders any such Service, as the
Viceroy and General in Hoksieu had done. Moreover, That they would have enough
to do, in giving Presents at Peking, for there, every one gaped for something;
and thereupon gave the Note again to the Interpreter Genko, which was again
taken from him by one of the Governor's Secretaries which stood by him, and
kept it. Whereupon the Ambassador desired, that the Governor would only please
to accept of the Presents, as a sign of his good Inclination The Governor
refuses the Presents.
toward him; and that hereafter, an opportunity might present, wherein he
might assist the Hollanders. Moreover, the Ambassador Commanded the Interpreter
Gemko to tell the Governor, and desire him in his behalf, That when any of the
Netherland Ships should accidentally by Storms or Tempestuous Weather, be
forced to put into this River, or to Ningpo, that he would please to look upon
them as Friends, and be assisting to them. The Interpreter seeming not to
understand it well, was again Commanded by the Ambassador to Interpret it
right, or else he would get another that should do it: Whereupon, telling it to
his Highness, he made answer, That this was also the Emperor's Haven and
Country, and his Imperial Majesty's Order should be observed in it: Moreover,
he could not accept of the Presents, but he would consider till the happy
return from Peking.

A little after, the Ambassador giving him many thanks for his kind
Entertainment, took his leave; and upon the Governor's advice, he went to visit
the Conbon of the City, who courteously received him with many Complements, and
a Cup of Bean Broth.

No Questions of remark did he propose to the Ambassador, only he related, That
in their eighth Month, (which is our October) the last Year a Ship was at
Priests Island, he desired to know whether it was a Dutch* Man or not? To which
the Ambassador replied, That he knew nothing of it, but that perhaps it might
be a Hollander Sailing to Iapan: Whereupon taking his leave, the Conbon advised
him to go and Complement the Tartar Manchu, who had the chief Command over all
the Militia in Hancheu; whither he accordingly went, but could not get
admittance, being excused by his indisposition, so that in the Evening he
returned again to his Vessels.

The twenty fourth in the Morning, the Ambassador writ Complementing Letters to
the Governor, Conbon, and Manchu, and presented the two last with some Gifts,
thereby to win their Favor and good Opinion; the Letter to the Chief Governor
was to this effect:

THe Ambassador is much obliged to the Governor, for his generous Inclination
Complementing Letter to the General.
and Nobleness to him, and hopes to express his Thanks, more by Deeds than
Words; to which he doubts not, but the Heavens will grant him a fit
Opportunity. He desires his Highness to accelerate his Journey to Peking, with
the Chinkon, that he may the sooner return and find him in good Health.


The Conbon's Letter was to this purpose:

THat the Ambassador did not expect so soon to have had an occasion to To the
Conbon.
present his Service to him, and desires he would be pleased to accept of these
Presents, as a sign of his good Inclination, and for such his Favor, he shall
exceedingly rejoice.


That to the Manchu was of the same effect.

With these Letters was sent an Inventory of the Presents; those to the Conbon
consisted in five Else of Cloth, one piece of Perpetuanaes, two pieces of
Linen, one string of Amber, one piece of Amber, and two Rhinocerots Horns.

Those to the Manchu, two Knives with Gilded Hafts, one Fire-Lock, one Carbine,
one string of Amber, one Quilt, and five Else of Cloth.

These Letters and Inventories, Nobel and Vander Does were ordered to go to the
several places, and deliver; but because of the Rainy Weather, it was referred.

Mean while, a Mandarin came with one of the Conbon's Factors, to present the
Ambassador in his Master's Name with two Hogs, two Sheep, four Geese, Presents
sent from the Conbon to he Ambassador.
eight Hens, two Pots of Liquor, Rice, and some other Provisions, which the
Netherlanders received with many Thanks, and judged it convenient, to deliver
the Notes of the Presents to them, to give to ^eir Masters: But the Factor and
the Mandarin being scrupulous to take it without some of the Netherlanders went
with them; it was judged convenient since it still Rained very hard, and it
being above an hours walk, to keep it till dry Weather, that then it might be
carried with the rest, as before mentioned.

In the Evening, Hiulavja came to tell the Hollanders, that he had been with
the Barques lying on the other side of the City, which were all ready, so that
the Goods might be sent aboard the next Morning: If there should not be Coelis
or Porters enough to carry them all in one day, they should send away as many
as they could, and leave the rest till the day after: Whereupon, the Hollanders
gave immediate Order, for the getting of all things ready against the next
Morning, yet they were hindered by the great Rain, the Ways being made (in a
manner) unpassable thereby.

Mean while, the Ambassador considering the Prime Governors answer to his
Motion about Ships having liberty to put in there in Stormy Weather, Proposed
to the Council, If it would not be for their advantage, to make a trial of it,
and Order one of the Frigates, which from Batavia were expected at Hoksieu to
come to Ningpo, with a Lading of such Goods, as they should think convenient,
to be Bartered for Silk; and this trial in his judgment could never be made in
a better time, than whilst they were there present: Whereupon it was concluded,
that Nobel and the Secretary, when they carried the Letters to the Governor and
Conbon, they should again speak to them concerning the coming thither of a
Ship, and then they might govern themselves accordingly.

The sixteenth in the Morning, the Hollanders were by the Chief Governor's
General's Present.
Order presented with two fat Weathers, two Porkers, some Poultery, and other
Provisions; which they received, and gave the Bearers some Money for a
Gratuity. So soon as the Weather began to grow fair, as many Goods were
unladen, as there were Coelis to carry them, with which Putman's went to the
other side of the City to give Order for their reimbarquing.

Mean while, Nobel and the Secretary Vander Does went to the Governor of Nobel
and Vander Does go to the General.
the City, to deliver the forementioned Letters. They took the Horses also with
them, because one of the Guides had told the Ambassador, that his Highness was
desirous to see them; whither being come, after a short stay, and the Governor
having viewed the Horses with great delight, Nobel and Vander Does delivered
his Highness the Letter, and returned him humble Thanks for the Presents which
he had sent the Ambassador the day before.

Then they also asked, (it suiting with their present Discourse) If it should
happen that a Hollands Ship should come thither, if it would be Welcome to his
Highness, and the People used as courteously as they were? To which the General
answered, That such strangers as they, which come from remote Countries, to
seek Friendship, and Present the Emperor, ought to have kindness shown them;
therefore what reason should he have to deal discourteously with the
Netherlanders, when ever they come thither? They might rest satisfied, for he
assured them, that if they came into his Jurisdiction, he would take care for
them, and show them all the kindness he could.

After which answer, the Netherlanders taking their leave went to the Conbon,
Goes also to the Conbon.
to whom they also delivered the Ambassador's Letter and Note of the Presents,
telling him, that no Blood Coral was mentioned in the Note, because they had
none at the present, but they hoped, that a Ship would shortly come thither,
and that then, they would furnish his Highness with what quantity he pleased;
using this Discourse purposely, because they would have the better opportunity
to speak of the Ship. Then they desired, that if a Holland Vessel should chance
to come thither, whether he would be courteous to the Netherlanders? To which
he answered as the General had done, adding, That the Hollanders must Command
their People to use no Hostility where ever they came with their Ships.

The Presents designed for him he would not accept of, till they returned from
Peking. From thence they went to the Manchu, but could not (because of And to
Manchu.
his indisposition) come to speak with him, but sent them in answer to the
Letter and Note of the Presents, that he thanked the Ambassador, but he durst
not accept the Presents; with which answer, the Netherlanders returned.

This forementioned Reply of the General and Conbon, and that of the thirteenth
They concluded to send for a Ship with Merchandise, and from Hoksieu to Ningpo.
instant, made to the Netherlanders, being consulted on in the Council, it was
unanimously agreed on, to send for the smallest Vessel expected from Batavia at
Hoksieu, to come to Ningpo, (under pretense, that she should go to Iapan) with
a Lading of convenient Merchandise, as Sandal-Wood, Pepper, Frankincense, Myrh,
Cloves, Lead, Caliatur-Wood, Black Paragon, and Scarlet-Cloth, some Blood Coral
in strings, and the like.

To which purpose Van Hoorn wrote a Letter to Harthouwer in Hoksieu, that Van
Hoorn writes to Harthouwer concerning it.
he had found it convenient, that one of the smallest Vessels which were
expected from Batavia in the Bay of Sothia, under a pretense to Sail to Iapan,
should come to Ningpo: But however, the Ship was not to stay any longer than
the first of September at Ningpo, and then, whether the Goods were sold or not,
set Sail to Iapan, that the forementioned Commodities might come time enough,
to be disposed of in Iapan, and so prevent all manner of Losses or Damages that
might happen. Mean while, the Weather being pretty fair, the remaining Presents
and other Goods were unladen and carried to the North side of the City.

The Ambassador, Nobel, and the rest of the Retinue following them through the
City of Hanchu, and the Suburbs, came in the Afternoon to the places where the
Barques lay, being above a League distant from the other in which they came.

The eighteenth, it was thought convenient to Present the Pingtow, which had
furnished the Netherlanders with Barques; and likewise in requital for his
Presents, sent them the twelfth instant, five Dutch Else of Red Cloth, one
Presents for the Pingtouw.
Piece of Perpetuana's, one string of Amber Beads, six Flasks of Rose Water,
one Perspective Glass, and some Spectacles, which the Secretary setting down in
a Note, proffered to him: Who returning, brought word, that the Pingtow would
receive the four first sorts of Goods; but as for the Perspective Glasses and
Spectacles, he knew not what to do with them; and sent also his Servant back
with the Secretary, to Present the Ambassador with two Bottles of Tee, and to
fetch the Presents, because he was fearful to receive them, if they should be
brought by the Netherlanders, and delivered in the presence of other Persons,
because the General and Conbon did not accept of theirs.

In the Evening, the Horse were Imbarqu'd in the prepared Vessels, and all
things were made ready for their departure the next day.

The nineteenth in the Morning, the Ambassador leaving Hanchu, came in the
Evening to Tangseeuw, a handsome Village, where they staid all that Night,
having that day Sailed three Leagues.

Soon after their arrival there, the Interpreter Ienko came to tell the
Ambassador, Orders not to Transport Silk.
that he was informed, that the Emperor, besides his Order of not Transporting
any Silk, had strictly forbidden, that no Silk should be carried out of the
Province Chekiang to any other Territory.

The twentieth in the Morning they left Tangseeuw, and were that day Towed by
many Rusticks Houses, which were built along the Banks of a deep Trench or
Graff. The Country hereabouts is all Champain, well Manured, and in many
places Planted with Mulberry-Trees, which yield food for their Silkworms,
Chekiang produces much Silk.
for no place in all China breeds more than this Province of Chekiang; for it
not only furnishes its own Counties, and all China with all sorts of Silk
Stuffs, but also the Neighboring Isles of Iapan, the Spaniards in the
Philipines, nay, all India, and the remotest parts of Europe, for the
Hollanders buy much Silk in Hoksieu, lying in the Province of Fokien, which is
all brought thither from Chekiang. The Silk Stuffs made in this Province are
esteemed the best in all China, and are to be had at such low Rates, that ten
Men may better be maintained there in Silk, than one Man with Cloth in Europe.
They cut the Mulberry Trees generally once a year, as in Europe we do our
Vines, and suffer them not to shoot up to any great height, because by long
experience they have found that the Leaves of the smallest and youngest Trees
produce the best Silk, which difference they know in the Spinning of the first
and second Threads; for the first is that which comes from the fresh budding
little Leaves, and the second comes from the strong and full grown Summer
Leaves, which alteration of Food given to the Worms, makes the difference in
the Silk. Which is also perhaps the reason, that the Silk which is made in
Europe, is generally much thicker and courser than that in China.

Between the Prizes of the first and second Spinning, the Chinese make a great
difference, notwithstanding the greatest Silk-Throsters in Europe have no
knowledge to distinguish the one from the other: The best Silk they Spin in
Lent, and the coursest and biggest in June, so that both sorts are made in one
Year. The breeding of these Worms is all one trouble, and requires as much care
as they do in any places of Europe. Wherefore it is a mere Fable, that all the
Silk in China is made by the Silk Worms upon the Trees, without the labor or
industry of Man.

Martinius tell us, That the breeding of Silk Worms, and the manner of making
Histor. China.
Cotton and Silk, is an ancient invention of the Chinese; for they say, that
the Emperor Ya's Consort, who Reigned before the Birth of our Savior, Anno
2375. was the first that used it, and afterward taught it her Subjects: For
though the breeding and ordering of the Silk Worms was not unknown to the
Chinese before that time, yet they were ignorant of that Art, to make Silk
Clothes of them, as generally at the first Discovery of things, we are
unskilful in the proper use. But however, the Chinese may justly claim the
honor, that from them, as the chief Fountain, the Art of making Silk was
carried to other remote Countries in Europe.

BUt to return: The Ambassador having passed many beautiful Stone Bridges, in
the Afternoon they came to the City of Kunghti, or Cunghte, the fifth
substitute City of the second Metropolis Kiahing, in the sixth Province, lying
on the left side of the River, and in the Evening arrived at a Village called
Summingsing, where they stayed that Night, having that day gotten four Leagues
further.

In the Morning, leaving Summingsing, they Sailed, as the day before, by many
Rusticks Houses; and about the Evening arrived at Chiangfoe, otherwise Kiahing,
the sixth City in this Province, along which they ran Westerly to the North
Suburb, where they staid that Night to get other Coelies to Tow them, having
that day made four Leagues forward in a Northerly Course.

The two and twentieth in the Morning, they proceeded, and were Towed, coming
about a Cannon shot from the Suburb of Kiating, between two Fortresses, and so
to the Village Iankanking, seaving it on their Lar-board; in the Afternoon, by
Pinghaw; on the South side of which lies a small Lake called Fuen, which
separates the Province Chekiang, from that of Nanking, so that they entered the
Province of Nanking.

After the Netherlanders were arrived about Noon, in the Village Pingchwan,
they from thence past by Ukiam, and leaving it about a Cannon shot from them on
their left hand, they went up to the Suburbs, where they cast Anchor to stay
that Night, and provide themselves with other Men to Tow their Barques, having
that day passed four Leagues, of which, two in the Province of Nanking.

This great Province of Nanking, by the Tartars at this day called Kiangnam,
Borders of the Province Nanking.
being the chiefest of the nine Southern, Verges in the East and South-East
with the Sea, in the South it borders upon Chekiang, in the South-West upon
that of Kiangsi, in the West touches Huquang, in the North-West Honan, and the
remainder, the Territory of Quantung.

Although the Chinese reckon (except the chief Province of Peking, wherein
Worth:
the Court and Seat of the Emperor is kept) that of Kiangnang the next in honor
and order, yet setting aside the Emperor's residence there, it cannot be
compared to this of Nanking, either in Magnitude, Fertility, or ought else;
nay, their Histories affirm, that the ancient Chinese Emperors, as V, Cyn, Sun,
Ci, Leang, Chin, and the Family Tang, first Planted the Seat of the Empire in
this Province, although afterward, Transported thence to Peking, by the
Taymingian Family, the better, and with the more ease to oppose the Tartars
incursions, being nearest to their Borders.

The whole Province is divided into fourteen great Territories, viz.
Kiangningsu, Division*
or Nankingfu, Fungyangfu, Suchenfu, Sunkiangfu, Changcheufu, Chingkiangfu,
Yancheufu, Hoaiganfu, Lucheufu, Gankingfu, Taipingfu, Ningquefu, Chicheufu,
Hoeicheufu, besides four small Counties, as Quangte, Hocheu, Chucheu, Siuchtu,
every one having great and small Towns in them, to the number of an hundred and
ten.

The first County Kiangningfu, has for boundaries on the North-East,
Yancheufu; Borders.
in the East, Changcheufu, and Sucheufu; in the South, Ningquefu; in the West,
Taipingfu, and Hocheufu; in the North, and North-West, Cheuchufu.

This County contains seven Towns, viz. Nanking, or Kiangning, the chief Towns.
and Metropolis of the whole Province, Kucyung, Lieyang, Lieuxui, Caoxun,
Kiangpu, and Loho.





The first Builder of the City of Nanking was Guoi, King of Cu, who called
Names.
her Kinling, that is, Gilded Tract of Land, The first Raiser of the Family Cyn
named it afterward Moling; the Kings V. which kept their Court there, Kienye;
the House of Tang, Kiangning; but the Taimingian Family changed the Name of
Kiangning to that of Ingtien; but at last the Tartars, after having harrased
the whole Empire of China, restored it the ancient Name Kiangning.

This Kiangning lies in thirty two Degrees and fifteen Minutes Northern
Latitude, about six Leagues from the Eastern Shore of the River Kiang, in a
pleasant and delightful Plain; for the River Kiang flows through broad and deep
dug Graffs, not only by the City Walls, but also into it with several
Navigable Channels.

In like manner the East side of the City, lying in a pleasant Valley, is
interwoven with broad Graffs, by which means they may as well come to this part
of the City in Barges, as to that side which verges with the River Kiang, and
may there likewise lade and unlade Vessels of ordinary Burden.

Over all these Graffs lead several Stone Bridges, supported on diverse Arches.

Over the forementioned Channel, which runs from the River Kiang into the
City, is a Bridge with fourteen Arches.

According to the opinion of the Chinese Geographers, this City does not only
exceed all other Cities on the Earth in bigness, but also in beauty; and indeed
she is inferior to few: for as to what concerns her inward part is most plain,
except some pleasant and easy Ascents. It stands surrounded with a Walls.
double Wall; the first and innermost of which is six German Miles in
circumference, or according to Trigaut and Martinius, eighteen Italian Miles;
yet the City it self is not above six Leagues in circumference.

This Wall incloseth the Palace, and most part of the City.

The second, or outward Wall is much bigger, but not continued round, or joined
together in all places, but stands only as a Defense in those places where the
City is weakest. When two Troopers (for so the Chinese describe this Wall) are
sent from one another in the Morning to Ride about the City, they meet not
again till Night; by which may easily be judged the bigness of the Wall and
City. Notwithstanding within the circumference of this Wall there are great and
spacious Gardens, Lakes, Mounts and Warrens, yet the greatest part thereof is
full of Inhabitants.

The first Wall, which is above thirty Foot high, whose under part consists of
Freestone, but the upper only of baked Stones, or Bricks, is raised very
even, and has Battlements, round about strengthened with Redoubts and
Watch-houses. It reckons thirteen Gates, some of which have four, and Gates.
others five Posterns, whose Doors are covered with Iron Plates. Every one of
these Gates are continually Guarded by strong Parties of Soldiers. The chiefest
Streets are about twenty eight Paces broad, and being as direct as a Line, are
in the middle Paved with broad blue Stones, and on each side with Pebbles. The
common Citizens Houses are neither fair nor costly, but mean and without
Conveniences, being but one Story high, standing all with their Gableends
toward the Streets, with only one Door. The Front has a square Hole in stead
of a Window, before which they have a wooden Shutter, which they let down, and
those that drive any Trade lay their Commodities upon them to sell, and to
prevent People from looking in, they generally hang a Rush Mat before it in
stead of a Glass Window. The whole House on the outside is from top to bottom
Plastered with very white Mortar or Lime, and the sloaping Roof covered with
white Tyles. In most of the Houses are Shops, filled with all manner of Chinese
Commodities, as Cotton, Silk-Stuffs, Porcellane, Pearls, Diamonds, and other
rich Merchandises: others also have Pedling Wares. Before every Shop stands a
Plank or Board, and before some two, on which the Master of the House his Name
is written in Letters of Gold, and what Commodities he has to sell: Next these
Boards stands also a Post, or rather a Pole, which is higher than the House, on
which they put a Penon, or Flag, whereby they may distinguish every ones
Habitation, as here in Europe they do by Signs.

Here are also many fair Edifices, as Temples, stately Triumphal Arches,
Palaces, and other public Buildings.

There was formerly a very magnificent Palace, built square, being the An
ancient Palac^ of the Emperors.
Court and Residence of the ancient Chinese Emperors, but now lies ruined on
the South part of the City; one side of it may still be measured, and bears an
Italian Mile and two hundred Paces in length, and is enclosed within the inner
Wall, which encompasseth the greatest part of the City. It was formerly
surrounded with three Walls, and deep Moats. According to the remaining part of
this Wall, the forementioned Trigaut reckons the circumference to be four or
five Italian Miles. In the middle there yet appears a broad Way Paved with
Freestone, which runs through the whole Work like a Cross. On each side of it
may be seen curious Carved Stones, which stand four Foot high, and behind them
a little Rivulet of clear Water. The Tyles on the Roof were of hard Stone,
wrought with Dragons, and the Emperor's Arms Painted in a Gold color, so that
when the Sun shined upon them they glittered like Gold.

In the last Tartar Wars this stately Edifice and Court was burnt and pulled
down to the Ground, so turning that which before was the wonder of the World
into a heap of Rubbish; yet no other way bereaving the City of her ancient
luster: which was done out of a peculiar hatred that the Tartar bore to the
Taimingian Family, because Hamvu, or Che, the first promoter of that Family,
drove the Tartars out of the Empire, after they had possessed it a hundred and
eight years, and planted the Branches of their own Stock in the Throne in this
forementioned Palace, till such time as it was removed from thence to Peking.

The City is very populous, and said to be inhabited by ten hundred thousand,
or a Million of Souls, besides a Garrison of forty thousand Tartars: for the
Governor of the Southern Provinces Resides here in the Emperor's Name.

But above all we ought not to forget a Tower, built on a high Hill, which A
strange Tower.
may justly be called A Tower of Art, because three artificial Pieces of Work
are kept in it, the like of which are not in the whole World: The first a
Celestial Globe, distinguished by its Equinoctial, and other equidistant Lines;
the second is an Armilla aquatoria, consisting in a Perspective Glass, with two
Circles, each movable upon their Point; the third is a Sphaera armillarii, very
like our European; every one of them has twelve Feet upon the Equator, or
middle Line, made of Copper, Gilt and curiously wrought: They stand upon
Dragons cut of Copper, and are so exact and artificially made, that the most
experienced Astronomer cannot discern the least fault in them: and
notwithstanding the Tartars of the Family Iuen placed them there three hundred
and seventy years since, yet they retain their ancient luster, as if but newly
made.

On the out-part of the City stands a famous Pagode, or Temple, by some The
Pagode Paolinxi.
called Paolinxi, and by others Paulinying; for we may observe, that by the
Name of Paolinxi the Chinese do not only express the Temple it self, but also
a great Plain at the Foot of a Mountain, adorned with many fair Buildings,
Pagodes, Porcelane Towers, and other fair and stately Edifices; amongst all
which one, being a Temple, exceeds all the rest: it is adorned with ten
thousand Images, made of Mortar; and curiously Painted; the largest are as big
as the Life, and the smallest not exceeding a Hand; both which stand in several
Entries, or Galleries round about the Wall, four or five Rows one above
another, the greatest on the top, and the smallest at the bottom.

In the middle of the Plain, to which they ascend by twelve Steps, stands
Porcellane Tower
a high Tower of Porcelane, which for costliness and all manner of rare
workmanship, has not its parallel in all China. It consists in nine (though
according to Semedo scarce in six) Vaulted Stories, to be ascended on the
inside by a hundred and four Steps. Round about every Story is a Gallery,
curiously adorned with Images and Windows; on both sides of which are square
Holes for the Light to come in at, with Ivory Bars; all the Work on the
outside Polished or Glazed with diverse Colors, as Red, Green, and Yellow: The
whole Structure made of several Pieces so curiously Cemented together, that it
seems to be one entire thing. Between the Galleries are Juttings out, made like
Pent-houses, and colored with Green; at each corner whereof hang small Copper
Bells, which moved by the Wind make a continual and pleasant tinkling. The
upper part of the Tower, to which none can get, unless they climb up the
outside, is Crowned, as the Chinese say, with a great Pineapple of Massy
Gold: from which upper Gallery they may see, not only over the whole City of
Nanking, but all the adjacent Plains, as far as the Eye can reach. They say,
that when the Tartars, Anno 1200. first conquered the Empire of China, they
forced them to build this Structure in commemoration of their Victory: for
which reason, as it appears, the Tartars, when in our Age they conquered the
Empire a second time, they never offered to deface it, but let it stand in its
full glory, when as they pulled down all other ancient Monuments, Buildings,
and Chinese Emperors Tombs to the Ground.

Without the Walls of the City are the Tombs of the antique Kings; near which
stands a Grove of lofty Pines, surrounded with a Wall of three German Miles in
circumference.

Within this Enclosure also appears a Hill, whereon likewise are erected
several Tombs; and not far distant a most magnificent Temple, a Royal Building,
as well for its Prospect as State: It consists for the most part of Wood,
except the Walls, which are of Brick, and stands on a Summit environed with
Freestone: you go into it by four pair of Stairs, opening to the sour Winds:
It has five Galleries, about which stand two Rows of wooden Pillars, each
thirty six Foot high, and above two Fathom thick: On these rest great Pieces of
cross Timber, and on them stand other lesser Pillars, whereon lies the Roof, of
Carved and Gilt Boards: The Doors are Figured with Laurel Leaves, and covered
with Gilded Plates. The Imagery of the outer Galleries and Windows are
incircled with Gilded Wyres to keep the Birds from either making their Nests,
or defiling them; yet the Wyres are so thin and wide, that they may easily see
through: which is also observed in all great Buildings, especially the
Emperor's Palaces. In the middle of the Temple stand two Thrones, wrought with
great Art, and beset with Pearls, and all manner of Precious Gems; on them
stand two Chairs, in one of which the Emperor sits when he makes Offerings; to
do which none else is permitted; and the other stands empty for their Deity,
who they say, sits therein, and receives the Offering. Without the Temple stand
many Altars of Red Marble* which represent the Moon, Sun, Hills and Floods: and
according to the Chinese Relations, all these Altars are placed without the
Temple, that none might worship them, but that every one should know they are
of the same Structure which the Emperor worships in the Temple. Round about are
several Chambers, or rather Cells, which formerly, as they say, were used as
Bannia's, in which the Emperor, when he went to Offer, Bathed himself with his
Attendants.

To this Temple, and to the Emperor's Tombs, lead very broad Ways, on each side
planted with five Rows of Pine-trees, at equal distance, and in a direct Line;
from which none might break a Bough on pain of death.

All these Buildings were ruined in the late Tartar Wars, the Trees plucked up,
the Tombs defaced, and the Temples and Palaces utterly laid waste.

The County of Fungiangfu, a great Tract of Land, gives Limits in the Borders.
East and North-East to Hoaiganfu; in the East, to the Lake Piexe and
Chucheufu; in the South and South-West to Hocheufu and Lucheufu; in the West,
to the Territory of Honan.

This pleasant and fruitful Country, vein'd by several great Rivers, is
famous, because two of her Natives of mean Extract were raised to the highest
degree of Honor; the first called Lieupang, bred among the scum of the
Commonalty, nay, among Robbers and Rebels, subdued the Imperial Family Cyn, and
raised that of Han.

The second being Humvu, or Chu, was a mean Priests Son; who at first turning
Robber, soon after the expulsion of the Tartars got into the Throne, and
established the Crown on the Taimingian Family.

The Emperor You also did not a little enrich this Country, when by his
Predecessor Ya he was Crowned King in the City of Mao. It is also said that
Lahu, the first Inventer of the Epicurean Learning, which lived before the
great Philosopher Confut was born in that City of Mao.

The County Fungyangfu contains eighteen Towns, of which Fungyang is the
chiefest, the next are Liuhoai, Hoaiyuen, Tingyuen, Uho, Hung, Hokieu,
Munching, Su, Hiutai, Tienchang, So, Lingpi, Ing, Tacho, Hao, Ingxan, Su, So,
Ing, Hao, all great Places.

The Metropolis Fungyang lying on a Mountain, incloseth many Hills within its
Walls, built with fair Edifices, both public and private.

This Division was by the Emperor You brought and joined to the Province of
Yang, to be Governed by Teu.

In the time of the Kings this part of the Country was called The Kingdom of
Tuxam; which the Kings of Cu afterward included in their Dominions: but the
Family Han made it again Tributary, called Chungly: yet this Place was not
honored with the Title of Teu, or Metropopolis, until the forementioned Chu,
which raised the Taimingian Family, and was born in this City, enlarged it,
building new and strong Walls, fifty Furlongs in circumference, and adorning
the Tombs of his Predecessors, and gave it the Name of Metropolis, setting over
it a Viceroy, giving it Jurisdiction over other Cities, intituling it
Fungyang, that is, Nobleness of the Phoenix.

The third Sucheufu, conterminates in the North and North-East with the Mouth
of the River Kiang; in the East, with the Sea; in the South, with Sunkiang and
Kiahingfu; the West borders Kiangningfu; and the North-West, Chancheufu.

The first which inhabited this Country amongst the Chinese, was one Taipe,
of the Family Cheu, who coming out of the North planted his Seat here, and
reduced those that formerly were wild and savage, to be rational and
understanding People.

In the Emperor Vu's time this County obtained Royal Dignity, being called The
Kingdom of V. after whose Death it was taken by the Kingdom of Iue, who
possessed it but a little while, being routed by Cu, who subdued the Country.

Lastly, the promoter of the Family Cyn conquered all those Kingdoms; and
brought them under the Province of Hoeiki.

The first which called this Country and its Metropolis Sucheu was King Names.
Sui: the Family of Tang gave it the Name of Changcheu; Sung, that of Pnkiang;
but the Taimingian Family restored the old Name Sucheu.

The Country is in all Places interlac'd with Branches of Rivers and Graffs,
along which they may Sail from the City to the Sea.

Sucheufu contains seven Towns, of which Sucheu is the chiefest; the rest are
Towns.
Quengxan, Changxoe, Ukiang, Kiating, Taicing, Cungmung, and Cungming, which
lies on an Island in the Sea.

The fourth Tract of Land being Sunghiangfu, is a small County, yet fruitful
Borders.
and a good Soil, bordering in the North with Sucheufu; in the East, with the
Sea and Hangcheufu; in the South and West at Hangcheufu only; and the
remainder on Sucheufu.

This Country, as the former, lies most in Water, the East part of it being
washed by the Sea, and the rest surrounded by Rivers, which with their Branches
cutting through the middle, and all Places else of it make the whole Navigable:
It contains only three Towns, which in bigness, populosity, and Towns.
variety of Commodities may stand in competition with many more eminent Cities;
the first and chiefest is Sunkiang, the other two Langhai and Cingpai.

The City Sunkiang verges with the Sea on the Northern Shore of a River, which
at its Mouth is fortified with a strong Castle, from whence they may Sail to
Iapan.

In ancient times this Country and City before mentioned shared also in the
Tartars Cruelties. The Family of Tang called it Houting; the Tartars of the
Names.
House of Iuen not only gave it the present Name, but also the Title of Fu, or
Great City, having formerly but the Privileges and Name of a mean Town* and
belonged to the third County Sucheufu.

The fifth County Changcheufu reckons for Limits in the North and North-East,
Borders.
the River Kiang; in the South, Sucheufu; in the South and South-West, the Lake
Tai; in the West, Yancheufu.

This County contains five Towns, viz. Changcheu, Vufie, Kiangyn, and Ginkiang.

There are also five Temples, of which one built near the City Vufie, in honor
to Taipe, the Supporter of the People, exceeds all the other.

The City Changcheu lies near the forementioned Moat, which runs from the City
Sucheu to the River Kiang: the Stone Banks of which near this City, are much
more curious and artificial than any where else. There are also some Triumphal
Arches, which add a great beauty to the City. It has received its Denomination
Guihing from the exceeding fineness of the Earth, of which the Tee Cups are
made, for Guihing signifies Rare Earth.

The sixth Territory Chinkiangfu borders in the North at the River Kiang; Towns.
in the East, at Changcheufu; in the South, at the Lake Tai; and in the West,
at Kiangnangfu.

This County reckons three Cities, viz. Chinkiang, Tanyang, and Kintan. Towns.


Chinkiang, by Martinius taken for Cingiam so called by Paulus Venetus, lies
Northward from the River Kiang, on the East side of a Channel, which falls into
the Kiang. On the other side of the Channel to the West lies a Suburb, neither
lesser nor emptier of People than the City it self. Between these lie several
Bridges, over which they pass out of one into another: beyond the Bridges the
Channel extends it self to a greater breadth, and receives Water from several
Places; which makes so great a Navigation by that City, that it cannot be
expressed; for all the Ships or Vessels that come from the Province of Chekiang
and the other Eastern Towns, to go to Peking and other Places, must stop here,
to put up their Masts, and hold out their Sails, not being able hitherto to use
them, because of the many Bridges in that Channel; for from hence to the Grand
Metropolis Peking no Bridge is suffered excepting one to draw up.

This City by some justly called Kinkeu, that is, The Mouth of the Court,
because there are continually Freighted Vessels going from hence to Peking.

The seventh Division called Yangcheufu, borders in the North, at the River
Borders.
Hoai; East, at the Sea; Southward, upon the Stream of Kiang; West, on
Nankingfu, and the little County Chucheufu; and the North and by West
conterminates with Fungyangfu.

This contains ten Cities, viz. Y^ngcheu, Ychin, Taihing, Kaoyeu, Hinghoa,
Paoyng, Tai, Iucao, Fung, and Haimuen, of which Kaoyeu and Tai are the biggest.

Northward over the River Kiang is a great Sluice near the Garrison Quacheu,
where the forementioned Channel takes its beginning; along which they Row up to
the City Yangcheu, which lies on the East Side of it, as on the West the
Suburb, which formerly stretched a German League, but was ruined in the last
Tartar War.

The City Yancheu is full of large and stately buildings and in many Places
moistened with Graffs of fresh Water, over which lead Stone Bridges, consisting
of twenty four Arches, besides many lesser, not to be reckoned. There is also a
Custom-house for the Emperor's use.

The chief Trade which the Inhabitants follow is the dealing in Salt; for in
the East of this County near the Sea are many Salt Pits.

The eighth, being Hoaiganfu, Confines in the East, upon the Sea; in the South,
with the River Hoai; in the South-West and West, with Fungyangfu and Sucheufu;
and in the North, with the Province of Xantung. The whole Tract of Land is cut
through with Rivers and Lakes. It contains ten Towns, Hoaigan the chief,
Cingho, Gantung, Taoyven, Moyang, Hai, Canyu, Pi, Souven, and Ciuning; Hai and
Pi are great Cities.

In the time of the Emperor You this County belonged to that of Iancheu, under
the Government Ten, and belonged first to King V. afterward to Iue, then to Cu.

In the time of the Family Hun the City Hoaigan was only a small Town Names.
called Hoaiyu; afterward Han called her Linhoan; but the present Name and
Title the House of Sung gave her.

This City lying on the Eastern Shore of the dug Channel is divided into two
Parts, a Southern and a Northern, yet both enclosed in one Wall; of which the
South side bears the Name of Hoaigan, and the North of Yeuching. The one side
is enlarged with a Suburb, which extends in length along the Banks of the
Channel a German Mile; out of which they enter into the Yellow River.

In the Suburb are two Custom-houses, in the one the Customs for Goods are
paid, and in the other for Ships according to their Burden; all which Money is
kept and bestowed upon the repairing of their Sluices in the Channel against the
force of the Water (for to the Northward of this City are three Water-falls;)
yet nevertheless a great part of it goes to the Emperor's Treasury.

In this City the Viceroy, being the Emperor's Purveyor, has his Residence;
who Commands with arbitrary Power over the seven Southern Provinces.

The ninth Lucheufu, borders in the North at Fungyangfu; in the East, at
Borders.
Hocheufu and the River Kiang; in the South, at Gankingfu; and in the West, at
the Province of Huquang and Honan. It contains eight Cities, Lucheu the chief,
Towns.
the rest Xuching, Lukiang, Vuguei, Cao, Logan, Iugran, Hoxan, most of them
lying on the Shore of the famous Lake Cao; Vuguei and Logan are the biggest.

In ancient Times this Country stood like the former, subject to the Family
Cheu, under whom it became an entire Kingdom, and named Lucu; but soon after
was taken from them by the Kings Cu. In the time of the Family Han it was with
its chief City called Lukiang; but the present Name given by the Emperor Sui.

Near the small City Logan are two stately Temples and a large Bridge.

The tenth County Gankingfu borders in the North at Lucheufu; in the East and
South-East, at the River Kiang; in the West and North-West, at the Province of
Huquang.

This Country contains six Towns, viz. Ganking, Tunchiang, Cienxan, Taihu,
Sosung, Vangkiang, was formerly called Von, and subdued by King Cu; after which
the Family of Tang named it Sucheu; that of Sung, Ganking.

The City Ganking stands situate on the Eastern Shore of the River Ganking, and
for Wealth and Trade compares with the famousest Cities in this Province; for
all that comes out of the other County to go to Nanking, comes first hither.

Because this Tract of Land joins the three Provinces, Kiangsi, Huquang, and
Nanking, and lies well for any Warlike Undertaking, it has a Viceroy, who
maintains a strong Garrison in the Castle Haimusen, for a defense of the Lake
Poyang and the River Kiang.

The Family Tang caused an Iron Pillar to be erected there of three Rods high,
and of a proportionable thickness, Anvil'd out of an entire Piece.

The eleventh Shire, being Taipingfu, is surrounded with the River Kiang, or
Borders.
rather lies between two of her Branches; and moreover verges in the East with
a part of the Lake Tanyang, where it borders with the County of Kiangning.

This County belonged formerly to the Kingdom of V. afterward to Iue, next to
Cu, but was at last by the Family of Cyn reduced under that of Chang. The House
of Han called it Tanyang; Tang, Nanyu: Sung first named it Pingnan; Names.
and lastly, Taiping; which Name it retains to this day. It contains three
Cities, viz. Taiping, Vehu, and Fachang; of which Vehu, the biggest and
richest, has also a Custom-house, and lies on an Island between the two Arms
of the River Kiang, which afterward join together at the City of Nanking.

The twelfth, being Ningquefu, borders in the North, at the River Kiang; in
Borders.
the East, at Quanghefu; in the South, at Hoecheufu; and in the West, at
Chicheufu. It is a mountainous Country, and contains six Towns, viz. Ningque
the Towns.
Great, and Ningque the Less, King, Taiping, Cingte, Nanling.

The chief City Ninque lies on the Eastern Shore of the River Von.

Within her Walls are pleasant Hills, Warrens, magnificent Buildings, and
abundance of Chestnut and Pear Trees.

Nea^ the little City King stands a fair Chapel, in the Chinese Tongue called
Hiangsi, that is, A sweet smelling Heart, and is Dedicated to five Maidens,
which when they were taken by Pirates, would rather endure death than suffer
their Honor to be blemished.

The thirteenth County Chicheufu, borders in the East upon Ningquefu; in the
Borders.
South-East touches Hoeicheufu; in the South-West lies the Province Kiangsi;
the North-West has the River Kiang; and in the North, a Promontory at the same
River for Boundaries.

This Country was formerly under the Kingdom of V. soon after under Iue; next
under Cu. King Loang called it Nanling; Siu, Cieupu; and the Family Towns.
of Tang, the present Name Chicheufu. It comprehends six Towns, viz. Chicheu
the chief, Cinyang, Tungling, Xetai, Kiente, Tunglieu, and four stately Temples.

The City Chicheu stands seated on the Southern Shore of the River Kiang.

The fourteenth Division Hoeicheufu, being the most Southern of all this
Borders.
Province, conterminates in the East, with the Province of Chekiang; in the
South, with a Promontory; in the South-West, with that of Kiangsi; in the
North-West, with Chicheufu; and in the North, with Ningquefu.

This Country in the time of the Kings suffered the same misfortune as the
Names.
forementioned. The Name Hoeichu it received of the Family Sung, and
possesses six Towns, viz. Hoeichu the chiefest, the rest are Hicuning,
Vuyveng, Kimuen, Towns.
In, Cieki.

This Hoeichu is a Place of great Trade, especially famous for making the best
Chinese Ink and waxed Chests.

The four small Territories of this Province are Quangte, Hochen, Chucheu, and
Siucheu, every one called by the Name of their principal City.

The first of them being Quangte, borders Eastward upon the prime County
Kiangningfu, and Hangcheufu; in the South, upon Hoeicheufu; in the West, looks
at Ningquefu; and in the North runs with a Point to the River Kiang.

This County has two Towns, Quangte the chief, and Kienping, both situate at
the Foot of a pleasant Mountain called Hong and Ling.

The City Quangte is not only fair, but also abounds with Silk.

The second called Hocheu, has for Limits in the North, the third small, and
twelfth great Territory Chucheu; in the East and South; Kiangningfu; and in the
West, Lucheufu.

This Shire contains two Cities, of which Hocheu is the chiefest, and Hawxan.

The City of Hocheu is famous, because heretofore the Residence of a great
Robber Chu, who Anno 1368. drove the Tartars out of China.

The third little County in which the great City Cheucheu stands, whose
Denomination it bears, verges in the North and West with the second Territory
Pungyangfu; in the East, with the Lake Piexe and the seventh great Shire
Yangcheufu; in the South, with Kiangningfu and the two little Territories of
the City Hocheu.

This County contains three Cities, of which Chucheu is the chiefest and
biggest, and the other two much less are Civenciao and Laigan.

The fourth small County, in which the great Siucheu is situate, is the most
Northern of this Province, and borders in the East, upon Hoaiganfu; in the
South, upon Tunyangfu; in the West, upon Honan; in the North, at that of
Xantung. In the middle it is cut through by the Yellow River, and is of great
consequence, because it conterminates with four Provinces, and contains five
Cities, Sieuchu, Siao, Tangxang, Fung, and Poi.

On the North-West side of the City Siucheu lies a Bridge, made of thirty five
Ships linked together with Iron Chains.

Here also is another Bridge that runs athwart the River Pieu.

This City Sieucheu is also famous, because the Emperor Lieupang, promoter of
the Family of Han, after he had taken the City of Poi, set forth from hence to
conquer the Empire.

Thus much of the Province of Nanking; now we will return to our Embassy.

AFter the Netherlanders had gotten fresh Men to Tow them, they set forward
Come to Sucheu.
again over the River Sung on the twenty fifth, and Landed about ten a Clock at
the City Sucheu, where they changed their Barques. No sooner they arrived at
the West Gate of the City, where they were to Embarque again; but the Mandarin
who had the Command of the Vessels, came to bid them welcome, and invited them
to Dine with him the next day; and moreover, presented them with two Porkers,
as many Sheep, four Hens, two Pots of Drink, several sorts of Fruit, and twelve
Pices of Silk-Stuffs, which were all delivered to the Ambassador himself, with
request that he would please to accept them. Van Hoorn thanking him for his
good inclination and trouble which he had taken upon him; and also for the
Presents said, That he would accept of the Provision (because he would not seem
to despise them) but as for the Stuffs he could not do it, because it was not
customary, therefore he desired them to excuse him: Moreover, that he could not
possibly come to Dine with him the next Morning, partly for his indisposition,
being tired with his Journey, and partly fearing to displease the Conbon of the
City, if he went any where to a Feast before he went to him; with which Excuses
they seeming to be satisfied took their leave.

The next Morning, being the twenty sixth, the Horses (being till that time
prevented by Stormy Weather) were Landed and put in Stables ashore.

The twenty seventh nothing happened of note, only some Mandarins came from the
Viceroy Singlamong (who keeps in this City to the number of twenty five) to
Complement and Welcome the Ambassador, whilst the Netherlanders waited for fresh
Vessels to be gone again, of which they then saw no likelihood, notwithstanding
the Mandarine Guides had told them the day before, that without fail they
should have them as that day. They also saw little hopes of their going, there
being no convenient Vessels to be had to carry their Horses.

The Conbon having the day before sent to ask the Hollanders, if they had no
Pistols, nor Sword-blades to dispose of? it was judged fit on the twenty
eighth, (observing what Courtesies the forementioned Lord might do them in
their coming thither) to present him with a pair of Pistols, two Sword-blades,
five Else of Scarlet, one String of Amber, two Pieces of Linen, and a Quilt:
But the Conbon would not accept any thing of the Presents, which were carried
to him by the Secretary, only the Pistols and Sword-blades; so that the rest
he brought back again.

In the Evening a Mandarin, sent from the Conbon, came to Present the
Ambassador, The Conbon Presents the Ambassador.
in requital for his Pistols and Sword-blades, with twelve Pieces of
Silk-Stuffs, four Porkers, four Goats, Geese, Hens, and other fresh Provisions,
which were accepted, but the Silk-Stuffs sent back again.

The twenty ninth Genko the Interpreter informed the Ambassador, that at his
coming an Envoy had been there, who just before was sent from the Emperor at
Peking, to bring the Chinese of Tayowan, under his Obedience. Shift the Goods.


The same day more Presents, and also the Oxen, were put into new Barques; and
likewise the Horses were Embarked again into the same Vessels which they came
in, there being no convenient Vessels to be got for them there. Soon after they
prepared all things to be gone the next day, only staying for Fodder for the
Horses, of which at this Place they were to provide themselves quite to Peking.

The thirtieth in the Forenoon the Conbon sent the Ambassador by one of his The
Conbon sends Provender.
Mandarins ten Picols of Hay for a Present, which since none could be bought
for Money, was accepted with many thanks, and a reward to the Mandarin that
brought it.

In the Afternoon a Grand Mandarin, who had the Command over the Militia The
Ambassador Complemented by a Mandarin.
and the Emperors Wardrobe in this City, came to Complement and Welcome the
Ambassador; who having presented him with a Glass of Wine, and showed him the
Horses and Oxen, took his leave.

The one and thirtieth in the Morning, being furnished with all Necessaries,
Leave Siucheu.
they left Siucheu, and were Towed along a dug Channel, which reaches from
Siucheu, Eastward of the Lake Tai, to the City Chinkiang, and disembogues it
self into the great River Kiang. Having stayed eight days for new Vessels to
Embarque themselves in, and yet not able to get enough, were forced to keep
four of their Hanksieu Barques, two for the Horses, and two for the Presents.

The two Masters of the Havens, sent by the General of Hanksieu to conduct
Haven Masters belonging to Hanksieu depart.
the Netherlanders, took their leave at the North Suburb of Siucheu, where
leaving the Ambassador they intended to Sail again to Hanksieu; Van Hoorn for
their care which they had over the Vessels, gave each of them a Piece of
Perpetuana; and also with this opportunity sent the following Letter to the
General of Hanksieu, and the Conbon.

GRatitude is accounted the greatest Virtue amongst the Hollanders. The The
Ambassador's Letter to the General and Conbon of Hanksieu.
Ambassador cannot forget the many Favors which the generousness and Civility
of Talavja had conferred on him. The Ambassador cannot find words to express
his hearty thanks, but hopes at his Return from Peking and for the future to
manifest by Deeds, how much the Realm of Holland and the Ambassador are obliged
to Talavja.


The whole City Siucheu has its Situation on the Banks of a great standing
River, which cuts through the City cross-ways, and is Navigable both for small
and great Vessels. The Walls of the City, according to the Chinese Geographers,
are forty Chinese Furlongs in circumference, and with the Suburbs above a
hundred: As the Netherlanders were informed, the City covers a Spot of three
Leagues in circumference. Without and within are many stately Bridges of Stone,
resting on several Arches. It is but thinly built, and the Houses are erected
on Pine Tree Masts, many of them being very slight.

Siucheu, because of its nearness to the Sea and the River Kiang, is a Place of
great Trade, and has many Ships belonging to it; nay, the Netherlanders saw so
many Boats in all Places, that there was scarce room to get through them.

Much Amber is used in this City: for the Hollanders passing through several
Streets, saw none but Workers of Amber.

All things, not only for the subsistence of Man, but also for pleasure, may
be had here in great plenty. It is one of the famousest Places in all China,
because all the Portuguese, Indian, Iapan, and other Commodities that come from
foreign Countries, are brought thither not only by Strangers, but the Chinese
themselves. There also come many Merchants from Nanking and other Places to
Trade, which makes, that from year to year there is a continual Trade here, and
Ships going from hence to other Provinces and Cities: and because the Ships
should not be in danger when they Sail cross the neighboring Lake Tai, there is
a Channel made on the North side of the Lake, which runs from the City Sucheu
to that of Chinkiang; so that it discharges its Waters in the River Kiang; but
yet the Course of it is stopped up there by a Sluice, which is drawn up, or let
down when they please. But as they travel from Sucheu to Ukiang, or from Ukiang
to Sucheu, is a Stone Bridge, resting on three hundred Arches, by which the
Channel is divided from the Lake Tai. On this Bridge they draw their Vessels
along by a Line, it being built for that purpose, that they need not lie still
there with their Ships.

Without the Walls of the City stands a Custom-house, where they pay no Custom
for Goods, but for the Ships according to their Burden: and it is said that
this Custom comes Annually to ten hundred thousand Ducats, or five hundred
thousand Pound Sterling; whereby it may easily be judged how many Ships go
constantly up and down this River; whereas all the Emperor's Vessels, or those
that carry any thing to the Court, pay nothing.

Many of the Emperor's greatest Barques, called Lunchyven, past by whilst the
Hollanders Rid at Anchor there.

The City is Governed by a Conbon or Governor, who at that time was a Leaohing
Chinese, and highly beloved by all Persons.

After the Netherlanders were gone about a League from the City they passed by
Xuciquan, a large Village, and in the Afternoon saw two hundred of the
Emperor's great Barques lying at Anchor. In the Evening they arrived at the
South-East side of the Suburb Usie, having that day with Sailing and Towing
passed six Leagues in several Courses.

Usie, the second substitute City to the fifth Metropolis Changcheu, signifies
The City* Usie.
Wanting of Tin; for formerly on Mount Sie near Fusie, the Chinese found a
great deal of that Metal; but in the beginning of the Reign of the Imperial
Family of Han, most of the Mines were exhausted, for which reason the City
received that Denomination.

Here the Hollanders found many Stone Ovens, in which they Bake, or harden with
Heat to that purpose, all manner of Stone.

In the Morning, being the first of April, they proceeded on their Journey,
April.
and Sailing about a Musket Shot from the Walls of Usie, which leaving on
their Lar-board, they arrived at the North-Suburb; where having stayed some
time for Coelies, or Men to Tow them, they went forward again. About Noon they
Sailed through Unquouw, a Village situate on both sides of the Channel, where
they saw diverse Vessels full of Indigo (which the Masters of them said was to
be had at Sinchian and Sucheu,) and toward the Evening arrived at the Village
Gongling, where they stayed all that Night, having that day Sailed three
Leagues and a half in a Northerly Course.

The second in the Morning leaving the Village Gongling, and after half a
Leagues Towing through the Village Syksiovyem they dropped Anchor in the
Evening on the North side of the City Siucheuw, otherwise called Cbangcheu,
that there they might furnish themselves with fresh Coelies; but none being to
be had there so suddenly, they were forced to stay that Night, having not
gained above two Leagues in a North-West Course all that day: The reason why
they made no greater speed was, because the Channel was very full of the
Emperor's Barques, which by reason of their Bulk and deep Lading made but
little way, and the Channel so narrow, that they could not pass them.

The sides of this Channel near the City are raised with much braver Stone than
the other parts.

The third in the Morning going on farther, and passing through the Village
Laytschem, they arrived at Luesinga in the Evening; where dropping Anchor they
stayed all Night to get fresh Coelies to Tow their Vessels, with which they
came that day but three Leagues, because of the slow progress of the Emperor's
Barques.

The fourth leaving Luesinga, they came, after they had been Towed through the
Village called Sucouw, to the City Tanyang: in the Afternoon Sailing along City
Tanyang.
the Walls thereof to the East Suburb, where they stayed that Night to get new
Coelies, having that day Sailed and been Towed in a Northerly Course three
Leagues.

The fifth in the Morning they set forth again with fresh Coelies, and leaving
the City Tanyang, passed by a Lake, which by three Sluices empties her Waters
into this Channel. In the Afternoon they came to a little Village called
Hongunpek, where they spent some time in resting themselves, being much tired
by slippery Ways, and the Wind being against the Vessels, whose high building
had the greater force of them. So soon as they had eaten they went away again,
and in the Evening arrived at the Village Singfon, where they were forced by
tempestuous Weather to drop Anchor, having that day by several Courses been
Towed two Leagues and a half.

The sixth in the Morning leaving Singhfon, they saw several Stone Ovens: about
Noon passing by the Walls of the City Sinkiang, or Chinkiang, they dropped City
Chinkiang.
Anchor at the North Suburb, to make preparation for their going up the Nanking
Stream, or River Kiang, and likewise (as their Mandarine Guides said) to
exchange some Barques, having this day been Towed about two Leagues.

The seventh in the Morning several Tartar Mandarins came to Complement the
Ambassador, and bid him welcome, whilst he entertained them with a Glass of
Wine. One of them after his departure sent the the Ambassador a Porker, a Goat,
and some Fruit, which he thankfully received, and in return sent him some
counterfeit Pearls, which he would else have bought. The Ambassador The
Ambassador is invited to the Governor.
was also by a Mandarin invited to Dinner with the Governor of that Place;
whither he went in the Afternoon (another Mandarin coming from the
forementioned Governor with Horses to fetch him) with Putmans the Secretary,
and all his Retinue, except Nobel, who could not go because of his
indisposition; and coming to the Governor they were courteously received and
welcomed.

This Lord gazed so exceedingly upon the Netherland Ambassador and his Retinue,
that he forgot his Eating and Drinking; by which means also no Discourse happened
amongst them of any remark; so that the Netherlanders after a civil
Entertainment took their leave.

In the Evening the Interpreters, Ienko and Liulako, came to tell the
Ambassador, that they had a second time been sent for to the forementioned
Governor, who asked them for the number and quality of the Emperor's Presents,
which as far as they knew they had given him an account of in Writing, whereat
he was exceedingly amazed, saying, That without doubt they would be very
acceptable. Moreover, he asked them if the Ambassador had no Blood-Coral,
Pistols, Sword-blades, counterfeit Pearls, and the like? because he would
willingly buy some of them, and therefore desired that they would please to
speak to the Ambassador: Which being considered by the Netherlanders, and
observed that this was a Tartar, and a Man of great Quality, who in and about
the City bore the Command over a great number of Soldiers, and that he might do
much for their advantage at Peking, they judged it convenient in the Morning to
send and present him with five Else and a half of Stammel, Presents to the
Governor.
five of Sky-colour'd Cloth, a Perspective Glass, two Pieces of Linen, one
String of Amber Beads, and some counterfeit Pearls; and with them were sent a
Complementing Letter to this effect:

THe Ambassador is extremely satisfied with, and obliged for Talavja's or his
Lordships Civilities, and desires him to accept of these small Gifts as a token
of Friendship; and in so doing will farther oblige the Hollanders:


Captain Putmans was ordered to carry the Governor the forementioned Presents
and Letter that Morning, but saw him come early Riding toward the Barques; so
that it was thought fit to stay till his Return. Mean while the Ambassador's
Son went with the Pilot and Interpreter Maurice a Fowling on the Banks of the
River Kiang. The Governor returning, in the Afternoon came with four of his
chiefest Lords to see the Oxen and Horses, and also to visit the Ambassador,
protesting he could not avoid waiting on him, being so much pleased with his
Conversation: Whereupon the Ambassador called for his Music; with the pleasure
of which he seemed even ravished: After which being entertained with Spanish
Wine and Sweetmeats, he departed.

The Gifts designed for the Governor were now ready to be presented; but he
modestly refused them, saying, He could not accept of them as yet, giving him
many thanks in the mean time. Then asking Genko and Liulako the Interpreters,
who were there present, if the Geueral of Hanksieu, and Conbon of Seucheu had
received any Presents of the Ambassador? To which they answered, That the
General of Hanksieu had not, but the Conbon of Sucheu was pleased to cull out a
couple of Swords: Whereupon he a second time refused the Gifts; but adding,
That if any Swords had been mentioned in the Note, he would have been glad of
them. Wherefore the Ambassador after his departure chose a Sword from a
peculiar Parcel, (for they had but few) and in stead of a Pistol, of which also
they had no great store, (for all the enquiring was for those two sorts of
Arms) added a Carbine to the Presents. Which done, Putmans went a second time
to the Governor with them. The Swords, Carbine, Sky-colour'd Cloth, and
counterfeit Pearl he received, but the rest he sent back; when several of the
Generals Children coming to see the Ambassador in his Barque, were in respect
to their Parents presented with Amber Necklaces and other Trifles.

After the Netherlanders had stayed till toward the Evening waiting for
Vessels to Ferry them over the River Kiang (for there were none but a great
Boat, which the Mandarin Guide Hiulavja kept for himself, under pretense that
that which he came in was grown leaky) they went with all their Vessels to the
Mouth of the Haven before a Pagode, where they stayed all that Night, whilst
the Guide Mandarins offered a Goat and a Swine to their Deity, before which, as
they say, they durst not Sail up the River.

The chiefest of them went into the Pagode or Temple, carrying the slain
Sacrifice to lay it on the Altar; when the Priest at their approach fell
devoutly upon his Knees, and began to Mutter and Pray to himself. In the
Temple, being Painted Red, hung several Lamps, which burnt Night and Day for
the Deceased Souls: On one side of the Altar stood a Trough, wherein they laid
the Victim; and on the other, a Rush Box with small pieces of Canes, which were
the Sorts or Lots cast by the Priests, to know future Events.

Presently after Noon, the Governor of Sinkian came with a Train of great Lords
to the same Temple; which he was no sooner entered, but he sent for the
Ambassador, desiring him, he would Command his Music with him, which the
Ambassador did; and so repairing to the Temple, the Governor Entertained them
with Bean-Broth, and the Ambassador on the other side, Cordiall'd them with
Preserved Nutmegs, which the Governor and his Mandarins having never tasted of
before, Eat with great delight, while the Musicians played on their several
Instruments.

After some stay, the Governor desired to see the Horses, which the Ambassador
caused to be brought out of the Barques, which they all beheld with great
admiration, saying, That they had never seen the like, therefore they doubted
not, but they would be very acceptable to the Emperor; after they had seen the
Horses, the Governor returned again to the City, and the Hollanders to their
Barques.

On Sunday, being the tenth, and Easterday, they set Sail with a South-East
Wind from the City of Sinkiun; the Ambassador with twelve Barques more, went
Northerly cross the River Kiang, and after having Tacked too and again about an
hour, they arrived at the North-side of the River, about a quarter of a League
distant from the Garrison of Quasieu, or Quacheu, through a great Stone Sluice,
in an artificial Channel, running Northerly by the seventh Metropolis Xangcheu,
to the Lake Piexe. This Trench is dug directly through the Country, to make
a way for Shipping out of the River Kiang, (which in that place sends no
Branches to the North, but runs direct East toward the Sea) into the Yellow
River.

It was at first in the Embassy of Peter de Goyer, and Jacob de Keys, by
Nieuhof called, The Royal Channel, partly for her breadth and pleasantness, and
partly, because it was built at the King's Charge.

They were Towed through the same in several Courses, having diverse Reaches and
Windings in half a League: At the end of which they arrived at a Village called
Tongnanghong, where they rested a little, whilst the Ambassador walked ashore
to see the forementioned Sluices; and going also toward a Temple, was met by
two Mandarins, (one a Sinksieuwan, and according to his own saying, the second
Person of Quasieu, and the other a Tartar, and Governor of that Village) who
both civilly welcomed him, for which he returned them Thanks. He of Sincksieuw
being asked by the Ambassador concerning Discourse between the Ambassador and
two Mandarins.
Tayowan, whether it would be delivered, answered, That he was well satisfied,
that this Embassy, and chiefly the Presents which the Netherlanders brought,
would be very acceptable to the Emperor; and that he doubted not of their good
success in their Business, and that all their Wishes were, that the
Netherlanders were entered into a League with the Tartars, in the Country of
China, and that they might come there to Trade with them, and then they should
hope, that the Foraign Traffic would again be permitted as formerly; whereas,
because of the strict Watches at the Seaport Towns, nothing could be done; and
that the Country People could not put off their Commodities; and if you Fee
the Courtiers well, nothing will be denied at Peking*

As to what concerned Tayowan, it was in a mean condition, because they were
obstructed from Trading to any place in China, and likewise all their best
People were gone; therefore if the Emperor would only join twenty Jonks to the
Netherland Ships, it might easily be taken.

That about five Months since, a Messenger had been there from the Emperor, to
bring all the Chinese there present under Subjection, who had also Order, that
if those of Tayowan did not hearken to his Proposals, that then at his return
he should destroy all the Seaport Towns which were yet in being, and to give
strict Orders in all places, that not one Jonk should either come in, or go
out, but if they would submit themselves to the Emperor, that then all places
should be left as they were. Now this Messenger being returned fruitless, there
was such Orders given in all the Havens, that not one Vessel can either come
out or in to them, which was formerly winked at.

Not many days since, another Messenger was sent to Tayowan (being the same of
whom Ienko the Interpreter had informed the Ambassador at Sucheu) whose return
they much longed for.

The Ambassador after this Discourse invited the Mandarins, with some other
that came thither in the interim to this Barque, where they were entertained
with a Glass of Spanish Wine, which having drank they departed.

This Mandarin of Sincksieuw, sent the Ambassador as a Present, one Porker, one
Sheep, four Hens, two Geese, a Vessel of their Drink, and some Herbs, and the
Governor of the Village some Dishes of Meat ready dressed.

Afternoon, the Vessels going through the forementioned Sluices, the Mandarin
Guide Hiu Lavja came to an Anchor at the end of the Village, before a Pagode,
and from thence Rode to make merry at the City of Quazieu; wherefore the
Ambassador seeing that this day would be spent idly, went with the Barques
wherein the Presents were Laden, to the Village Palipoe, and staid all Night;
but the Mandarin informed of the Netherlander's departure, soon after followed
them to the forementioned Villages.

This day they gained about three Leagues.

The eleventh in the Morning, they set Sail again, and passed by several small
Towns and Villages, and also by a great Tower, with seven jutting Galleries,
standing on the South Side of Tongnaphan; between which and the forementioned
Tower, a Channel runs up Westward into the Country.

Against Noon they came to the South Suburb of Iamcefu, otherwise called
Iancheu, the third City of Note in this Territory, where was also a Tower with
four Galleries, by which being Towed to the City Walls, they resolved to change
their Coelies, having given those that brought them thither, leave to go home,
notwithstanding it was late before they got new Men; yet they went away, and
passed through a Bridge with six Arches, opposite to a Custom-House, and so
Eastward, having that day been Towed up the River two Leagues and a half.

In the Morning, being the twelfth, they proceeded on their Journey about
Daybreak, from Yancheu, against the Stream, by and through Wantoe, a Village
separated by a Channel that runs up into the Country of Wayopoe, or Wayopoe.
Stone Bakers, from the abundance of Kilns that are there; the West part of it
being under Water, represented a great Pool, or Lake.

At Noon they passed by Sjopouzink, a Village that a far off seems a City, and
also three Sluices, through which the Water runs out of this Channel into the
Manured Grounds.

Toward the Evening, coming to a small Village of seven or eight Houses,
called Louting, where was a Cloister of their Votaresses or Nuns, they dropped
Anchor, having gained five Leagues on several Courses.

The thirteenth in the Morning, leaving the Village Louting, they passed by
many Cottages, standing on the East Side of this Channel, to the Westward of
which the Country lay all drowned.

In the Afternoon they arrived at Kayoven, or Kaoyeu, the fourth City of Note
City Kayoven.
next Hangcheu, where they were forced to stay, because their Coelies could not
pass, the Ways being so deep by continual falling of Rain.

The City Kaoyeu lies on the East Side of this Channel, on the brinks of the
Lake Piexe, which supplies the Stream with Water.

Formerly, all the Ships that would go from Nanking, and the other Southern
Territories along the River Kiang, and this Channel up to Peking, and so to the
Northern Province, were forced to cross the forementioned Lake, to their great
hinderance and inconveniency, being in Stormy Weather many times compelled to
stay at Kaoyeu for fair Weather.

But in process of time, to prevent this trouble, and that at all times the
Ships might proceed on their Journey, and not be necessitated to cross the
Lake, a broad Channel was dug of seventy Furlongs, on the East Side of it,
and Wharff'd or Enclosed on each side with Freestone: The City stands on a
Clay Ground, the same with the adjacent Country, very good for Rice, which
they have there in abundance.

The Country to the West of this Channel lies most under Water, yet produces
abundance of Canes, which serve for Fuel, for no other Wood grows here.

The fourteenth in the Morning, they set Sail with a stiff Gale of Wind out of
the North-North-East, from the South Suburb of Kayoven, and for a quarter of a
League, they had the City on their Starboard, and the Lake on their Larboard,
till they were past the North Suburb; then Steering a Northerly Course up the
Royal Channel, they left the forementioned Lake on their Larboard.

Between this Lake and the Channel, is only a narrow Bank of three Foot high,
which separates the one from the other: On their left Hand, the Country lay
all under Water, yet in some places stood a few small Huts dry, being the
Residence of Country People.

In the Afternoon, they past by the Village Loantsia, which lay on their
Starboard; here the Country on the East Side began to show somewhat
pleasanter, being Tilled in several places.

In the Evening they Anchored at a Village called Kuisjo.

The fifteenth in the Morning, leaving Kuisjo, they past by Laensui, and
Loujapou, City Paoing.
and in the Afternoon Landed at Paoing, the sixth City of Note under the
seventh Metropolis Yangsheu; it lies on the East Side of this Channel, and is
surrounded with strong Walls, about a League and a half in Circumference: On
the North-side of the City stands a fair Temple, neatly built after the Chinese
manner.

Here they staid sometime waiting for fresh Coelies, which having gotten, they
went farther, and in the Evening arrived at Kinho, where they staid all Night,
having that day by several Courses gained five Leagues.

Between the City Paoing and the Village Kinho, the Bank Westward of the
Channel which separates that and the Lake Piexe, is broken in several places,
through which the Water rushes with such a force out of the Channel into the
Lake, that they had great labor to keep the Vessels from falling there into.

The sixteenth about Daybreak, proceeding on their Journey, they past through
and by many Villages and Hamlets, lying on each side of the Channel; and about
Noon, arrived at the West Gate of the City Hoaigan, having by Noon Arrive at
Hoaigan.
been Towed and Sailed three Leagues and a half in a Northerly Course. Here (as
the Mandarin Guides told them) all their Vessels in which they came were to be
changed; whereupon they immediately applied themselves to the Commissary of
that place, that they might be dispatched with what speed possible.

No sooner were they come to an Anchor with all their Barques, but there also
Landed the Masters of the Haven of Hanksieu, which on the last of March, went
from Sucheu with the Ambassador's Letter to the General, which Letter they
said, they had safely delivered.

Their business, for which they came thither, was to fetch back the four
Hanksieu Jonks, which were yet amongst the Fleet.

Some Mandarins also came to Complement and bid the Ambassador Welcome, in the
name of the Governor of that place; for which Civility they were Entertained
with two or three Glasses of Spanish Wine.

In the Night there arose a great Storm out of the North mixed with Thunder and
Lightning, which continued all the next day.

The eighteenth, the forementioned Governor invited the Ambassador and The
Ambassador is entertained by the Governor of Hoaigan.
his whole Retinue to a Feast, in a great House, at the West-Gate of the City,
before which they lay with their Vessels, whither they accordingly went about
Noon, and were no sooner come there, but they were brought to the Governor's
Presence, who kindly Congratulated the Ambassador's Arrival and Health. After
some other Complements were past, every one was placed at a peculiar Table, and
plentifully served.

Among their Table-talk at Dinner the Governor asked, What the Ambassador
thought of China, and if it was not a great Country? Who replied, Yes Sir, not
only a great, but a very fair Country, full of Fertile Grounds, and Delightful
Objects: Then he began to Discourse with the Guide Mandarins (which were there
present) about the Vessels: Wherefore the Ambassador desired the Governor
(being informed before, that there were few Barques to be had there) that since
he was come so far with the Emperor's Presents, having never wanted any
Conveniences, that he would be pleased to take care, to procure them good
Vessels so soon as possible, (because he was yet to go the most dangerous part
of the way) having already spent so long a time in their Journey. All which
this Lord promised, and excusing the meanness of the present Treat, hoping when
they came back from Peking, to be provided for their better Entertainment. On
which Van Hoorn proffered to Present him with a parting Cup of Spanish Wine,
which he modestly refusing, would not suffer.

Thus the Netherlanders taking their leaves, and departing to their several
Barques, two Mandarins came to them, (which had, whilst the Netherlanders were
Entertained at the forementioned Lords, sat just over against them) to ask in
the Governor's Name, if their Entertainment had pleased them? whereupon the
Ambassador, in respect to their Master, Presented each of them with five Else
and a half of Red Cloth, which after some Complements they accepted.

The nineteenth in the Morning, according to the usual Custom, the Secretary
Vander Does went with a Complementing Letter to the Commissary, and to Thank
him for his kind Entertainment: The Contents were these.

THe Ambassador so highly esteems Talavja's Civility, that he cannot express A
Complementing Letter from the Ambassador to the Commissary.
his Thankfulness in these few Lines; but at his return from Peking, He hopes
to find Him in good Health, when he will manifest and confess himself much
obliged by his Lordships Favors.


The Ambassador was informed by the Mandarin Guides, that notwithstanding the
Commissary had promised Yesterday, that he would take care to provide Vessels
for his farther Journey: The Touwatja had said, That there were none to be had,
therefore the Secretary was commanded, that when he came to the Commissary, to
desire him a second time to assist them, that they might depart with all speed,
and then to go from thence to Touwatja, and ask him if any Vessels were to be
had? and if he answered no, he should acquaint him, that they would hire
Vessels themselves, for they could wait no longer; and if he replied, there
were, then to desire him, that they might be sent to them that very day.

The Secretary at his return, informed that he had been at the Commissary's
House, but could not be admitted to speak with him; but that he had given the
Letter, and whatever else he had to say, to his Servant, who presenting it to
his Master, brought answer, That his Lordship thanked the Ambassador for his
kind Wishes; as to what concerned the Vessels, he knew no otherwise but that
the Ambassador was already furnished, but since they were not, he would
immediately send to the Touwatja, and Order him, to procure them; which if he
did not do, he would complain to the Emperor of his neglect. The Secretary had
also been with the Touwatja, and inquired of him concerning the Barques: To
which he was answered, That there were Vessels enough, but they lay at
Sinkianso, a Village at least three Leagues from thence, and that he would send
some of his Men thither with the Guide Mandarins, to look upon them, and if
they were Equipt and Tight, to hire them.

But because the Ambassador supposed the Guides Mandarins not to be very expert
in Naval business, he sent his Secretary with them; who returning in the
Evening, brought word, That he had chose two convenient Barques for the
purpose, which Touwatja had promised to hire, but he could find none to carry
the Horses, Oxen, and their Persons, therefore the Touwatja believed it
convenient, that the Ambassador and Nobel should remain in those Barques which
brought them thither, and go up farther in them; and the Touwatja would
satisfy the Owners of them for it, and also furnish them with all other
Necessaries for their Journey.

As for Barques to carry the Horses, he would send for them from the other side
of the Yellow River, which with the two Barques that the Secretary had chosen,
would be there the next Morning; to which purpose, Lakka the Interpreter was
left there, that he might come down with them.

The twentieth in the Morning, the Mandarins (which the day before had Presents
to the Ambassador.
been Presented with five Else and a half of Red Cloth) came in return to
Present the Ambassador with two Cowes, two Sheep, six Ducks, six Hens, four
Steans of Chinese Drink, seven Pieces of Silk Stuffs, and two Silver Cups.

The Provisions were kindly accepted of, but the Silver Cups and Silk Stuffs he
returned.

In the Afternoon, the Interpreter Lakka came back without any Barques from the
Village Sinkiansoe, with news, that the Touwatja's People wrangled, and would
not agree with the Owner of the two Barques which the Secretary had chosen,
offering them less than their Fare; whereupon Nobel went immediately to the
Touwatja, to ask him a second time, What he intended to do about the Barques,
and withal tell him, That he if he did not suddenly provide them with Barques,
they would go and hire some themselves, or else go away with them in which they
were.

Nobel at his return brought the Touwatja along with him, who excused himself,
that he could not yet provide Vessels for them; and desired, that the
Ambassador would please to have patience till the next Morning, against which,
he would send to all places, and if he could find none, they might remain in
those wherein they were, and so go on in them at least two days after.

The next day being the one and twentieth, no likelihood of any preparation
appearing, Van Hoorn judged it convenient to write to the Governor to this
effect.

THe Viceroy Singlamong has earnestly desired, that the Ambassador Letter to
the Governor for Barques.
should hasten his Journey to Peking, because the Lipous were somewhat
dissatisfied at his long stay; now the Ambassador has already been three
Months from Fokien.

The Horses, Oxen, and other Goods of the Presents.
Chinkon, are subject to hurt, and may suffer in their Transporting.

And because the Emperor's Favor is concerned in this Chinkon, the Ambassador
desires, that his Lordship would please to give Order for the speedy procuring
of Vessels for the Chinkon to go up to Peking, or that the Ambassador himself
may hire, because he can neither well answer his long stay to the Emperor, nor
his Master the Lord Maetzuiker in Batavia.


To this Letter carried by Putmans, the Governor answered.

THat he had just cause to complain; also that he himself had sent some Barges,
and that he would take further care to accommodate the Ambassador so soon as it
was possible.


In the Evening the Touwatja came again to the Ambassador, to promise and
assure him, that he should be provided the next Morning for his Journey, and
therefore entreated his patience till then: To which Van Hoorn answered, That
if he performed his promise, he would take it kindly.

The two and twentieth, the Mandarin Guides came to tell the Ambassador, that
the Vessels were come to take in the Horses, and Oxen, and that the Shipwrights
were busy in mending and repairing the Decks. The Commissary having sent them
as his own, and likewise a great Boat to put the Presents in out of those
Vessels which were not in condition to go further.

The Netherlanders immediately going to see the forementioned Barges, and
finding them to be pretty good, they immediately gave order for the removing of
them into those Vessels, and so, all things being ready, they left the City
Haoigan with seven Vessels, which carried their Goods and Persons, besides
eight more for the Mandarins and Interpreters. Coming beyond the North Suburb
of Haoigan, the Governor of the City, who was there busy receiving the
Emperor's Customs and Tribute, Drank to the Netherlanders good Voyage in a Cup
of Bean-Broth, which he sent Aboard by his own Servants; for which as they
passed by him they returned him many thanks, and gratified the Servants with
two Rix-Dollars.

Haoigan, the eighth City of prime remark in the Province of Nanking, lies on
the East side of the Channel on a Plain, being all a Morass, not far from the
Sea, and in the North near the Yellow River. It is but one City, yet consisting
of two Parts, both which are enclosed within one Wall: that which lies to the
South is properly called Haoigan, and that to the North-East Yenching: It is
enlarged by a Suburb, which on each side of the Channel extends it self above a
League.

In this City the Viceroy of that Province has his Residence, who takes care,
as Purveyor, for the Emperor's Annual Provisions, and Commands with arbitrary
Power over the Southern Provinces. His Office is to send for Provisions and
other Necessaries from the adjacent Country, which in an incredible number of
the Emperor's Jonks are sent from thence to Peking. When they come to this City
they are all searched and measured by the Vice Roy's Order, who afterward
sends them to the Court.

In this Suburb are also two Custom-houses, one for Merchandises, and the other
for Ships, but not for the Emperor's use. The Money which is hereby raised is
bestowed on the repairing of Sluices, Graffs, and Banks near several
Water-falls; yet notwithstanding a great part thereof goes to the Emperor's
Exchequer. On the North side of the City in this Channel are three Waterfalls,
of which the first and nearest to the River Hoai is the most troublesome,
because out of this River the Water comes with great force; which is stopped by
nine great Banks, that it may not overflow the whole Country.

Not far from Haoigan the Netherlanders passed by Pantja and several other
Villages, and also by a great number of the Emperor's Jonks laden with
Tributary Goods. In the Evening they arrived at Zinkhiunzoe, where they were to
pass by a Sluice, having by Noon been Towed almost three Leagues.

The next Morning being the twenty fourth they got safely through the
forementioned Sluice, and from thence by a Village called Sinkjanzoe, which
scattering extends it self along this Channel above a League and a half, and
about Noon were in sight of the Village Namenno, or Namemio, or Neymemia,
before which stood a Place of Execution, as appeared by several Men's Heads
stuck on Poles: Here they were also forced to pass another Sluice, which was
somewhat dangerous; for coming near it, they were forced to stay till some of
the Emperor's Barques, laden with Revenues, were gotten through. Mean while the
Horses and Oxen were put ashore, for fear, as the Men pretended, when the
Barques should come to the Sluice with them (where the Water, because of its
narrow Passage makes a great roaring) they would not stand still, and thereby
endanger the oversetting of the Barques. In the Afternoon all the Vessels got
safe through, yet with much trouble; for every Vessel was forced to be drawn
with two hundred Men; for the Water on the upper, or North side is above four
foot higher than that below on the South: Thus they were towed along till they
came to the end of the Village, where they Anchored before a Pagode, where the
Barque-men, according to their Custom, went to offer and pray for a safe
Passage through the Yellow River, which they were now to enter, having this day
gained about three Leagues.

The twenty fifth about Noon leaving Namemio, they crossed the Yellow River,
Come to the Yellow River.
which runs South-East and North-West by the forementioned Village to the
Western Shore, on which the Coelies were Landed, opposite to the Village
Singho, and then towed them North-North-West up the Yellow River, till they
came to the Village beforementioned, where they stayed for fresh Men.

Mean while a Siampan or Boat came aboard with a Priest, and two Persons
Weather-makers.
calling themselves Magicians, or Cunning-men, one of them having a Bodkin
stuck through his Cheek, and continually shaked their Bodies, as if they had
been possessed, which they made the poor People believe, also telling the Men
in the Ambassadors Vessel, That they should have a fair Wind the next day, and
a successful Voyage; whereupon the Master, who stood quaking before them, gave
them some Silver (which was all they desired) and also some Gold and Silver
Paper, which he entreated them to offer to their Deity: Van Hoorn also to be
rid of them, gave them some Money.

There are many of these sort of People in China, which by strange Gestures,
and scourging of themselves after a peculiar manner, so get Alms from the
Charity of the People.

Some lay red-hot Cinders on their bald Heads, where they let them burn so
Jugl^rs*
long, till the stench of the Broyling offends the Spectators, whilst they by
crying, wringing of their Hands, and the like, enduring so great Torment, move
all that are present to a charitable Benevolence.

There accustom also in the chiefest Cities, and Places of greatest Commerce,
especially at Annual Fairs, whole Companies of blind Beggars, which at the
uttering of some Words which they mutter, strike themselves so violently with a
sharp and cutting Stone on their Breasts, that sometimes the Blood trickles
down their Bellies.

Others knock their Foreheads one against another with such violence, that they
seem to crack one another Skulls; which they continue till fainting they fall
in a Swoon, unless prevented by a considerable Alms. Some again lying along on
the Ground, beat their Heads against the Stones till they have great Swellings
as big as Eggs upon their Foreheads.

Besides these, there are many other Idle People in China, who by several
Cheats maintain themselves by the Gifts of Charitable Persons. The Beggars
amongst others go up and down in Companies, as our Gipseys, who for their
debauched living are accounted as the most infamous of the Nation. Most of them
are deformed, either born so, or else made so wilfully by their Parents in
their Infancy, with incredible Torture; for there are some with wry Necks or
Mouths, crook Backs, long hooked Noses, or squint Eyes, and lame Arms or Legs.

There are likewise many Mountebanks, who use several wild Beasts, especially
Tigers, made tame by Degrees, on which, to the admiration of the Beholders,
they sit and ride through many Cities and Villages, which walk along the
Streets very softly, with a Branch in its Mouth, which holding wide open, is
very fearful to look upon, besides his Tail, which he swings to and fro, yet
hurts none.

The Rider, who knows without either Bit or Bridle to govern the Tiger, only
by moving his Body and Feet, has a wide Coat over his under Clothes, with
Sleeves so large, that they hang down half way to the Calves of his Legs: Over
his right Shoulder comes a Girdle, which is made fast under his left Arm, in
manner like a Scarf* In his left Hand he grasps a Sword, with which he cuts the
Air, and now waves it over his Head, and then side-ways, crying and extolling,
like our Stage-Doctors, his Balsoms, Unguents, and Plasters, good against all
Wounds and Distempers whatsoever.

This Mountebank is generally accompanied with many deformed People, some
following him on Crutches, others with Rattles; most of them go naked; others
again wear wide Coats, full of Patches of diverse Colors and Stuffs; others,
which is strange to behold, have stiff Wings on their Temples, on each side of
their Heads.

IT was late in the Afternoon before fresh Toers came from the Village Singo;
nevertheless the Netherlanders going forward, passed by Sinkiazuan, and about
Night arrived at another small Village, containing about ten or twelve Houses,
called Ioupou, where they dropped Anchor, having that day been towed but two
Leagues and a half.

The twenty sixth they went by break of day from Ioupou, and came, having
passed Conghiveao, Tsantzan, and Govetchia, the two first on the East, and the
last on the West side of a River, about a Cannon-shot Southward from the City
Taujenjeen, where they were forced to stay for fresh Coelies, having that day
gained The City Taujenjeen.
three Leagues and a quarter, according to the Course of the Yellow River.

Taujenjeen, otherwise called Taoyven, situate on the Western Shore of the
Yellow River, is surrounded with broad and strong Mud or Earthen Walls,
fortified above with Stone Breast-works.

The twenty seventh they proceeded on their Journey with fresh Toers, and
leaving the City Taujenjeen, went on Easterly, and at Noon passed by Suytsien,
lying on the East side of the Yellow River, and also by diverse Rusticks Houses,
which stood on each side thereof. At Noon they came to a nameless Hamlet, of
seven or eight Houses, on the West side of the Stream, where they stayed all
Night, because the Mandarins, it beginning to blow somewhat hard, durst not
venture further. This day they were got about three Leagues onwards of their
Journey.

The next Morning, being the twenty eighth, they reached the Villages Goesjan,
Pojancho, and Gousuntu, the one on the East, and two last on the Western Shore
of the Stream. In the Afternoon they arrived at Tsinsing, where they lay still
expecting fresh Coelies, being got three Leagues and a half that day on several
Courses. Somewhat Easterly from Tsinsing appears a fair Castle, within a Wall,
which toward the North takes in a Mount.

The twenty ninth in the Morning weighing from Tsinsing, they came, having
sailed a League Westerly, to Kousango, a Village where the Channel called Iun
takes its beginning, and discharges its Waters through a Sluice; viz. This
Channel Iun begins on the Northern Borders of the Province of Peking, in the
Territory Hoaiganfu, Northward from the City Socien, on the North side of the
Yellow River; out of which the Ships that go to all Places in the Northern part
of the Empire, are brought into the Channel Iun, which spreads it self
North-West from thence through the second County Iencheufu, in the Province of
Xantung to the City Cining, Southward of the Lake Nanyang, then through those
of Tungchunfu, and through the Nanyang, and lastly at the end of that Territory
it disembogues in the River Guei, which separates the Provinces of Xantung and
Peking.

But because this Channel in many Places is too shallow for Vessels of Burden,
there are above twenty Sluices, which they call Tungoa, built artificially with
Stone: every Sluice has a large Watergate, which is opened when any small
Boats or Vessels are to pass, and strongly barred up with Posts and Planks to
keep up the Water. These forementioned Gates are opened with an Engine, or
Wheel-work, with little trouble, to let the Water through, and so from one to
another till they have past through, like the Sluices at our new River at
Guilford. But half way before they come to the City Cining, they let as much
Water out of the Lake Usianghoe, or Can, through a very great Watergate, as
they have occasion for them, locking it again, that the Lake may not be quite
exhausted.

When the Ships come to the Lake Chang they cross it not, but go with greater
ease along a Channel made near the side, and Confined with two broad Banks. At
every Watergate are People, which for small consideration pull the Vessels
through with Ropes. In this manner the Ships go out of the Yellow River to
Peking.

Certainly if the European Builders, or Layers of Watercourse, did come along
this Channel Iun, and behold the thickness and height of the Banks on both
sides, and the stately Water-gates, which are also of Freestone, or the
firmness of the Work, they would justly admire the Contrivance and Art of the
Chinese in this their way of Aqueduct, not to be paralelled by the prime
Pieces of the best Masters in Europe.

After all the Boats were Towed through the forementioned Water-gates, they
Sailed up the Channel Iun, in a Northerly Course with a fair Wind by the
Villages Mochoctan and Uwtaotchou, the first on the West, and the last on the
East side of the Channel, and in the Evening came to Maulovao on the Western
Shore, having this day wrought out six Leagues and a half.

Here they they were forced to exchange their Coelies, because the other that
came from Sinsing (a Place two Leagues and a half distance from thence) had
gone their Stage.

Van Hoorn no way satisfied with these delays, told the Mandarin Guides, that
Van Hoorn is displeased for staying.
they ought to have sent Coelies before, that they might have been ready
against his coming thither, and then rehearsed the long time which he had
already spent, when as they might have finished their Journey in six Weeks; all
which (said he) you can scarce answer in Peking, if the Emperor's Presents
should be any ways damnifi'd, which they are subject to.

The thirtieth at Noon, no Coelies coming, they went with some Soldiers into
the Country to Press some of the Rusticks; which was done so leisurely, that
it was almost Night before they got from Maulovao, and Sailed the whole Night,
though with a slow pace, because their Vessels often raked upon the Sand.

In the Morning the first of May they past by Kiakio and Sankomiao, two decayed
May.
Villages on the East side of the Channel somewhat up into the Country, and
about Noon passed by Thoetsuang; beyond which they lay still a little while
till their Toers had Dined. Then going on again they arrived in the Evening at
a small Village called Sjousincha, and Anchored before a Watergate, having
since the last Night gained six Leagues in several Courses.

The second in the Morning about nine a Clock they passed through the
Watergate, before which they lay the Night before, being hindered there by a
strong North-West Wind. In the Afternoon coming to Twansingiao, they again lay
before one of the Water-gates till the Wind was something abated. Whilst they
lay there, one of the Emperor's Barques, laden with Tributary Goods, just to
the Northward of the Village, was accidentally set on fire, but soon quenched,
only burning her Stern, and very little of her Lading. Toward Evening they
passed the forementioned Watergate, and Sailed in the Moonshine through
Singhjamiao and its Water-gates, and about Midnight Anchored before Wansensua,
having that day gained but a League and a half. About daylight they got
through the forementioned Sluice, and at Noon arrived at Milanchia, where they
were to pass another, but because the Wind blew very hard they cast Anchor
before it.

This Village of Milanchia separates the Province of Nanking from that of
Xantung, being seated on their Borders. Against the Evening, the Weather
growing more calm, they went with their Vessels through the Watergate beyond
the Village, at the end of which they stayed, having the whole day not gained
above three quarters of a League, and passed out of the Province of Nanking
into that of Xantung.

The Province of Xantung, being the fourth of the Northern, verges South-East
and North with the Sea; and on the West side surrounded with Rivers: in the
North it borders upon the Province of Peking; in the South, on that of Nanking,
from which separated by the Yellow River. The remainder thereof lies enclosed
within the Rivers of Iun and Guei.

The fourth in the Morning weighing again, they passed through Tsingchia and
Hanghsuansa, and also through two Water-gates.

To the Westward, or behind this Village, a great Lake, by the Chinese called
Yzianghoe, takes its beginning, and through two Sluices discharges Waters into
those of Iun.

In the Evening, though late, they came to the Village Tzizang, where they
stayed all Night, being got three Leagues and a half farther in several Courses
that day.

The fifth about Daybreak they went forward, and about Noon reached Iaixinho,
or Iaxhinno, a little Town consisting of thirty six Houses, all built like
Forts, or defensive Towers. Here they stayed some time for fresh Coelies, who
being come they weighed again, and first passed through a Watergate, lying in
the forementioned Iaixinho; afterward through Tsonoiacha, and two Watergates
more. In the Evening they arrived at Maaliaeao, where they stayed all Night,
having gained four Leagues that day.

Here, as before, began to appear a Lake on the East side of the Channel. The
Country to the Hills seeming to lie thereabouts under Water.

The sixth in the Morning before day setting forward again they passed Pass by
several Villages.
through ten Floodgates, and also by and through Tsouteucha and Naeyang,
Loutchiajeen, Tongnang-fong, Tsiongiaceen, Chinkio, Sinchia, Tsoufee, and
Sohousum. In the Evening they arrived at the South Suburb Tzinningfoe, or
Cinning, and Anchored City Cinning.
before a Flood-gate, through which they were to pass. This day they had gained
eight Leagues.

Here, according to the Mandarin Guides Saying, the Hoaigan Barques, which were
in the Fleet, must be changed, and therefore they must stay till the Governor
of the City had provided others for them.

Here the Ambassador, to oblige Hiulavja, one of his Guides, that he might make
haste, gave him a String of Blood-Coral.

The eighth in the Morning the Governor of the Militia of that Place, being a
Tartar, came to Complement the Ambassador; for which Civility he was
entertained with a Glass of Wine, and at his going away saw the Horses and
Oxen, which he much admired.

In the Afternoon the Mandarin Guide Hiulavja came with the two Vessels to
shift and take in the Horses and Oxen, but the Netherlanders searching them,
found them to be very old and crasie, and therefore sent them back again.

The ninth in the Morning a Grand Mandarin, a Native Chinese, came with
Hiulavja to visit the Ambassador, who kindly entertained them: amongst other
Questions the Ambassador asked them when they should go forward on their
Journey; whereupon Hiulavja answered, That the City had not yet provided Toers,
Rice, Money, and other Necessaries, which should be gotten with all expedition,
that they might have the least hindrance possible. But the Ambassador
suspecting it to be only delays, judged it convenient to send the following
Letter to the Conbon, or Governor of that Place, to this effect:

THe Ambassador is arrived here from a remote Ploce with the Presents.
Chinkon, and therefore hopes that his Lordship will forward the Journey; for
they have been a long time on the Way, and the Presents are subject to receive
hurt and damage, therefore the Ambassador desires Talavja, that he would please
to give order that there may be good Barques prepared for the Horses and Oxen,
and that the Ambassador may be dispatched to go with all speed to Peking.


This Letter being carried to the Conbon by the Secretary Vander Does, and read
over, he replied, That it was never known, nor customary either going to, or
coming from Peking, to change Vessels in that Place. To which the Secretary
rnswer'd, That he hoped he would excuse the Ambassador, because he knew not the
Custom, as being a Stranger; he had made this Request on the advice of his
Mandarin Guides, who made him believe that the Hoaigan Barges must be changed
here. The Conbon after this Discourse said, That all the Emperor's Goods should
remain in the same Barques in which they came thither, and that he would give
order that the Barques should be furnished with all Necessaries; that the
Hollanders might depart when they pleased. He also in the Secretary's presence
sent a Mandarin to the Touwatja, or Master of the Vessels, with Commands that
he should immediately furnish the Barques with all manner of Necessaries, and
by no means detain the Hollanders.

The tenth in the Morning a Mandarin, sent from the Conbon of that Place,
Conbon presents the Ambassador.
came to present the Ambassador with two Hogs, two Sheep, two Ducks, six Hens,
two Pots of Chamzoe, or Zamzou, that is, Liquor of Rice, and some other fresh
Provisions; which were all kindly accepted of, and the Bearers rewarded with
three Tail of Silver.

About Noon they passed through the Water-gates, before which they had lay'n
with all their Vessels, and lay still before another Sluice till the eleventh in
the Evening; then setting forward again they arrived at Cinning, or Tzinning,
or Cuningsiu, the fourteenth City of note under Yengche^.

This is a pleasant, though an ancient City, lying on the East Shore of the
Channel Iun, in a plain and Morassy Soil. The Suburbs thereto belonging, which
spread themselves on each side of the Channel, are very large and populous, and
has on each side of the Trench two strong Water-gates.

In the dark they Sailed by the Villages Oeling, Siliphoe, and Ghansu; and in
the Afternoon dropped Anchor at the Village Poetuen, a League and three
quarters from the City Tzinning.

The twelfth in the Morning weighing again, they shot three Water-gates, and
also passed by and through two Villages, Longhwanghmuao and Nangwangao, lying
close by one another, near the Place where the River Onghoo runs into this
Channel, so that the Current which had hitherto in this Graff been against
them, was now somewhat with them, by which means they reached the Village
Poelcely that Evening; and not long after arrived at Koygoeva, where they
Anchored before two Sluices, having that day gained about four Leagues.

The thirteenth they passed the Sluices, and so leaving Koygoeva they Sailed
through three Floodgates, and by the Villages Inlako, Tsinti, Kingkiacouw, and
Oesienno: coming beyond the last, the Wind began to blow very hard out of the
North, so that they were forced to Anchor near the Shore to expect fairer
Weather, having this day Sailed four Leagues.

The fourteenth being calmer they weighed again, and Sailed about three
quarters of a League, when they came before a Flood-gate in the Village
Oesienno, where they lay till the Evening, because the Mandarins said there was
not Water enough to float the Vessels. Toward Evening they weighed again, and
in the Dusk passed by Siliphoe, Ulchelapoe, and Oeliphoe; and in the Afternoon
arriving at Toukjamtuao, they dropped Anchor before a Watergate, two Leagues
and a quarter from Oesienno.

The fifteenth in the Morning about nine a Clock they passed the Sluices, and
leaving the Village Tunkjamtuao, they came about Noon to Xantsuy, a City, where
they stayed a little while for fresh Coelies; which when come to them, they
immediately went on.

The City of Xantsuy lies on each side of the Channel Iun, which on the West
side at the going up of the Trench, and fortified with strong Castles built
square, and about an hours walking in circumference; the Walls of Stone,
strengthened with Stone Breast-works: there are also many stately Buildings,
which for want of Inhabitants are fallen to decay. Amongst other Edifices appears
a famous Pagode, or Temple, Teywan Miao, enclosed within a Wall raised half
with Freestone, and the other half with red and green Bricks. The Temple it
self consists all of Freestone; the Roof on the inside is of a Vermilion
color, and on the top covered with yellow glazed Tyles; without the Walls is a
standing Water, where, according to the Relation of the Chinese, some years
since a stately Temple suddenly sunk, with the whole Congregation, Priests and
People.

Toward the Evening they came to Kimonsa, and dropped Anchor before a
Watergate, having that day gained three Leagues and a half.

The sixteenth in the Morning they shot the Sluices with all their Vessels,
before which they had lay'n that Night, and came to another about a Musket
Shot thence; through which they could not get till the Afternoon, because of
the shallow Water. From thence they arrived before another in the Village
Oasting, which they went through in the Evening; and in the Dusk arrived at
Tsaotsing before a Flood-gate, having that day been Towed but three quarters of
a League; it was very difficult too for the great Vessels to get through these
Sluices, which were in a manner quite dry on the North side, and on the South
side not above three Foot and a half of Water, which being let out, there would
not remain a Foot and a quarter, when as the great Barges drew two Foot and a
half so that the Water must at least be a Foot higher before they could get
through; wherefore they lay still two days, viz. the seventeenth and
eighteenth; but on the nineteenth they got through, and after a little Sailing
coming to the Village Gihaatsysy they dropped Anchor before a Water gate,
having this half day been Towed somewhat more than a League.

The twentieth in the Morning they went through the Sluice, and at Noon another;
and also by the Village Zoatiajeen, In the Afternoon arriving at Lieghayway
they Anchored before a Watergate, having gained two Leagues this day.

The one and twentieth in the Morning having shot the last Sluice, they arrived
about nine a Clock at the South Suburb of Tungjanfoe, otherwise called
Tungchang, the third City of eminency in the Province of Xantung.

This little City of Tungchang stands in a Valley, built square, and about an
The City Tunchang.
hours walking in circumference, with defensive Walls. In it are two eminent
Streets, which run cross through the Town, in the middle of which stands a
Triumphal Arch, or a high Structure with four Vaulted Posterns, and as many
Roofs one above another. The Gates are very strong, and have on each side four
Bulwarks, which they can, when Stormed, clear and make good. On the North side
is a Bridge of a hundred and thirty Paces long, leading cross a Water that
incircles the City. On the South is a very populous Suburb of great Trade. On
the East stands an Iron Pillar, four Fathom and a half thick, and about twenty
Foot high, Engraven at the bottom with several Chinese Characters, which
according to their Relation was set up there seven hundred years before, as a
Monument; under which lay the Body of an Hero, famous for his valorous
Achievements, and good Service done his Country.

The two and twentieth in the Morning they left the South Suburb of Tunghang,
having gotten fresh Toers, for which they stayed, and Sailing a Musket Shot
Eastward by the City, came about Noon to Sinsia, where they Anchored before a
Sluice, having Sailed above a League this half day.

Here they were forced to lie all the Afternoon and the next day, before they
could get through for want of Water.



The twenty fourth in the Morning they shot the forementioned Sluices, and
about Noon another; and also passed by Xoesu, Liancotsue, Liancotza. In the
Afternoon they came to Toetsao, where they Anchored before a Watergate, having
been Towed above a League that day.

The twenty fifth setting forth again, they passed another Sluice, and about
Noon they came to Woersjavaan; where taking fresh Toers they went away
immediately, with hopes to reach the City of Linsing that day; but being past
Ooetsjaven, Taykiasa and Tayhiaven, they saw that the Channel lay full of the
Emperor's Vessels, laden with Tributary Goods; which by reason of its
narrowness and sholeness in some places they could not pass by, which forced
them (though but half a League from Linsing) to stay till the Water grew
higher, having that day gained three Leagues.

The twenty sixth in the Morning they went forward again, and about nine a
Clock they arrived at Linsing; into which they went with their Barges (for the
Channel runs through the middle of it) till they came before a Flood-gate,
through which they were to pass, having this Morning been Towed half a League
in a Northerly Course. All Places hereabouts lay full of the Emperors Barges.

The Governor of this Place, as the Mandarin Guides related, was deposed, and a
new one expected in two or three days from Tungchianfoe; for which reason they
could not pass the Sluice before which they lay, it being locked up with Iron
Chains.

The twenty seventh and twenty eighth nothing happened of remark.

The twenty ninth, being Whitsunday, the Ambassador was told, that the Governor
of Tungchanfoe was come, and had taken possession of his Place; so that he
thought fit the thirtieth in the Morning, for the hastening of his Journey, to
write the following Letter to him.

THe Holland Ambassador is come from remote Countries, and has staid here at
Linsing above four days. The Chinkon has been a long time a coming, and by
that means subject to be spoiled; therefore the Ambassador desires, that they
may with all speed go to Peking; and to that purpose the Sluices may be opened,
which will be serviceable to the Emperor, and a great kindness to the
Ambassador.


Nobel carrying this Letter, related at his return, that he had been with the
new Governor, who in answer to the Ambassador's Letter had told him, That he
was sensible how far a Journey the Netherlanders were come, and that he knew
(having two years since been at Emuy and Quemuy) what service they had done for
the Emperor; therefore he would not detain them, but send a Mandarin to search
the Barges (because there being a Custom-house, no Goods but the Emperors were
to pass through without paying) in which the Emperors Goods were, to see if any
other private Commodities were in them, or not; which should no sooner be done,
but he would give them leave to be gone, and accordingly a Mandarin was
forthwith sent, who at first was very earnest about searching of the Goods: But
when the Ambassador answered him, that he might do it and begin at his Vessel,
but he would permit no Chests nor Cases to be opened, he went away without
looking upon them; being first presented by the Ambassador with two Pieces of
Linen, which was all he aimed at.

The next Morning about Daybreak, passing the Sluice with all the Vessels,
Leave Linsing.
they went through the City of Linsing, till they came to the River Guei, or
Geu, which comes from the South to another part of the City.

Thus they left the Channel Iun, in which they had past through forty seven
Sluices, or Floodgates, not without great trouble, and Expense of two and
thirty days time; yet according to the Chinese saying, they were gotten
happily and speedily out of it, because some years since, there was so little
Water in that Channel, that the ordinary Vessels had been forty five, and fifty
days coming from Tunchiangfoe, and Linching; which places are not above six
Leagues distant one from another.

In the Afternoon they got beyond Linsing, which exceeds all other Cities in
City Linsing.
this County for Populousness, fair Buildings, (though on the West side it is
much decayed) and Traffic; nay, it need not give place to any City in the
whole Empire, for it stands at the end of the Channel Iun, where the
forementioned Channel and the River Guei commix their Waters; by which means
there is extraordinary Conveniences for Shipping, the Vessels and Barques that
come Laden to this City with all sorts of Merchandise, from most places in
China, here pay Custom to three Treasurers chosen for that purpose.

On the North side, you may see a Bridge with nine Arches, over which they pass
from one part of the City to the other; one of which Arches is made so
artificially, that it may be removed, and give Passage to the biggest Vessels,
after they have paid their Custom.

The City (seated in a plain and Sandy Soil) has a Mud-Wall, Fortified on the
top with Stone Breast-works, having on the North side fifteen Bulwarks, and two
Redoubts. Porcelin Tower of Linsing.


Half a League from the Walls, on the North side of the City, is an exceeding
high Tower, built with eight corners, rising from the Ground with nine
Galleries, every one nine Cubits above another, so that the whole height
amounts to ninety Cubits. The Out-Wall consists of fine Porcelane Earth,
curiously adorned with Imagery and Painting; the Inner, of various colored
Marble, Pollish'd as smooth as Glass, especially the Black: The Ascent is by a
pair of winding Stairs, not made in the middle, but betwixt two Walls, which
has its Entrance at every Story, and from thence to the Marble Galleries, and
Gilded Iron Rails, which as an Ornament are made round about the Galleries; at
whose corners hang little Bells, in such a manner, that being moved by the Wind
they make a pleasing sound: On the uppermost Story stands a great Image, thirty
Foot high, Cast of Copper, and Gilt, to which, being a Goddess, the Tower is
Dedicated: From the upper Gallery, the whole City, with the adjacent Country,
yield a pleasing and delightful Prospect.

On one side of this Tower stands a fair Pagode or Temple, worth the seeing,
for the great Gilded Images which are in it.

In the Afternoon they were Towed along the River Guei, through the Village
Wantouwo; and in the dusk of the Evening, they arrived at Ifong, a little
Village, where they Anchored, being gotten three Leagues with the Tide from
Linsing.

This River Guei takes its Original on the West side of Gueihoei, the fourth
City River Guei.
of Eminency in the Province of Honan, and from thence runs with many crooked
Meanders, between Xantung and Peking; and at the Castle Tiencin disembogues
into a Bay called Cang, which borders on the great Indian Ocean.

The first of June, Weighing again, by break of Day they had sight of Oepoeye,
June.
and Wankelo, two pretty Villages; at Noon they were Towed Easterly by the City
of Vohincheen, but without stay; so in the Afternoon passing Sangnes, about the
Evening they arrived at Chianmaing, where they were to change their Toers,
having that day gained five Leagues in several Courses.

The second in the Morning, having gotten fresh Coelies, they set out from
Chiamaing, and past by Tsasuang and Singkiakouw; and in the Evening they
arrived at the City of Oesingjeen, or Uciening, otherwise called Vuching, the
fourteenth City belonging to the Metropolis Tungchang, in the Province of
Xantung, where they cast Anchor.

Vuching lies Enclosed with a square Wall on the East side of the River, having
Vuching.
on the same a well built Suburb.

This day they gained five Leagues and a half, according to the Course of the
Stream, which thereabouts is full of windings and shallow Water.

The third in the Morning they reached the Villages Thunloo, Soenusoe, and
Teckchiouw; and at Noon arrived at the City Taatchiouw, otherwise called Tachu.
Tachu.


This City lies in a Square, (as most of the other Cities in China) built on
the right side of the River Guei, as you go up the same; it is enlarged with a
fair and Populous Suburb: The City it self, though full of handsome Houses, yet
has lost much of his former Luster, suffering in the last Tartar Wars.

The Wall is about thirty Foot high, well built, and Fortified with Bulwarks
and Breast-works.

The chiefest Trade of the Inhabitants consists in the Brewing of (as we may
call it) Chinese Beer, which the Tartars Transport from thence to other places.
Here they lay still a little while, waiting for fresh Toers, which having
gotten, they Weighed again, and came that Evening to Soukuntang, a Village,
where they staid to change their Toers again, having this day gained six
Leagues and a half.

The next Morning, being the fourth, having gotten other Coelies, they
proceeded on their Journey, and past by some Vessels that were come from
Peking, in one of which was the General of the Province of Quantung, sent
thither to succeed him that was then there, having (in regard of his great Age)
desired a Writ of Ease.

About nine a Clock they Landed at Sangjueen, where they tarried some time;
from thence going on in the Afternoon, they came to Ghanning and Seufeukhouw;
and against the Evening at Lienuchoe, where they Anchored, having that day gone
six Leagues.

According to the information of the Villagers, here the Province of Xantung
parted from that of Peking; though others will have it, that those two
Provinces are separated by the City Taatchiouw.

The fifth in the Morning, they Weighed at break of Day, and Sailing down the
River with a fair Wind from Lienuhoe, they past about eight a Clock by
Taloeveen, at nine a Clock Westward, by the City Tonquangchien, or Tungquiang,
on the South side of the River Guei, about a Musket shot up into the Country.

This City (as the rest) built Square, contains about an Hours walk in
Circumference, Environed with strong Walls, and deep Moats: In the Marketplace,
in the middle of the City stands a great Iron Lion; and the Country about is
planted with all manner of Trees, pleasant to behold.

At Noon they Landed at Ieusang; in the Evening, at Poethouw, where they dropped
Anchor, waiting for new Toers, having this Day Sailed four Leagues in the
Province of Peking.

The next Morning, so soon as Daylight appeared, they left Poethouw with a
fair Wind and new Toers; and in the Forenoon, past Suskiajeen, Sjenzoctan,
Swykvao, Sakkiavoy, Siensiteen, Fonkiakoul, Sangui, and Suangcho; and at Noon
arrived at the City of Siangchiouw, where they found other Toers ready, with
which they immediately went away again, and past that Afternoon by Paliswang,
Zaysisung, Ulchilitung, Soucoulthon, Suckiaswun, Sang, Isuang, Ul, and Vly,
besides many Pagodes and Hamlets of decayed Houses, and arrived in the Evening
at the City of Chinche, where they lay still that Night, to be furnished with
fresh Coelies.

The seventh, before Daylight, new Coelies coming, they immediately went on
their Journey, and very early past by and through several Villages, viz.
Sanquesucan, Iaquacouw, Tonchekouw, Palisuang; and about eight a Clock, they
went Eastward along by the City Chingchee. By this City, a River running up
into the Country, takes its Course to the South; soon after, they went by
Sayetwang, Masang, Haysoemat, and Suang.

At Noon, they past through Lioucho, where they should have changed their Toers;
but the Wind blowing very fair, they past by without striking Sail, which
favoring them all the Afternoon, they went by nine Villages, viz. Soucoulthung,
Koutche, Tankoulthung, Soutouwa, Gehockia, Chingsuan, Likiathue, Sinceatheen,
Canthea, Suatheen; and in the Evening, to the City of Chinchay, lying on the
Eastern Shore of this River, where they dropped Anchor to stay all Night, having
this day Sailed eight Leagues and a half.

The eighth they set out again with fresh Coelies and a South Wind, from the
City of Chinchay; and in the Forenoon, as they had done the day before, they
past by many Villages, lying on each side of the River, as Oelifoang,
Loulysuang, Thouliouw, Taywansuang, Oekiamiao, Boatsaac, to Zongkiasuaan,
Sangjue, Iangleotzing, Liekiatwang, Tzautsocauw, and Piechie; and in the
Afternoon arrived at the City of Come to Tienciu.
Tjensinghway, otherwise called Tiencin, where they dropped Anchor, having that
day Sailed six Leagues.

The General of the Militia in this place, being a Tartar, and a Man of great
Are Complemented by the General.
Quality, whose Sister was one of the present Emperor's Fathers Concubines,
came to Complement and welcome the Ambassador, and also to invite him the next
day to a Treat, for which civility the Ambassador returning Thanks, said, That
he was tired and indisposed, and therefore durst not venture to go out, but
desired his Highness to excuse him. Whereupon the General replied, That he
would prepare the Entertainment in one of his Barques, and come and lie with it
by the Ambassadors, that he might not trouble himself to go ashore: On which,
Van Hoorn seeing that it could not be otherwise, provided to come.

The ninth in the Morning, the General sent for the Ambassador, whereon, he,
with Nobel, Putmans, and the Secretary Vander Does, went with some of the
Retinue to his Barque, lying a little behind the Ambassadors, where they were
courteously received, and immediately placed at Tables which stood all
Entertained at a Dinner.
ready before their coming; soon after came also the Toya or Governor of the
City, who also seemed to be invited there, and was placed by the General at his
own Table: Then the word being given, the Dishes were brought in, filled with
variety of Meats, dressed after the Chinese manner: The General urging no
Discourse, nor asking the Netherlanders any Questions, only used his endeavor
to persuade them to be Merry, and Eat and Drink freely.

After the Hollanders had well Feasted, and Thanked the General for his kind
Entertainment, they took their leave: When the Ambassador judged it convenient,
in Requital of the General's kindness, to Present him with two Pieces Presents
sent to the General of Tiencin.
of Linen, a String of Amber Beads, five Else of Stammel, one Piece of
Perpetuanaes, a Perspective Glass, and two Bottles of Rose Water; all which,
with a Letter, Putmans was to carry the next Morning: The Letter was written to
this effect.

THe Ambassador returns humble Thanks for his kind Entertainment, and lets his
Lordship know, that since that, he is recovered again, and in good Health.

The Ambassador shall always remember his Honors Favors; in Requital of which,
and as a sign of his good inclination, he Requests, that he will please to
accept of these Presents, which will highly oblige him.


Putmans returning, brought word, that the General would not accept of Will not
accept of them.
them, but had desired him to refer it till they came back from Peking;
thanking the Ambassador with a Complementing Letter.

The City or Garrison of Tienein lies in a Triangular form, at the Promontary
of Xang, where all the Rivers of the Province of Peking meet; and after having
passed her high Walls, disembogue themselves into the Sea.

The Inhabitants of this City Trade much, for which it stands very convenient:
all the Ships that come out of the Sea, or from any Inland places which will
go up to Peking, must pass by it, wherefore there is always an incredible many
Vessels; there is also generally the choice of all Merchandise, because this
City is free for any one to Trade in, and pay no Custom.

The City it self is surrounded with high, defensive Walls, and defended by a
strong Garrison.

Against Noon, leaving Tiensingway, after they had Sailed a little way, though
still in the Suburb, they left the River Guei, which had helped them very much
by her Ebbing Water, and went into another, which came out of the North into
that of Guei; so that they had both Wind and Tide against them, and by that
means went but very slowly; yet by Toing, they got past Quanfa, Sijkoelda,
Iangsang, and Peytsang, lying on each side of this River; and in the Evening
dropped Anchor at P'Hoekoel, having since their departure from Tiensingway,
Sailed about a League and a half.

The eleventh in the Evening, they left P'Hoekoel, and went that day with
Sailing and Towing, by Thanquasue, Poecue, Ganchol, P'Hoekhouw, Hangchue, and
Mactiachoa.

The Country hereabouts is plain, Manured, and full of Houses.

In the afternoon they arrived at a great Village, called Iangtzin, where they
waited for fresh Toers, having this day gained three Leagues on several
Courses, twice or thrice surrounding the Compass.

The twelfth in the Morning, the Mandarin Guide Hinlavja, sent to acquaint the
Netherlanders, that there were no Coelies to be had there, therefore asked the
Ambassador if he would hire Men. But Van Hoorn answered, That since he had not
done it all this Journey, he would not do it now; so that they went away with a
good Wind, which at first proved successful to them, but some turning, by
reason of the crooked Windings of the River, they were forced by all the
Coelies, to be Towed one after another; yet notwithstanding this, they past
that day by Zeetiatwangh, Phinkoulutin, to Zatzuen, and three other Villages.
In the Evening they dropped Anchor at Gosathun, where they staid that Night,
having this Day Sailed two Leagues and a half.

The next Morning, being the thirteenth, the Wind blowing fair, they set Sail
again; yet the Barques often sticking fast on the Ground, they made but little
way; yet having past Wankafan and Sitiafoe, they came late in the Evening
Arrive at the City of Gioechioe.
to the City of Gioechioe, where they staid all Night, having this day Sailed
but two Leagues and three quarters.

About nine a Clock in the Evening, the Mandarin Guide Hanlavja, and the
Chinese Secretary Soukjen, and the two Interpreters Ienko and Liulako, came in
a small Boat to the Ambassadors Barge, telling him, that they were going to
meet the new General that came from Peking, and was hard by (as the
Netherlanders could see by the Lights in his Boats) going to Hoksieu, to Depose
the there present Tziangpovi.

This news was not very strange to the Hollanders, having been often told by
the Guide Mandarins and their Interpreters, that the forementioned General in
Hoksieu was Deposed, and that the Viceroy Singlamong was condemned to pay two
thousand Tail of Silver, because he had let the Netherland Ships go away
without the Emperors leave, (which the Hollanders looked upon (it being mixed
with no true words) to be only a Tale; but that perhaps (since they saw that
another came to Depose him) he might for some Misdemeanor or other, be sent for
to Peking.

At Midnight, the forementioned Hanlavja, the Secretary, and Interpreters came
aboard to tell the Ambassador, That they could not speak with his Excellency
that Evening, he being gone to sleep before they came, but they would go to him
early the next Morning; as accordingly they did; desiring to know of the
Ambassador what time he might wait upon him. But returning, they brought word,
That his Excellency durst not permit it, because he had not yet had Audience
from the Emperor. Mean time his Highness Sailed by the Netherlanders,
accompanied with twenty great Barges.

The City Gioechioe is a Ruined place, buried almost in heaps of Rubbish,
occasioned by the last War.

After they had gotten Coelies, they left that City, though with slow advance,
Leave Gioechioe.
because the River (notwithstanding the Wind was good) in many places (as they
had seen the day before) was full of dry Sands; yet at last, passing by
Sanghkiatwangh, they could (because of the Night coming on) get no further than
Wanghiapan, where they came to an Anchor, having, notwithstanding they had a
good Wind, Sailed but two Leagues and a little more.

The fifteenth in the Morning they Weighed again, and with Sailing and Towing,
past by Ponsinghou and Googothien; and in the Afternoon arrived at Goechin,
where they staid all Night, having this day gained three Leagues.

About half a League from Goechin, lies the City Goeycen, North-West into the
Country, which appeared but little to the Netherlanders, (for they did not put
in to it) but seemed rather like a large Castle than a City.

A little before they arrived at Goechien, a grand Mandarin, a Tartar (as it
was said) Nephew to the present Emperor, came to Complement and Visit the
Ambassador in his Barge; where he was entertained with a Glass of Spanish Wine,
which having drank, and seen the Horses, he took his leave.

The sixteenth, leaving Goechien, they proceeded on their Journey, and passed
by many Houses, built on both sides of the River; and also by some Villages, as
Kongidieen, to Santan, Nainaimeao, Iaumeao, and Xantiento, the Suburb of
Sangsinghwey; and in the Evening, arrived on the East side of the same City,
before a great Plain, lying between the City Walls and the River; having this
day Sailed three Leagues.

Here they were to lie (because the River being in a manner dry, they could get
no higher) till the Emperors Order came to unlade the Presents, and go with
them by Land to Peking, which was four Leagues distance.

The seventeenth, nothing happened of remark.

The eighteenth, several Mandarins came to Visit and Welcome the Ambassador; and
likewise that Mandarin which was with him on the fifteenth, which was said to
be the Emperors Nephew, who gave the Ambassador two Sheep for a Fire-Lock,
which he much desired.

Amongst other Discourses, Van Hoorn asked this Lord, If no other Ambassadors
from any other place were in Peking? To which he answered, None, but some from
the Corean Isles, which were shortly to return.

There happened little of note here, only the Mandarin Guide came to acquaint
the Ambassador, that the next Morning Carts and Coelies would come to carry the
Goods to Peking, and that one of the Lipous would be at a Town called
Tonghsieuw, four Leagues from thence, to receive the Ambassador in the
Emperor's Name, and conduct him to Peking.

The next Morning, being the nineteenth, many Carts, Coelies, and Horses came
to fetch the Presents, with all the Persons belonging to the Embassy, and their
Goods, to Peking by Land; whereupon, the Ambassador gave immediate Order for
the unlading of them, in which they spent all the Morning.

The Ambassador gave the Barge-men (though every one apart) which came with him
and his Retinue from Sucheu and Hoaigan, eighty six Tail of Silver, with which
they were very well contented.



About Noon, the Netherlanders set forward on their Journey to Tongsieuw, with
the Presents and their other Goods, which were guarded by some Troopers, and
between a concourse of thousands of Townsmen, Rusticks, Women, and Children.

About three a Clock, coming to Tongsieuw, all the Goods were put into an
Tongsieuw.
old decayed House, where the Netherlanders also Lodged, but found small
conveniences.

The twentieth, setting forth by Daylight, and having Rid through Palikua,
Swango, and Kapucheen, they came within half a League of Peking, where they
were Welcomed by one of the Lipous, called Liu Lavja, a Native Tartar, who
kindly received them; and after some Complements, conducted them to the City,
which they entered just about Noon in good order.

Coming within the Gates of Peking, they thanked God for his Mercy, in Come to
Peking.
bringing them so great a Journey all in good Health, being a Way of many
Leagues, in which they had spent six Months, Traveling both by Water and
Land, by and through thirty seven Cities, three hundred thirty five Villages and
thirty four Temples.

They were led by the Emperors Palace to the Tartars or Prime Chancellors
Court, standing behind the Emperors, where all his Imperial Majesty's Presents,
according to order were to be left; and then the Hollanders to go to their
Lodgings prepared for them.

The Streets through which they passed swarmed with People, thousands standing
on each side of the way, which made so great a Dust (to which inconveniency the
Streets in Peking are very subject) that they could scarcely see; wherefore
they were bid to sit down under the Gate or entrance of the Court, from amongst
the crowd of the People, which by thousands stood before it, there to stay for
the Presents which were left somewhat behind in their Riding through the City.

Having staid about a quarter of an Hour under the Gate, and drank a Cup of
Tee, the Goods came; whereupon the Hollanders were led into a Chamber, leaving
Putmans and some of the Retinue to look to, and separate the Emperors Presents
from the other.

The Ambassador and Nobel, with the rest, coming into the Chamber, they found
some Secretaries sitting on a Table, which pointed to Van Hoorn to sit on the
Floor; but he said, he could better stand, which they observing, bid him sit on
the same Table where they sat, which he accordingly did.

Then the forementioned Secretaries began to ask the Ambassador, by Order
Questions to the Ambassador.
of the Lipous, the following Questions, viz. Concerning his Quality: From
whence the Horses and Oxen came? How old they were, and how many Miles every
Horse could go in a Day? To all which Questions he gave them fitting answers.

They likewise asked who was the chief in Quality? Whether the Ambassadors Son
or Nobel? because the General of Hoksieu had placed the Ambassadors Son first:
To which was answered, That the Lord Van Hoorn's Son, was according to the Lord
Generals Order in Batavia, to have the upper place; besides many other
frivolous Questions, not worthy rehearsal.

Mean while, the Lipou which had fetched in the Netherlanders, came to bring
them some Meat dressed after the Chinese manner, which they kindly accepted of,
having eaten nothing all that day before.

Putmans also came to tell the Ambassador, that after the Netherlanders had
taken nineteen Chests with the Emperors Presents out of the Carts, the Tatan or
Prime Chancellor coming thither with another Person of Quality, had forbid them
to unlade any more, and that they would have the Emperors Letter, The Generals
and Councels Letter from Batavia is delivered.
which after much trouble, being found, having happily a day or two before been
wrapped up in a yellow Cloth; the Ambassador bare Headed, bowing himself three
times, laid it with both Hands on a Table covered with Red Cloth, (behind which
stood the first and second Tatan) not having time to deliver it in a Silver
Charger, or any thing else of value; which done, the Netherlanders were again
conducted into the Room in which they were before, without a Word spoke on
either side.

Soon after, the remaining Presents, Horses, Oxen, and other Goods were
disposed into proper places.

As they went to their Lodings, they were told that the Horses must be Saddled,
Horses and Oxen are commanded to come to the Court.
and the Oxen put into their Wagon, to be brought to Court the next Morning;
because the Emperor had designed to see them.

And now the Ambassador coming to his new prepared Lodging, was much amazed
that there was not so much room as would hold the Goods, Horses, and Oxen, nor
no convenience for himself nor his People; Whereupon chiding the Mandarins that
brought him thither, he asked, if that was a House fit for an Ambassador which
came so great a Journey, and had brought such Rich Presents, and whose
Countrymen had done the Emperor such remarkable Service; Withal, that it was
impossible for him in that place, to take out the Saddles for the Horses, and
also the Coach; yet nevertheless he would do his endeavor, although he feared
much that it could not be done.

The Mandarins observing the small conveniences that the Netherlanders would
have in that place, said, That they would acquaint their Master with it, and
persuade them that they might have better Lodgings next day; meanwhile, the
Ambassador must by no means fail to Saddle the Horses, and fit the Oxen, that
they might be brought to the Court next Morning; but the Ambassador telling him
that it was no way possible, unless they wrought the whole Night; The Mandarins
took their leave.

About Midnight two Mandarins came again to the Ambassador's Lodging, sent from
the Lipous to tell him, that the Horses and Oxen must be brought to the Court
before Day, and if they could not be Saddled, to bring them without, for the
Emperor would be there in Person to see them, which would be no small Honor.

The one and twentieth, about three a Clock in the Morning, one of the Lipous
came to fetch the Horses and Oxen to the Court; whereupon, they were
immediately Caparison'd and Harnessed, but the Chariot being fitted up, could
not come out of the Door, so that being forced to leave it, Nobel and the
Secretary, conducted by the Lipous, went with the Horses and Oxen to the Court;
from whence returning, at nine a Clock, they gave the Ambassador the following
account:

That entering the Emperor's Court at break of Day, they past through four
strong Gates, then they walked along by the Walls of the forementioned Palace,
about a quarter of a Mile, at the end of which they went through a fifth Gate
into the inner Court, where the Horses and Oxen were first viewed by the chief
Zoutaizin or Councellor of State, who was a brown Tartar, with one Eye, and a
White Beard, about sixty years old, who, as they said, by his conduct Valor and
Prudence, Governed almost the whole Realm. He also told Nobel and the
Secretary, that they should go and stand back a little, for the Emperor was
coming in Person to see the Horses and Oxen, and that when his Imperial Majesty
came out, they should Kneel. But the Horses stood still, held by four
Hollanders, in the same place where the beforementioned Zoutaizin had seen
them; and the Oxen also held by two, were about twenty Paces from the place
where the Emperor afterward came to view them: The Grooms were likewise
commanded to Kneel; a little while after, four Horses with Yellow Saddles came
in at the inner Court Gate, on one of which the Emperor sitting, stood still,
just without the middle Gate of the inner Court.

The Emperor, according to Nobel and the Secretary's Relation, was a Person
Shape of the Emperor.
of a middle Stature, pretty White, and about sixteen Years of age, not
gorgeously Habited, having only a Blue Silk Damask Coat on, Imbroyder'd before,
behind, and on the shoulders, with Yellow Boats, looking steadfastly upon the
Horses for a considerable time; at length, drawing his Eyes from them, smiling,
he spoke to the forementioned Governor about them, by which the Hollanders
perceived that his Majesty was well pleased with them. Then the Emperor gave
Order, that two of the Horses should be Rid by the Commissary Berkman, and one
Horse and an Ox be brought nearer him, where he looked upon them with a more
curious Eye.

After which, the Horses and Oxen being led a little way thence, his Imperial
Majesty alighting, sat down on a little Bench, in the same place where he had
stood with his Horse; and likewise the two first Zautaizins, or Counselors of
State, sat down about four or five Paces from the Emperor, on his left Hand,
on Carpets of Cloth; the first of the two, was the Person that had seen the
Horses and Oxen alone; the other was also a Tartar: When upon his Majesty's
Order a Cup of Bean Broth was given him, and also to the Netherlanders, who
drank it on their Knees: Moreover, the Emperor Commanded to ask them, How far
Holland was from Batavia, and Batavia from Hoksieu? and also, by whom the
Ambassador was sent? To which they replied, That Holland was eight Months
Sailing from Batavia, and Batavia Emperor's Questions.
about six Weeks from Hoksieu; and likewise, that the Ambassador by Orders of
their Prince in Holland, was sent from the Lord Maetzuiker in Batavia, which
was all that was asked them; But the Horses and Oxen on the Emperor's Order,
taken from them, and led into a Stable, opposite to the Gate of the inner
Court; after which, the Netherlanders had leave to depart (when to their full
satisfaction, they had seen the Emperor above half an hour) the same way they
came, leaving his Imperial Majesty sitting in the forementioned place.

Soon after, Nobel and the Secretaries return with the remaining Attendance,
two Mandarins sent from the Emperor, came to desire two Hollanders, one to
dress the Horses, and another the Oxen, and show his Grooms the manner of it,
which the Ambassador immediately granted.

The Lipou Liu-Lavja, which had the day before fetched in the Ambassador,
Remaining Presents are sent for to the Court.
came also to his Lodgings to tell him, That the remaining Presents must
immediately be made ready to be carried to the Court; to which purpose Carts
would immediately be brought thither to fetch them; likewise, that the Lord
Ambassador, his Son, and as many Persons more as he pleased, might come along
with them, because he ought to be Present when the Goods were looked over, to
see if none were wanting, which was not needful at the Horses and Oxen, and
therefore they were accepted of; whereupon, the Ambassador making himself
ready, Ordered the Presents to be put into the Carts, and went with Nobel,
Putmans, the Secretary, and eleven Persons of his Retinue, toward the Court;
but was first carried to the Council of State's House, where he had left the
nineteen Chests with Presents: Here having sorted all the Goods (except five
Chests with White Pepper, which the Tatan said were needless) they were sent to
the Emperor's Palace; whither soon after the Tatan (who Rid before through
another Gate with the Goods) the Ambassador and all his Retinue followed.

Coming to the inner Court, where the Emperor saw the Horses in the Morning,
they found the Carts with the Goods there before them, and also the Tatan
sitting in the open Court. Here the Ambassador and his Attendance were also
shown to sit down on the Ground behind him, which they accordingly did, on
Coats brought with them for that purpose.

Having staid about half an hour, the two Prime Counselors or Zoutaizins of
the Emperor, came also thither, and seated themselves on their Pieces of Cloth
on the Ground; and having rested themselves a little, they called the Tatan,
who kneeling before them, received their Commands, which was, to tell the
Ambassador, That the Emperor asked if the Lord Maetzuiker in Batavia was in
good Health? To which kneeling on one Knee, he answered, that he was.

Then the Counselors asked, If they were all four Persian Horses, and the Oxen
Bengael? And also, If the Netherlanders were at Peace with the Persian and
Bengael? To which the Ambassador replied, That they were, and had many years
lived like Brothers, and real Friends. They also asked, What sorts of Grain
there grew in Holland? To which they gave a fitting account. Then the Oxen were
ordered to be put into the Chariot, and the Ambassadors Son to come and show
him Reverence.

Soon after the Presents, except the Lanthorns, were carried away again without
the Emperor's coming to look upon them, and leave granted to the Ambassador to
return to his Lodgings.

Mean while, Putmans and Ruwenoort staid in the Court to undo the Lanthorns,
which the Emperor, after the Ambassador's departure came to see; and likewise
the Oxen drawing the Chariot, in which he Ordered two of his Attendants to sit,
and be drawn in it; so that Putmans and Ruwenoort also saw the Emperor.

Several grand Mandarins went to Visit the Ambassador in his Lodgings; all
which he Entertained with great kindness, and according to the convenience of
the place.

The two and twentieth, early in the Morning a Secretary belonging to the
Lipous, came to the Ambassador's Lodgings, to tell him, That Putmans must come
to the Tatan's House to unpack the Emperor's Presents, and look them over;
whereupon, Putmans accordingly went thither.

This Secretary humbly proffered his Service to the Ambassador, saying, He
would rejoice, if by his advice, or ought else, he might be serviceable to his
Excellency; for which he received many Thanks from the Ambassador, who answered
him, That he would slip no opportunity to make use of him.

The same day, Ienko the Interpreter informed the Ambassador, That he had been
told from credible Persons, that he should be brought within three days before
the Imperial Throne, to have Audience granted him, which although he did not
absolutely believe, yet he prepared all things in a readiness.

There also came a Commissioner with four Mandarins, sent from the Prime
Counselor, or Zoutaizin of the Emperors, to ask the Ambassador if he had no
Blood-Coral, Perpetuana's, or other Goods to Sell, because the Emperor would
perhaps buy some of them? Whereupon the Ambassador replied, That the Ong, or
General of Batavia, had strictly forbid him to sell any thing, but what he had
was at the Emperor's Service: which said, they took their leave.

There likewise came two Mandarins to keep Watch in the Ambassador's Ambassador
is strictly Guarded.
Lodgings; so that the Netherlanders were then Guarded by four Mandarins, and
twenty Soldiers, that every one was kept from going out (except those whom they
pleased) or coming into the House. The Mandarin Guides also, which since their
coming thither had been Lodged there, were removed to another Place; but the
Chinese Interpreter Soukjen, stayed with them.

At Noon Putmans returning, said, That he had again been in the Tatans House,
and laid a Piece of every sort of Goods to view, all which was Sealed up in a
Chest to show the Emperor, and that the rest were left in Chests to be looked
over.

In the Afternoon one of the Lipous Secretaries came on Horseback to the Gate
of the Ambassador's Lodging, saying only to the Interpreters, That the Lord
Ambassador must make himself ready against Midnight, to appear before the
Emperor, and to deliver the Presents himself to his Majesty: which said, he
immediately hasted away again without any Answer. Van Hoorn made himself ready
against the forementioned time.

The same Afternoon Putmans was again sent for to the Tatan, that he might (as
they said) take the rest of Presents out of the Packs, that they might be shown
to the Emperor altogether the next Morning, and be in readiness to be delivered
by the Ambassador to his Imperial Majesty.

Putmans returning very late in the Night related, That he had been with the
Tatan, and had taken all the Goods out of the Chests, yet laid them in again.
Moreover, he was commanded to tell the Ambassador, that he should make himself
ready betimes to go to the Court the following Night.

The twenty eighth, two hours before Daylight, the Ambassador was with The
Presents must be shown to the Emperor.
all his Retinue fetched to the Court by some prime Mandarins, being led
through three other Gates than those which they passed the day before, to an
inner Court: having passed the third Gate, they saw in a great Plain before the
Portals of a stately House, all the Presents set on the Ground, and close by
them the second Tatan, who also pointed to them to sit down by the Presents,
which they did.

About half an hour after the Ambassadors from the Corean Isles, being three
Corean Agents.
in number, came also thither with fifty Attendants, Habited after the Chinese
manner, with long Hair, yet poorly Dressed, and of mean Aspects; which were
ordered to sit a good way behind the Netherlanders, on the left side of the
going in at the Door.

In the interim, whilst the Netherlanders stayed above two hours, some
Discourse A Discourse between the Lipou Lilavja and the Ambassador.
passed between the Lipou Lilavja and the Ambassador, about a Letter which the
Interpreter Genko said the Ambassador would deliver to the Emperor; which the
Lipou advised him not to do, saying, That it was not customary there; for if
they would Request any thing of the Emperor, they must first acquaint the Lipou
with it, that they might again impart it at convenient times to the Emperor:
Whereupon the Ambassador replied, That he would do nothing but what he advised
him to, because he was a Stranger and knew not their Customs. As to what
concerned the Letter which the Interpreter had told him of, it was nothing else
but a Complement of thankfulness to his Imperial Majesty, which he designed to
speak to him, and whether it would be fit to deliver it to the Emperor before
all his Business was done.

There likewise came another Lipou to the Ambassador, saying, That he had
understood by one of the Zoutaisins, that it might happen, that the Emperor
would ask the Ambassador some Questions, which if he did, he advised him to
make short and brief Answers.

Lastly, the Ambassador was told, that he might again return to his Lodging,
because the Emperor would not that day come out to see the Presents; yet that
Putmans must stay there to see the Chests and Packs opened, if any thing should
be ordered to be taken out of them; all which was accordingly performed: But
the Ambassador being in the last Gate to go out of the Court, was desired to
stay a little, where Putmans came to him, saying, That Genko the Interpreter
had demanded the Keys of the Chest in which the Presents were, which having
opened he was ordered to follow the Ambassador. A little after he was told,
that he might go home with his Retinue, which he did, and was no sooner come
thither, but he found a List written in the Chinese Tongue; in which was set
down the Provision that the Emperor allowed the Ambassador every day, viz.

For the Ambassador, his Son John Van Hoorn, and Nobel, two Geese, four A List
of the Emperor's allowance to the Ambassador's.
Hens, three Fish, six Catty of Meal, three Tail of black Tee, a pound and a
half of Waetsjoe, one of Mesoe, one of Soya, one of Oil, nine Catty of Herbs
and Garlic, six Cans of Liquor, and every five days a hundred Pears, five
Catty of Grapes, or Raisins, five Catty of dried Prunes, a hundred and fifty
Apricocks, and likewise every other day a Sheep.

For six Men every day twelve Catty of Pork, six of Meal, six of Tauwhoe, three
Tail of black Woetsjoe, one Catty and a half of Misoe, the like of Soya, the
like of Oil, and six great Vessels of Drink.

For fifteen Persons every day seven Catty and a half of Pork, two of Herbs,
one of Salt, five Jugs of Liquor.

In the Afternoon Genko the Interpreter came to acquaint the Ambassador, That
all the Presents being taken out of the Chests and Packs, were brought before
the Emperor in his Court, where his Imperial Majesty had seen them, and
accepted of them; which did not a little rejoice the Netherlanders, when they
heard that all the Presents were delivered without any of them being damnifi'd,
except some flaws in the Lantern.

There also came two Commissioned Mandarins from the Lipous, to ask if the
Ambassador could about two days hence go to Zamboie, that is Complement the
Emperor? and withal, to go for the Emperor's Privy Seal the next Morning? To
which he answered, That he was ready at all times to obey his Imperial
Majesty's Command.

The Ambassador also asked these Mandarins whether the Emperor had accepted of
the Presents? and if he had done with them? To which they replied, Yes.
Whereupon the Ambassador said, That he was sorry, his House being so small, he
could not entertain them according to his good inclination: To which they
answered, That the Ambassador's good will was sufficient, and that three days
hence he should remove into a great House, which was preparing for him.

The next day, being the four and twentieth, about nine a Clock a Mandarin came
to the Ambassador's Lodging, to tell him that it was time to go and show
Reverence to his Imperial Majesty's Seal: Whereupon he went thither, with his
Son, Nobel, Putmans, the Secretary, and five of his Attendants, whom the fore*
mentioned Mandarin conducted into an old great Mandarins House that stood
behind the Tatans; which when entered, they saw through one of the Palace Gates
the Place where the Seal is kept, being a little eight cornered House, and were
directed to sit under the Gate, to defend themselves from the heat of the Sun;
where, having stayed half an hour, they heard a Voice bidding them Ascend;
having passed on about fifteen Paces they heard the same Voice crying, Kneel;
and afterward again, Bow your Heads three times together, which done you may
rise; soon after it said, Kneel down again, and once more bow your Heads three
times; so that they were to bow eighteen times and kneel six; all which being
passed over, they cried, Stand up, and go to your Lodgings, which accordingly
they did.

After the Ambassador had been at home about half an hour, he was told, that
the chief Councellor of State, or Tatan, would be there presently: whereupon
they made themselves all ready to entertain his Highness, who soon after came
thither with two Lipous: They asked the Netherlanders by an Interpreter several
Questions, viz. How long Holland had been in being? Near what Kingdoms it
bordered? What Goods and Merchandises were to be had from thence? To all which
his Highness received satisfactory Answers: So having spent half an hour in
asking Questions, and it beginning to grow very hot in the Ambassador's little
House, it being about Noon, he said that he would go home, and leave the two
forementioned Lipous there, to be resolved of some more Questions by the
Ambassador; who caused two Pistols, one Fire-lock, and two Sword Blades to be
shown to his Highness, with Request that he would take them with him in
commemoration of Holland; but he excusing Refuses Presents.
himself, said, That the Ambassador's good inclination was enough; which said,
he departed.

The two Lipous asked him many frivolous Questions, not forgetting the least
The two Lipous Questions.
thing; nay, desired to know what Tails the Sheep and Hares had in Holland: in
which Discourse they spent most part of the Day, the Ambassador giving them
their desired Answers. After their Secretary had written down all things, they
took their leave: The Ambassador proffered them some Presents, thereby to draw
their inclinations toward him, but they refused them like the Tatan.

Mean while the Emperor sent eighteen Tartar Saddles, with all their Furniture,
to the Ambassador's Lodging, to use whilst he stayed there.

The four Watch Mandarins were the same day presented by the Ambassador with a
Piece of Perpetuana, and five Tail of Silver.

The twenty fifth the prime Secretary to the Lipous came with two Mandarins The
Ambassador makes Obeisance before the Emperor's Throne.
(all three Habited after a stately manner, fit to show obedience to the
Emperor) to the Ambassador's Lodgings after Midnight, to tell him, that it was
time to go to the Palace: Whereupon the Ambassador went thither with most of
his Retinue, which were all led through three Gates into the same Plain wherein
they sat the Morning before, and there ordered to stay till Daylight, when the
Emperor would appear sitting in his Throne. Having spent two hours, and the Day
beginning to appear, they saw the Plain full of Mandarins richly Habited, that
were come thither to Zamboie, or show Obedience to the Emperor; so that the
Hollanders divertis'd themselves with looking upon the Multitude. Having sat
till half an hour after Daybreak, they were conducted farther to a fourth
Gate; about fifteen Paces from which they saw five Elephants, with Gilded
Towers on their Backs, (three on the right, and two on the left side of the
Entrance,) and likewise four of the Emperor's Wayns without Horses, standing on
both sides of this Gate, which has three Passages. They were conducted through
the left Gate between the Elephants, which they had no sooner passed but they
saw a fifth Gate, built like the fourth, but* somewhat higher; to which they
went by an ascent, and found it also to have three Passages, through the
middlemost of which (where on the right side stood the Emperor's Palakin) they
go directly to the Imperial Throne: but they were, as at the fourth Gate, led
through the third Entry (because none dare go through the middlemost but the
Emperor himself;) which having passed, they came into a spacious Court; at the
end whereof stood the Palace wherein the Throne was erected; to which they
ascend by Marble Steps. The Court was full of Mandarins, Clothed after the best
manner, sitting in Rows one by another. On each side of the Throne stood many
Umbrella's, Flags and Standards, of yellow, State before the Emperor's Throne.
blue, and white; below the Marble Steps, on each side of the Ascent of the
Throne stood about thirty Persons in a Row, Clothed in the Emperor's Livery,
being Yellow, and also ten white Horses with yellow Saddles, five on each side.
The Ambassador and all his Retinue were placed on the left side of the Throne,
at the end of the first Row of Mandarins; where having sat a very little while,
they were forced to rise up to make way for some Grand Lords that were going to
the Throne. About half an hour after a small Bell was heard to Ring, and four
Persons making a noise, or flacking with Whips, which was just as if a Field of
Canes had been set on fire. Soon after they heard a Voice, which proclaimed
something in the Tartar Language; whereupon many prime Lords and Great Persons
went and stood directly before the Throne between some blue Stones (which were
laid there about half a Foot high, to the number of eighteen or twenty) and
upon the Proclamation of a Herald they showed their Obeisance to the Throne, by
thrice Kneeling, and nine times bowing of their Heads: During this, a sweet
Harmony was heard of several sorts of Instruments. When these Grand Lords had
made their Obeisance, the Ambassador, being called by the Herald, was by two
Lipous led with his Assistants between the forementioned blue Stones, and
placed just behind the sixteenth, where they could neither see the Emperor nor
Throne, yet made Obeisance in the same manner as the others had done before,
the Music beginning to Play when they Kneel. This done, the Lipous went again
to their Places where they sat before; but the Ambassador, his Son, and Nobel,
were through a by-way led up the Marble Steps that ascended to the House where
the Throne stood; where they were placed next to the second Tatan, or
Chancellor, from whence they saw the glittering Throne, and the Emperor in
Cloth of Gold, the Imperial Stool not being above fourteen Paces from the Place
where the Ambassador sat. Soon after Van Hoorn, his Son, and Nobel, were
presented with a Cup of Imperial Bean-Broth; which they had no sooner drank,
but the Emperor rising from his Throne, seemed to come to them, but The Emperor
rises.
went out behind the Throne. He being a brown slender Youth, about sixteen
years old, had, as the Netherlanders were informed, twelve Kings for his Guard.
After his Imperial Majesty's departure, the Ambassador also went soon after And
likewise the Ambassador.
with all his Retinue to his Lodgings, not without great joy (because he found
himself somewhat indisposed) that he had made an end of this grand Business.

Having been at home half an hour, the prime Secretary to the Lipous came
thither, to ask him how far such and such Places were distant from Holland? and
if there were any Tigers, or other ravenous Beasts in Holland? To which having
received due Answers, he took his leave.

To the Mandarin that provided Horses for the Netherlanders, and conducted them
to the Court, the Ambassador gave five Else and a half of Stammel, which he
accepted of, and used great diligence to get it out of the Ambbassador's
Lodgings.

Since the Council in Batavia had expressly commanded, that when the Emperor had
been Complemented, and his Presents delivered to him, they should also present
the Taisins, or Counselors of State, therefore the Ambassador proposed in
Council, in what manner it was best to be done, and to which Persons: whereupon
it was judged convenient, that it should be to the following Persons, because
they were to assist the Netherlanders during the Emperor's Minority, viz. the
four Zoutaizins, being of his Imperial Majesty's Privy Council, Presents to the
Zoutaizins.
who Governed the Empire during his Nonage, should be presented with half a
Piece of Scarlet, half a Piece of black Cloth, and half a Piece of Sky-colour'd
Cloth, two Pieces of Crown-Serge, three of Cloth-Serge, ten Else of Holland
Velvet, one Quilt, ten Pieces of fine Linen, two of fine Guinee Linen, two
large Carpets, two fine Chitsen, one Piece of Sandal-Wood, twelve Pieces of
Blood-Coral, four Pieces of great Amber, one Fire-lock, one pair of Pistols,
two Swords with rich Gilded Handles, one pair of Pocket-Pistols, two Pieces of
Whalebone, two Rhinocerots Horns, two Unicorns Horns, six pair of Spectacles,
one Perspective Glass.

To each of the three other Tatans, or Chancellors, the chief in the Lipous
Assembly, that they might impart the Hollanders Requests to the Emperor, were
presented half a Piece of Crimson, half a Piece of black, and half a Piece of
sky-colour'd Cloth, one Piece of black Cloth* Serge, one of Crown-Serge, one
Piece of Sandal Wood, ten Else of green Velvet, six Pieces of Adathiis, two of
fine Guinee Linen, two Carpets, one String of Amber Beads, three Pieces of
great, and three of small Blood-Coral, two great Pieces of Amber, one
Sword-Blade, one pair of Pistols, two Unicorns Horns, two Rhinocerots Horns,
one Perspective Glass, six pair of Spectacles, and some Glass* works.

To each of the three Lipous, or Speakers for Strangers, acting in all
Ambassador's Presents to the Lipous.
Affairs, were presented half a Piece of Crimson, half a Piece of black, and
half a Piece of sky-colour'd Cloth, one Piece of Cloth-Serge, one of black
Crown-Serge, ten Dutch Silk-Stuffs, four Pieces of Adathiis, one of Guinee
Linen, one Carpet, one ordinary String of Amber Beads, six Pieces of
Blood-Coral, one great Piece of Amber, one pair of Pistols, one Carbine, one
Sword-Blade, and two Rhinocerots Horns.

Every one of the Secretaries belonging to the Lipous were presented with ten
Presents for the Secretaries.
Else of Stammel, one Piece of Cloth-Serge, one of Perpetuana, one Carpet, two
Pieces of Adathiis, one of Guinee Linen, one String of ordinary Amber Beads,
one Sword-Blade, two Rhinocerots Horns, one Carbine, and one Piece of
Crown-Serge.

And that the Inventories of the Presents should be safely delivered, and the
Ambassador no way cheated therein, it was ordered that Nobel should go thither
with the first opportunity, to deliver them in his own Person, and send a Dutch
Letter with them, that they might show it by such Person as they pleased the
Ambassador should deliver their Presents to.

The twenty sixth in the Morning, Nobel and Putmans were sent for to the Nobel
and Putmans are sent for to the Lipous.
Assembly of the Lipous; whither (having acquainted the Ambassador with it)
they went, and at their Return related, That they had been before the three
Lipous, who sat in Consultation of their Business; where they were asked if the
Ambassador had ought to request of the Emperor, by order of the Lord Maetzuiker
in Batavia? and if he intended to present the Emperor with any thing else? if
so, he should write down his Requests, and the Presents which he would give,
and come with Nobel the next Morning to their Assembly and deliver it himself,
that hereafter he might not trouble them with any more Requests. Moreover, they
asked if the Lord Maetzuiker had written a Letter to the Pou of Hoksieu? To
which they replying Yes, said that the Contents thereof was unknown to them,
but that the Ambassador might perhaps inform them of it. They inquired also the
difference in Quality between the Ambassador's Son and Nobel, which was
answered according to the truth. The Lipous also said, that Carts and Coelies
should come the next day to fetch their Goods out of their straightened Lodgings,
and carry them to a greater.

Nobel and Putmans acquainting the Ambassador herewith, he called his Council,
where they seriously considered their Instructions: whereupon it was first
judged no way convenient to complain of the Viceroy Singlamong, as was
mentioned in them, because of the great Power which he had in that Place, by
which means there might arise a confusion, and a hatred against them, and a
great prejudice if the Trade should be forbid them in Hoksieu. Moreover, since
the General there was already deposed, and the Viceroy condemned to pay two
thousand Tail for suffering the Netherland Ships to go away, they ought by no
means to be the occasion to bring any more trouble upon him. Nay, though the
Ambassador would have fulfilled his Instructions he could not do it, because
none (as fearing to incur displeasure) would have translated it into the
Chinese Tongue.

Many other Complaints mentioned in the Instructions were thought fit not to be
taken notice of till a more convenient opportunity, they being commanded to set
down only what they had to request of the Emperor. All which being rightly
considered of, it was concluded to write the following Points, and get them
translated into the Chinese Tongue, that the Ambassador and Nobel might the
next Morning carry them to the Lipous, viz.

The Realm of Holland, and the General of Batavia have commanded the Requests
of the Ambassador to the Emperor.
Ambassador to request of his Imperial Majesty the following Points:

I. THat the Hollanders may always, and every year come with as many Ships as
shall be requisite, to Traffic in the Realm of Tayzing. II. That the Holland
Ships may come and Trade at Quantung, Singcheu, Hoksieu, Ningpo, and Hanksieu.
III. That the Hollanders may Trade with all Persons, and Buy and Sell without
being forced to deliver their Merchandise against their wills. IV. That the
Silk and Silk-Stuffs may be Bought and Transported by the Hollanders, as also
all other Merchandise, except those which the Emperor pleases to prohibit, of
which the Ambassador desires he may have knowledge, that they may obey the
Emperor's Will and Pleasure. V. That the Holland Ships, so soon as they are
arrived, may Trade and go away again when they are ready. VI. That all manner
of Provisions, and other Necessaries, may be bought by the Hollanders and
carried to their Ships. VII. That the Hollanders when they come to Trade, may
have a convenient Habitation for their Money, to stow their Merchandise in and
sell them, and also to preserve them from Fire; because the Chinkon was in
great danger at Hoksieu. VIII. That the forementioned Particulars may be
ratified with Sealed Letters from the Emperor, and that his Viceroys may be
commanded to observe and take notice of them: Which if the Emperor grant, the
Ambassador has Order to consult farther about the Chinkon.
Moreover, the Ambassador proposed, if he ought not for his particular part to
present the Emperor (because it was customary there;) which being approved of,
they set down the following Presents, viz. four Strings of Amber Presents to
the Emperor.
Beads, one Amber Box, one Silver Charger, one Silver Box with Mother of Pearl,
four Casuaris Eggs, ten Pieces of yellow Cloth, two double Barrel'd Pistols,
two Pocket Pistols, two Sword Blades, one Buff Coat, twenty Flasks of
Rose Water, four Perspective Glasses, six Pieces of Calamback Wood, two
Unicorns Horns, one Piece of Amber, one Copper Horse upon a Pedestal, one
Copper Lion, two Copper Dogs, one Copper Mount, one Persian Quilt, two small
Mortar-Pieces.

The twenty seventh in the Morning the Ambassador and Nobel were fetched by a
Mandarin to the Lipous Assembly; where coming, they were led into an
Antichamber, and from thence, after half an hours stay, to the Lipous; to
whom, after the delivery of the several Requests, and Inventory of the
Presents, they were again led to the forementioned Chamber, without a word
speaking on either part.

A little while after there came two Lipous to ask the Ambassador some Several
Questions of two Lipous to the Ambassador.
Questions by the Tatans Order, viz. That the Holland Ambassadors were in the
thirteenth Year of the Emperor Zungte ordered to come by Quantung, and he was
now in the fifth Year of Conchi come thither from Hoksieu, why he did not come
by Quantung? also which way was nearest, from Quantung or Hoksieu? The
Ambassador answering these, desired that if they had any more Questions to ask
him, they would please to deliver them to him in Writing, that he might answer
them again in the same manner, that by that means all mistakes, which might
happen to arise by the Interpretation of them, might be prevented. This the
Lipous willingly consenting to, delivered them a Paper written in the Chinese
Tongue, in which the Questions were all set down.

Van Hoorn and Nobel going from thence went to their new Lodgings, which
Ambassador goes to his new Lodgings.
were the same wherein the Ambassadors Goyer and Keizer had Lodged thirteen
years before, and now also the four Corean Ambassador, who went from thence the
day before, having been there a whole Month.

The Place whereon this House was built being of a large circumference, was
surrounded with Stone Walls, and full of Chambers and other Apartments; yet
very inconvenient, though better than where they were before.

Soon after their coming into this their new Habitation, the Lipous which had
been there before, came again with their Secretary, to tell the Ambassador,
that the Tatan would come in Person and see those Presents which the Ambassador
would present to the Emperor apart, that he might give the better account of
them to his Imperial Majesty. To which the Ambassador replied, That so soon as
the Goods came thither, he would lay them ready for him.

Not long after Putmans and Vander Does came thither with all the remaining
Presents and other Goods: whereupon the Ambassador gave immediate order, that
those new Presents which he had designed to give the Emperor, should be taken
out of their several Chests: which was no sooner done, but the Tatan came with
several great Lords; where looking on all the Goods, he asked from whence this
or that came, and what use it was for? to which Question having received an
Answer, he took his leave; but coming just without the Gate he sent one of his
Secretaries to tell the Ambassador, that he must get the Presents all in
readiness against the next Morning, if the Emperor should chance to send for
them.

The twenty eighth about Daybreak, a Mandarin came to the Ambassador to have a
written Answer to the Questions delivered in Writing the day before by the
Chancellor and Lipous to the Ambassador and Nobel: whereupon the Ambassador
causing them immediately to be translated, found them to be as follows; and
thereupon judged it convenient to answer according to what was there written,
under every Question.

The Emperor and Lipous ask of the Ambassador and Hopou these following
Questions.
I. Question. In the thirteenth Year of the Emperor Zungte, the Holland
Ambassadors came to Quantung. The Lipous in the same Year writ to the Emperor,
and he has granted that the Ambassadors shall always come by the way of
Canton. In the fifth Year of the Emperor Conghi, the Ambassador is come from
Hoksieu; and why did he not come from Canton?

Answer. Because the Hollanders in the Wars, and routing of the Pyrate Coxinga,
put into Hoksieu.

II. Qu. Which Way is nearest, from Quantung, or Hoksieu?

Answ. The Way from Quantung is three or four days nearer; yet that is
according as the Winds blow.

III. Qu. If the Way from Quantung be three or four days nearer than from
Hoksieu, why did not the Ambassador come from thence?

Answ. The reasons thereof are mentioned in the Answer to the first Question.

IV. Qu. In the thirteenth Year of the Emperor Zungte, the Holland Ships were
in Quantung, and since there are many Shelves and Rocks, how did they get
through them?

Answ. Concerning the Rocks, and being at Quantung, we can say nothing of them,
because neither the Hopou nor Ambassador were there; but yet they both know
that some of the Holland Ships were cast away there.

Whilst they were answering these Questions, two Lipous came to the Ambassadors
Two Lipous ask several Questions of the Ambassador.
House, asking a Pattern of each sort of the peculiar Presents which the
Ambassador intended to give to the Emperor, that they might show it; which
being given them, they again asked some other Questions, from whence this thing
or that came? and what use it was for? as the Tatan had done the day before. To
which they received Answers as formerly. Soon after they began to Pack up all
the Goods to be carried to the Court.

The Ambassador taking hold of this opportunity, judged it convenient (since
two days before he could not have any time) to deliver the Zoutaizins, Tatans,
and others, the Inventories of their Presents; which was done accordingly,
after the Ambassador had taken both of them apart from the other Mandarins: but
they (notwithstanding all the arguments that could be used to persuade them to
accept of them) excused themselves, saying they could not as yet take them,
alleging that they would stay till they had done the Ambassador's Business.
This said, they asked if the Ambassador had brought any thing to sell? and also
if any of his Retinue had any thing to dispose of, which if they had, they
should give them the quantity of them in Writing, before they sold their Goods,
which (as they said) was the Custom there of all Strangers. Whereupon the
Ambassador gave them the same Answer as he had done on the two and twentieth,
viz. That they had nothing to sell, but that which they brought with them was
to give away to Persons that assisted them in the obtaining of their Desires.
Whereupon they looking upon one another, said nothing, but that they durst not
accept of the Presents.

Moreover, the Ambassador requested that they would please to order him
Ambassador's Requests*
a certain Purveyor, to buy all his Provisions and other Necessaries for him
and his Retinue, because they could not agree with those that were there then,
by reason they were changed every day; and likewise that they might have a
Carpenter to make some Conveniences for them. The first they granted, telling
them of two Persons which should assist them; but the second they could not
consent to, because (as they said) none might come into the Ambassadors House
whilst the Emperor's Presents were there.

They also asked for an Answer to their Questions made the day before; to which
the Ambassador replied, That it was ready to be delivered to them so soon as it
was Translated: To which they answered, That when it was done they should
deliver it to the Mandarins whom they would send; which soon after was
performed: and they took their leave without taking any of the Emperor's
Presents with them, which the Ambassador had Packed up: neither was it done
till the twenty third, when by three Secretaries belonging to the Lipous, they
were with the rest of the Presents (according as they said) to be delivered all
together to the Emperor.

The thirtieth the Ambassador and Nobel were sent for to the Lipous, and
carried Ambassador and Nobel brought before the Lipous.
to the chief Tatan's House, where they commonly assembled; whither coming,
after a little waiting, they were asked by the Tatan if they had any Goods to
buy or to sell? To which they answered, No; and that it was not customary for
any Ambassador to trouble himself with Merchandising. Whereupon the Tatan asked
how it was with the Ambassador's Health: after which his Excellency and Nobel
were carried into an Antichamber; where being seated, they asked the
Ambassador concerning his Sons Quality? and if Several Questions.
he came upon order and knowledge of the Lord General. To which Van Hoorn
replied, That his Son was of no Quality more than as being his, and that he
only came to bear his Father Company, which the General had given him leave to
do. Moreover, they asked why this Embassy did not come by Quantung and Canton,
but from Hoksieu, alleging that they were not well satisfied in the written
Answer to this Question, because they had not asked about the War with the
Coxingans, and if they were come thither by that means; but why the Embassy did
not now come by Quantung? and if they and the Lord Maetzuiker did not know that
the former Emperor's Order was, that all Embassies must come from Quantung?
Whereupon after consultation they answered, That they knew not of the former
Emperor's Order; and that according to the Lord Generals Command they were come
by Hoksieu, and whether or not he knew the former Emperor's Order they could
not tell. Which Answer they said was sufficient, and accordingly written down.
They also asked concerning Putmans and the Secretary's Quality; which being
resolved, the Ambassador and Nobel took their leave.

The first of June in the Morning one of the Lipous called Songlavja, and four
June.
Grand Mandarins, came to the Ambassador's House, with Request that he would
command his Music to Play, which they much desired to hear. He knowing the
Lavja's to be very civil People, entertained them nobly, and ordered his
Musicians to Play their best Tunes; which pleased them so well, that they
returned him many thanks, and at last took their leave.

In the Evening the Ambassador proposed, That they had made some Inventories
Consult about presenting the Council of State.
of Presents for the four Zoutaizins, three Tartar Tatans, three Lipous, and
four Secretaries; and that their Letter of Requests was, as they reported,
already delivered to the Emperor, and that in a short time they might have an
Answer; that also in their Instructions they were ordered to present the
Counselors of State before their chief Business was done, as the Ambassador
had already used some endeavor to deliver the Schedule of the Presents, without
being able to do it; as also by one of their Mandarin Guides to the Zoutaizins,
which likewise came to no effect: Whereupon considering, that they could trust
none without being cheated, it was therefore proposed what way would be best to
present the Counselors: After serious Debate it was resolved, that Nobel and
Putmans should the next Morning go to the Lipous, and acquaint them, That the
Ambassador rejoiced at the Emperor's kind acceptance of all the Presents, and
withal desired, there being some Presents for the Zoutaizins and other
Grandees, sent them from the General, that they might be acquainted with it,
and they admitted to deliver them. Whereupon the Mandarins of the Guard were
called, and desired by the Ambassador, that they would go to the Lipous in the
Morning, and request of them, that Nobel and Putmans might be admitted to
impart something to them; which they promised to do, and said they would bring
the Ambassador an Answer at their Return.

The second in the Morning the Mandarins returned to tell the Ambassador, that
Nobel and Putmans might freely go to the Assembly, and that a Mandarin was come
to conduct them thither. Whereupon they immediately went, and at their Return
related, That they were carried by the forementioned Mandarins to the Tatans
House into a Chamber, by the Lipou Songlavja, who had asked them if they would
acquaint him only with their Requests, or the whole Assembly? to which they
answered, That they would do as he pleased: whereupon he desired that they
should only impart it to him, which was done after the same manner as it was
agreed on the Night before: which having heard, he went in, and after half an
hours stay coming out again, and sending away all his Servants, he told them,
That for that time the Lipous were risen, but the Tatan had promised to propose
it to the Assembly in the Afternoon, and would send them an Answer the next
Morning, whethe Nobel should come to the Assembly or not; and if no Messenger
came, he migh tstay at home. Songlavja had also asked several times if the Lord
General had sent the Presents? and if there were no Letters with them. To which
Nobel replying, said, That there were none; but he knew that the Ambassador was
commanded by the Lord Maetzuiker to present all the forementioned Grandees:
which said, they took their leave.

The third, two Mandarins came to tell the Ambassador, That the Lipous on the
Proposal of the Presents made yesterday by Nobel and Putmans, desired that he
would write the Persons Names which he intended to present, and if they were
sent from the General, or given only by the Ambassador: To which he sent an
Answer in these following terms:

THe General of Batavia has commanded the Ambassador, after the delivery of A
Letter to the Taisins concerning the Presents.
the Chinkon to the Emperor, also to Present the Taizins; for he being ignorant
of the Customs here, has ordered the Ambassador to do according as he shall
find it convenient.


With which Letter Nobel and Putmans went to the Lipous Assembly, and at their
Return brought word, That they had again, as yesterday, been at the Tatans
House, and by two Lipous led into a private Chamber, where they delivered the
forementioned Letter; which when they had read they delivered to Nobel again.
Whereupon Nobel desired of the Lipou Songlavja (which was one of the two) that
he would be pleased to assist the Ambassador, he not knowing their Customs, and
advise him what was best to be done: At which seeming not to be well pleased,
he went to the Council, whither Nobel and Putmans was also called: There they
saw three Tatans, being two Tartars and one Chinese, to whom they again
delivered the forementioned Letter: The Tatans having read it, asked to whom
they would deliver the Presents? Nobel and Putmans desired that they might
speak with the Ambassador about it: But they making no Answer went away without
effecting their Business, the Letter being also by the Tatans demanded from the
Interpreter de Hase, to whom they had first given it.

In the Afternoon a Mandarin, whom Van Hoorn had some days since presented with
five Else of Stammel, came and brought it again, saying, When the Ambassador's
Business was done he would take it, but now he durst not keep it. He also
informed the Ambassador, that he was come of his own accord to tell him, that
the Letter to the Lipous to present the Zoutaizins did not please them; nay,
that they would perhaps send some Lavja's, to ask how and where the Ambassador
heard of the Zoutaizins? and advised him to answer them, That he supposed the
Zoutaizins, Tatans, and Lipous, were all one.

The Ambassador looked upon this as a strange Discourse, because he had seen
the Zoutaizins, and they asked him concerning the General's Health; so that he
supposed the Lipous did this only to prevent him from presenting the
Zoutaizins, and get the Presents amongst themselves.

The twenty ninth in the Morning Van Hoorn and Nobel were sent for to the
Ambassador and Nobel appear before the Lipous.
Lipous, and carried before their Bench, where they were asked what Lords the
Ambassador meant by the Name of Zoutaizins? and how they knew that there were
any? To which he answered, That he had seen two of them in the Emperor's
Palace, and they told him that there were two more, which were then sick; and
also that he had spoke to them when they asked him about the General's Health.
To which the Lipous said, Mean you them? Whereto Van Hoorn replied, So he
understood his Orders.

Moreover they desired that the Ambassador would declare what Lipous he meant
by the other, and that he would express the Lipous thereby; which was done
accordingly. This pleasing them, the Ambassador was by some of the Lipous led
out of the Council Chamber into a private Room, and there told, That in the
second Year of the Emperor Conghi, a Mandarin called Tanghlavja, had been in
Hoksieu empowered as Taizin, and had brought word that they would every year
come to Peking; whether or no that was true? To which Van Hoorn answered, That
that was not the meaning, but that they would come every year to Trade. So
after several other Questions of small consequence, the Ambassador and Nobel
took their leave.

The fifth in the Morning the Ambassador and Nobel were again sent for to
Ambassador and Nobel again sent, for to the Assembly of the Lipous.
the Lipous, and coming to the Tatans House were led into an Apartment, out of
which after two hours stay they were called before the Assembly; where the
Tatan first asked concerning the Ambassador's Health, and afterward said, That
it had often happened that Ambassadors proffered to present the Zoutaizins and
Lipous, but it was not customary there to receive them, therefore the
Ambassador must not credit those which told him so, and that they had not
advised him well: after these and such like Discourses were ended, they
departed.

In the Evening the Mandarin, who had hitherto been chief Steward for the
Ambassador's Provisions that were allowed him and his Retinue by the Emperor,
came to tell him, That being preferred to a greater Place, he could not wait
upon him any longer, but that another would supply his Room: The Ambassador to
gratify him for his former care, gave him five Else of Stammel.

The sixth in the Afternoon came four Mandarins to the Ambassador, to tell him
that they were expressly sent from the Emperor, to have his Answer to the
following Questions, viz. First, from whence the Rose Water came, and Several
Questions of four Mandarins to the Ambassador.
what it was for? likewise the Unicorns Horns and the Copper Mount, which were
amongst the Bengale Copper-works? Moreover, what Birds the Casuaris were? all
which the Ambassador answered to the best of his knowledge; which they having
set down, went away again.

The seventh and eighth nothing happened, nor saw they any Strangers.

The ninth in the Afternoon Genko the Interpreter informed the Ambassador, That
he and the Mandarin Guides were that Morning sent for to the Lipous, where they
had understood that the Ambassador and all his Retinue should about three days
after be invited to the Emperor's first Feast, and perhaps within ten days go
away again.

The eleventh nothing happened of note; but on the twelfth in the Morning The
Ambassador and his Retinue are fetched to the Imperor's Feast.
a Mandarin (which generally went with the Netherlanders to the Court) came to
tell the Ambassador, That he and his Retinue should make themselves ready to go
to the forementioned Feast of the Emperor; which was immediately performed,
and the Ambassador conducted to the Tatans House, to stay in the usual Chamber;
from whence he was soon fetched, and by the Lipou Songlavja led into the Hall,
where finding the Tatan, and having with him kneeled down and bowed their Heads
three times toward the Emperor's Palace, they were seated after the following
manner: The Tatan sat uppermost, and on his right Hand a little distant the
Ambassador, behind him Nobel, Putmans, and the Secretary, and behind them the
rest of the Retinue, to the number of seventeen; on the Tatan's left Hand, at a
pretty distance sat some Lipous, and other great Lords: When they were placed,
a Cup of Bean-broth was filled round, and drank up kneeling with one Knee on
the Ground; after which the Tables, Garnished with thirty three Silver Plates,
were placed before the Tatan, Ambassador, and those of his Retinue that were of
Quality, and before the other Retinue five and five to a Table, filled with all
manner of Fruits, and Meal Baked in Oil; then every one received a Cup of
Imperial Liquor, which was also drank by those that liked it on the Knee, after
they had bowed their Heads; which done, they fell to eat, the Tatan giving the
Lipous and other great Lords some from his own Table. After they had pretty
well eaten, the Tatan asked the Interpreters, if the Netherlanders had brought
no Bags to put the Offal, and what remained in? being answered No, and that it
was not their custom, he immediately caused some Bags and Clothes to be
brought: But the Interpreters not long considering, threw in all that was left
one amongst another into the Bags; which was no sooner done, but another Course
was brought, viz. on the Tatan's, Ambassador's, and other Persons of Qualities
Table, were set two Dishes and two Plates; on the Retinues Tables, one Dish of
boiled Rams flesh, and another of Lamb: Before the Lipous and other Lords, a
Mat was spread on the Floor, without either Table or Dish, the flesh exceeding
fat and good, though unhandsom to look on, weighed at least fifteen Pound a
Joint.

The Hollanders were much pleased to see the Lipous and other Lords eat so
heartily thereof; also observing the manner used by the Tartars at Meals, which
was rather like Beasts than rational Creatures: Having spent some time in
Eating, the Soldiers taking away the Meat from the Tables, the Netherlanders
rising and kneeling, bowed their Heads, with the Tartars, three times toward
the Emperor's Court, and so returned to their own Lodgings.

No sooner was the Ambassador come home, but Genko the Interpreter Interpreter
Genko's information.
informed him, That he was Commanded to tell the Ambassador, that four days
hence, (being the twentieth of ours, and the six and twentieth of their Moon)
there would be a second Feast, and two days after, the last, or third:
Moreover, that two or three days after that, he should depart, which being
observed by the Ambassador in his Council; and also, that it might be designed,
that just at their departure, the Emperor's Answer on their Requests might be
The Ambassador and his Council consult about it.
made known to them; after which time there would be no opportunity to alter
any thing that might not agree with their Instructions; therefore they thought
fit to entreat, that the Merchandise which would come in those Ships that
should fetch the Ambassador, might be sold at their arrival: Whereupon they
wrote the following Letter to the Assembly of the Lipous.

THe Ambassador hopes, that the Lipous have well understood his Letter of
Requests, The Ambassadors Request to the Lipous.
and hopes for a good Answer from the Emperor: Now his further Desire is, that
he may receive the Commands, and Answer of the Emperor, ten days before he goes
away, that he may the better (having time to consider) understand his Imperial
Majesty's Will and Pleasure, and may faithfully render an account thereof to
the General in Batavia; and that the Hollanders may for the future, Obey, and
faithfully perform the Emperor's Commands, as well in the Chinkon, as ought
else.


Nobel and Putmans went with this Letter to the Lipous Assembly, and were
directed to use such persuasive arguments, as they should think fit, to make
them understand the Ambassador's Request; to which purpose, the Mandarins of
the Guard were desired by Van Hoorn to go for him to the Assembly of the
Lipous, and desire of them, that Nobel and Putmans might be admitted into their
Presence; which they promising to do, related at their return, that the Lipous
had told them, that the Ambassador on the twenty sixth of their Moon (which was
the sixth of July) when he should be Entertained at the Emperor's second
Banquet, might then acquaint them with what he had to Request.

The fourteenth, nothing happened of Note.

The fifteenth in the Forenoon, the Lipou Songlavja came with two Mandarins to
the Ambassador's Lodging, to ask him what his Requests were about, which he
desired to speak with the Council; Whereupon Van Hoorn gave him the Letter
written two days before, but he was afraid to take it, until the Chinese
Secretary Soukjen had explained it to him: The Ambassador ordering him to read
it, which being done, he answered, The Ambassador is come hither with a Letter
to the Emperor, therefore his Majesty will not let him go away without another,
and as soon as the Emperor had resolved on his Business, he should not fail to
have his answer in Writing delivered him with the Emperor's Letter to the
General; To which the Ambassador replied, That is all I desire, and therefore
asked the Lipous, if he might to Morrow show the Tatan the forementioned
Letter, or not? Whereto Songlavja replied, That he might, if he pleased, but it
was all one, since he knew the Contents of it; and that he would speak with him
further about it to Morrow, at the Emperor's second Feast.

Mean while, six grand Mandarins more came to the Ambassadors House, at which
the Lipou Songlavja taking his leave, advised the Ambassador to entertain the
six Lavjas, which he performed, by keeping them to Dinner, and delighting their
Ears with his Music; after which they departed well satisfied.

The next Morning early, being the sixteenth, the Lipous Mandarins came to
Emperor's second Feast.
give notice to the Ambassador, to make himself ready to go to the Emperor's
second Feast: Which the Hollanders immediately performed, and were again
conducted thither, and entertained after the same manner, as on the twelfth
instant, without any alteration, only they did not Kneel before the Tatan: Who
by the Interpreter Genko told the Ambassador, that he need not deliver the
Letter of Requests which he had brought with him, because he had understood the
Contents of the same from the Lipou Songlavja, which made him keep it; and
taking his leave, went away, without asking or speaking any thing else, with
all his Retinue: Where he was no sooner come, but the Mandarin which in the
Morning had fetched him to the Court, came and told the Ambassador, That he and
his Retinue must make themselves ready, that they might go to Morrow Morning
before Daylight, to the Emperors Palace, to receive his Imperial Majesty's
Presents; which the Ambassador promised to do. This Mandarin said also, That
his Excellency should on the thirtieth of their Moon (being the tenth of our
July) come to the third Imperial Feast, and three days after that go away,
which made the Ambassador long for the Emperor's resolution on his Request.

The seventeenth in the Morning, two hours before Day, he was fetched with his
Retinue to the Court, to receive the Imperial Presents, and conduct them
through three Gates into the Emperor's Court, on a Plain, before the fourth
Gate, which faces the Throne; where, on June the 23. they had seen the Coreans
show Reverence to the Emperor, and their Presents lie on a Table. Here the
Netherlanders rested till Daylight; about an hour after they saw some Lipous
dressed after a stately manner coming into the Court; and soon after, a Table was
brought in, covered with a Piece of Red Cloth, which was set in the same place
where the Corean Ambassadors stood; only this stood before the Gate at the
Tartars upper Hand; when as that of the Coreans stood on the left. A little
while after, some Stuffs and Money was laid upon it, which done, the
Ambassador, his Son, Nobel, Putmans, and the Secretary, were called and placed
just before the middle Gate, which was opposite to the Throne; yet they could
not there discern the least glimps of it; for that the fifth Gate stands so
high, that although it be open, yet they can see nothing belonging to the
Throne.

After they had faced the Throne, and upon the Order of a Herald, kneeled
thrice, and bowed their Heads nine times; they brought the Ambassador first
those Presents that were for the Lord General, which he received kneling; and
afterward, those which were for himself: This done, Nobel received his
likewise; next Putmans, then the Secretary, and the rest of the Retinue, every
one what was ordered for them: Which finished, the Mandarin Guide, Hiu and
Huilavja, the Chinese Interpreters and Soldiers which came with them, received
theirs.

The Presents which they received from the Emperor were as follows:

For the Lord General three hundred Guilders of fine Silver, consisting in six
Presents for the General.
Boats, two Pieces of Chinese Cloth of Gold, two more of the same with Dragons,
four Pieces of Flowered Silk, with Dragons; two Pieces of Flannel, twelve
Pieces of diverse Colored Satin, eight Pieces of Damask*Silk, ten Pieces of
rich Flowered Stuff, ten Pieces of Pelangs, and ten Pieces of Pansjes.

For the Ambassador an hundred Guilders of fine Silver* four Pieces of Pelangs,
four Pieces of Pansjes, four raw Pieces of Hokjens, three Pieces of Blue single
Satin, six Pieces of single Damask, two Pieces of Cloth of Gold, with Dragons.

For his Son, one Piece of black Flannel, fifteen Guilders of fine Silver, two
Pieces of Raw Gazen, two Pieces of single Damask Silk.

For Nobel, fifty Guilders of fine Silver, one Piece of Chinese Cloth of Gold,
one Piece of Flannel, three of Damask Silk, one Piece of Satin, two of Gazen,
two of Pelangs, and two of Pansjes.

For Putmans and Vander Does, which had both alike, were forty Guilders of fine
Silver, two Pieces of Damask Silk, one of Flannel, one of Satin, one of
Pelangs, one of Pansjes, one of single slight Damask, and one Piece of White
Goes.

The Interpreters, Maurice Iansz Vish, and Dirk de Hase, had each two Pieces of
Black Satin, two of White Goes, two of Pansjes, two of single slight Damask.

For every one of the Retinue, fifteen Guilders of fine Silver, two Pieces of
raw Gazen, and two of single Damask.

For the Guide Mandarin Hiu Lavja, one Horse without a Saddle.

For the Guide Mandarin Hanlavja, and the two Chinese Interpreters, one Silk
Damask Coat, Edged about with Gold, which they were immediately to put on, and
for each of the Soldiers that came with the Ambassador, one slight Silk Damask
Coat.

After every one had received what was laid out for them, the Ambassador was
with his Retinue led back to the place where he Kneeled before, and did it
again, as a sign of thankfulness; after which he was by the Mandarin
Song-Lavja, and some other Mandarins conducted out of the Court; whereat, the
Ambassador asked of the Lipou Song-Lavja, when the Emperor's Letter to the Lord
General, and his answer on their Requests would be delivered? To which he
replied, All in good time, yet it should be three or four days before his
departure: Whereupon, the Netherlanders returned again to their Lodgings.

In the Afternoon, a young Viceroy, not above twenty years old, and Nephew to
the present Emperor, came to visit the Ambassador, and to hear his Music;
which having delighted his Ears, and tasted two or three Glasses of Sack, he
took his leave, seeming very well satisfied.

The nineteenth in the afternoon, another grand Lord, who had the Command over
the Nobility at the Court, came to the same purpose, which was accordingly
granted him, and entertained with a Banquet; which ended, he departed.



The fourth instant, the Tatan told the Ambassador and Nobel expressly, that
none there might receive any Presents, and those who told him otherwise did
very ill: Wherefore the Ambassador seeing them to be in earnest, sent a Letter
to the Lipous and Zoutaisins, to desire, that those Goods which he had brought
with him to give away, since they would not accept of them, he might have leave
to sell them; but he could get no answer upon it.

The twentieth, the Ambassador was fetched to the third Feast of the Emperor,
and again, as before, conducted to the third Tatans Court, where he was
entertained after the same manner, as on the sixteenth.

The Ambassador, after all this trouble and Expense, both of time and
otherwise, gained no more, but to be at last dismissed, with a Sealed Letter
from the Emperor, to the Lord Maetzuiker in Batavia.

So on the fifth of August, he set forth from the Imperial City Peking, to
measure back his former tedious Journey; and first reached a Temple about a
League from the Town of Tonsjouw, and two from Peking, where they lay all that
Night.

AS to what concerns the Metropolis Peking, it shall be with its whole Province
at large described in our following Discourse of the Empire of China or Taising.

The great Citizens, and other Prime Court-Ladies, are here, as also through
all China, seldom seen to walk in the Streets, but are carried in close Sedans,
or Palakyns, accompanied by a great Train of Waiting-Women, and other Servants.

In the Houses, their Lodgings are apart from the Men, where likewise they have
Wildernesses, Groves, and pleasant Gardens, where they delight themselves in
Planting curious Flowers, and keeping all manner of Singing-Birds.

But the high-going Madams take another manner of State upon them, especially
the Emperor's Concubines, who appear very rich and gorgeously Dressed in their
Houses, (in manner, as are represented in the following Print, in Silk Coats,
which trail on the Ground after them with very wide Sleeves; their Heads
covered with a costly Cap, is round, and turned up before, cut and indented
like the Points of a Coronet.

The sixth they proceeded on their Journey from Tongsjouw, and at Noon came to
the Vessels lying at the City of Siensingway, where the same Boats received
them that brought them thither.

The seventh, leaving Siensingway, and passing by many Hamlets and Villages,
they Anchored before some Houses, about a League from Giochioe.

The ninth about Daybreak, Weighing again, they arrived in the Forenoon at the
forementioned City, from whence, after they had gotten fresh Toers, they set
Sail at Noon, and dropped Anchor that Night before the Village of Ianzin.

The eleventh, they came to the City of Siensingway about Noon, where they
waited for more Toers, because the Current was against them, and the stronger,
by reason of the Rain lately fallen.

The next Morning, Putmans went to the Sienkin of that place, to proffer him
the Presents which were laid out for him on the tenth of June, in their Journey
up to Peking, which he had then refused, and put off the accepting of, till
their return: From whence he sent the following Letter, with the Goods.

THe Ambassador is safely arrived here: The Civilities which he has received
of your Lordship, shall not be forgotten: The Lipous have Commanded the
Ambassador to make what speed he could possible in this his Journey for Fokien
and Batavia, there to deliver the Emperor's Letter; therefore the Emperor
desires Talavja, that he would give speedy order, and dispatch.


Putmans at his return informed, That the Talavja had accepted of the five Else
of Stammel* and two Flasks of Rose Water, but sent the rest back again; and as
to what concerned their speedy departure, he took no notice of, because it did
not concern him, he having only the Command over the Soldiers.

Soon after, the Sionkins Interpreter came to tell the Ambassador, That his
Master, in requital for the Presents, had sent him two Hogs, two Sheep, one
Pikol of Rice, and some Fruit, with Request, That his Excellency would please
to accept of them: Whereupon the Ambassador replied, That he would receive it,
on condition, his Highness would also take the rest of the Presents; which the
Interpreter promised to tell him, and at his return, acquaint the Ambassador
with his answer. Not long after, coming back, he said, That Talavja was double
satisfied with those Presents which he had already received; yet however, to
please his Excellency, he would accept of a Piece of Green Perpetuana, if they
had it, which he gave immediate Order to lay out, but was forgotten by the
Interpreter.

Also the Interpreter was Presented by the Ambassador, with two Pieces of
Linen, and two Flasks of Rose Water, because he had asked to buy them.

The Netherlanders Weighing Anchor, went with their Vessels to the South side
of the City, that they might proceed on their Journey the next Morning.

The Toya also sent them some Presents thither, viz. Sheep, Apples, Pears, and
the like, for which he returned him the Piece of Perpetuana, which Sionkins
Interpreter had left behind him; But his Servants soon after brought it back
again, saying, that their Master judged it too much, but if the Ambassador had
any Sword-blades, Pistols, or such like things, he would willingly accept of
them; Whereupon, the Ambassador sent him by the Interpreter Maurice, a Carbine,
a Sword, and a handsome Knife, which he received with many Thanks.

After Noon, having been nobly entertained in one of the Sionkin's Barques,
they Weighed from the Suburb, and the next Morning being the fourth, set Sail
from the City of Tiensingway, and in the Evening Anchored at Sangjue.

The following day, in the Afternoon, they arrived at the City of Chinchay,
where having staid about an hour and half, they set Sail again, and at Night
dropped Anchor before Sincoacheen.

The seventeenth they proceeded on their Journey, and in the Evening arrived at
Chiuche.

The eighteenth at Noon, they past by the City of Siangsjouw, without putting
in, but in the Evening Anchored at the Village Talodueen.

The nineteenth they rested at Poethouw.

The twentieth in the Afternoon, they past by Tunquancheen, and staid all Night
near Lienulhoe, where the Province of Peking, and that of Xantung is separated.

The one and twentieth, they Sailed six Leagues in the Province of Xantung, and
dropped Anchor at a Village called Lonkuntang; and next day, after Noon, staid
for fresh Toers in Tuatchiouw, which having gotten, they set forward, and on
the three and twentieth arrived at Chinjeen.

The twenty fifth, passing by Uchincheen, they dropped Anchor that Night at
Oepoeso.

The six and twentieth, going on again, about Daylight they came in the
Evening to Linsing, being got out of the River Guei, in the Royal Channel Iun;
and that Evening past through the first Sluice, as in the Morning they did the
second, made in Linsing, and dropped Anchor before the Custom-house, where a
Chain was put cross the Channel, that no Vessels might pass without paying.

The Governor of this place came in the forenoon to visit the Netherlanders in
their Vessel, and bid them Welcome; who, after having been well entertained,
took his leave.

After his departure, sending the Ambassador some Presents, Putmans was ordered
to carry him a Pair of Pistols, a Sword Blade, a Piece of Perpetuana, and a
Piece of Say in return.

The forementioned Lord received many Letters in Putmans presence, advising
him, that the Emperor had Reigned three days, and that his own Chiap or Seal
was abroad.

The Guide Mandarins informed the Netherlanders, that all the Governors, as
well Povis, Conbons, Poutsensies or Farmers, which were up and down in the
Provinces were sent for, and that Tartars were to be put in their places.

In the Afternoon, the Governors of this place came to invite the Netherlanders
to a Banquet, which they would willingly have refused; but that they being very
importunate with them, were forced to grant their Request; so that the
Ambassador told them, that so soon as the Chain was unlocked, and his Vessels
past through, he would come and wait upon them: To which they replied, That
they would give immediate Order for it, as accordingly was done, and the
Vessels permitted to pass.

Against the Evening, Messengers came to fetch the Ambassador to the Governors:
But he excusing himself, said, That he could not go out of his Barque in the
Night; wherefore the Governors sent him several Dishes with prepared Meats to
his Vessel, which was distributed amongst the Barge-men. Mean while the chief
Commander of this place sent the Ambassador some Silk Stuffs, which he returned
again.

The twenty ninth in the Morning, they set out from the City of Linsing. In the
Evening they Anchored at Linancotsue, which leaving on the thirtieth, they past
by Tungsjaufoe, and lay that Night before Gihautchie, having past through five
Water-gates that day.

The one and thirtieth, Weighing Anchor, they came to Xansui; and in the
Evening arrived at Gansjan, through six Sluices, which they all found open to
their great advantage.

The first of September they left the Gansjan, and shooting that day four
Water-gates, September.
they dropped Anchor in the Evening at a Village called Kaygoeva.

The next Morning, being the second, setting Sail again, they past that
Forenoon by Namwang, and a Pagode thereto belonging, called Longwangmiao, where
the River unites with this Channel; so that they had the Tide with them, by
which means they reached Sinning that Night, having past through three Sluices,
when they Anchored before the fourth and last in the Western Suburb of the City
Sinning, expecting when it should be opened, that they might get through that
also, which being not before the Afternoon, they went only a Canon shot from
thence, and lay still for that Night.

In the Morning, the Toya of the City coming to Visit and Welcome the
Ambassador, Presented him with some fresh Provisions, which he accepting, sent
Putmans after him with five Else of Stammel, in Requital of his Favor.

The fourth in the Morning, leaving Sinning, and having a fair Gale of Wind,
they got to a Village called Naogang that afternoon, where they waited for
fresh Toers, having that day shot seven Sluices or Floodgates.

The fifth, setting Sail again, they arrived in the Evening at Iaxinho, passing
through seven Water-gates that day.

The next day they lay still, wanting Toers.

The seventh in the Morning, leaving Iaxinho, they Anchored toward Evening at
the Village Miliancho, where the Province of Xantung is separated from that of
Nanking.

The eighth they entered the Province of Nanking, and lay the next Night before
Kiakia; which leaving on the ninth, they arrived that Morning with a fair Wind
at Maulovao, three Leagues and three quarters from Kiakia, where they changed
their Toers, which came not till the Evening, because they were fetched from
Singsing a League and a half distant from thence.

The tenth in the Afternoon, setting Sail again, they arrived in the Evening
before the Mouth of the Lake Usantjouw, into which the Yellow River disembogues.

The Bank in this place being broken, they had made a Dam in the River Geu,
which takes its Original in a Village a League and a half from thence; here the
Ambassador dropped Anchor, to stay for some of his Barques to come up with him,
which were a good way behind. Toward Night they arrived at a little Village,
opposite to the City Taujenjeen, which leaving again in the Morning, they
reached the Village Namemiao at Noon, and withal got out of the Yellow River,
which has so swift a Current as creates much danger.

The thirteenth, putting forward again, they came to the great Village
Sinkianpoe at Noon, where the Conbon of Hoksieu, according to the Information
of the Guide Mandarins, arrived the same day, being on his own Request rid of
his Office to come thither.

The Ambassador writing a Complemental Letter to him, he sent to invite his
Excellency to come to him; Whereupon, he immediately going thither, was kindly
received and entertained by his Highness; who told the Ambassador, that it was
a great Honor, that the Netherlanders had been with and seen the Emperor, and
that he had left some Presents in his Factors hands in Hoksieu for to be
delivered to the Ambassador, for the Lord General and himself, which the
Ambassador would find there at his coming: The Conbon also commended himself
for the good inclination which he had bore to the Hollanders in the time of his
Governorship: To which the Ambassador answered, That he was very sensible of
it, and that they should ever be obliged to his Highness for it. Lastly, The
Conbon said, that he was desirous to make one small Present more to the
Ambassador, being only four Hogs, some Geese, and other Poultrey, which he
desired his Excellency would be pleased to accept; whereon the Ambassador
promised he would, provided his Highness would again receive the like Present
from him: Which last the Interpreters durst not tell the Conbon, because
several other Lords stood about him, so that there was no mention made of it.

So after a handsome Entertainment, the Ambassador took his leave.

The fourteenth in the Morning, the Ambassador in Requital of his Friendly
Reception the day before, sent a Letter to the Conbon, and judged it
convenient, since he might do much by his Recommendation in Peking, to the
benefit of the Company, to present him with ten Else of Stammel, ten of black
Cloth, ten of Blue, one Piece of Say, one of Crown-Serge, four Pieces of
Linen, two of Guinny Linen, one fine Carpet, one String of Blood Coral, and
two pair of Spectacles; and the Ambassador to oblige his Interpreter, and that
he might put his Master in mind of the Hollanders, gave him five Else of
Stammel, one Sword-blade, and a pair of Spectacles.

This done, leaving the great Village Sinkianpoe, they past by the Conbon's
Barques, which consisted of fifty six great and small.

In the Afternoon they came to the North-Suburb of Haoigan, where they lay
still before a Bridge, till the Townsmen had furnished them with Provisions.

The sixteenth, against Noon, the Ambassador was presented with some Pieces of
Stuffs, by the Toya of that place, who was Brother to the new General at
Hoksieu; which the Ambassador judged not convenient to accept, but sent them
back again, and with them five Else of Stammel, partly, because he might assist
the Hollanders, and do much for them by writing a Letter in their behalf to his
Brother; and secondly, that they might be speedily dispatched from thence;
which prevailed so much, that the Netherlanders left the City Haoigan in the
afternoon, and arrived in the Evening at Paoing. The next Morning, going from
thence again, at Noon they met with a Factor belonging to the General, called
Tziang Povi Thesia, who according to his Relation, came from Hoksieu the fifth
of August, and was going for Peking; who informed the Ambassador, that three
Ships were arrived from Batavia at Sothia, and that four more were gone to
Tamfui and Quelang: Moreover, that all things were well with the Hollanders in
Hoksieu, only none might go to the new arrived Ships, nor any come ashore out
of them, neither was any Provision permitted to be sent to them.

The Viceroy Singlamong and General were coming to Peking, being sent for,
because they let the Netherlands Ships go away, and that the new General which
was to Depose his Master met him near Lancquy: The Ambassador asking him if he
had brought any Letters from Harthouwer, he answered, No: but that fourteen
days before he came from thence, two Letters were writ to the Ambassador by
Harthouwer, and sent with that which the General dispatched to Peking, about
the arrival of the forementioned Ships: After his departure, the Netherlanders
putting forward, they arrived in the Evening at the City of Kayoven, where they
staid all Night.

The next Morning, being the eighteenth, they left the City, and with Sailing
and Toing, reached the City of Ianchefoe about Noon, where they lay before a
Custom-house.

The following day, the Ambassador judged it convenient to procure a speedy
dispatch, by Presenting the Toya of that place with five Else of Stammel, one
Piece of Perpetuana, two Adathys, and a Book Looking-glass; with these he sent
a Complementing Letter by Putmans, yet he accepted of nothing but the two
Adathys, and the Looking-glasses; in return of which, he sent one Hog, one
Pikol of Meal and Rice, and a parcel of Fruit; of which the Ambassador accepted
only the Fruit, and sent back the rest; yet the civility of their offer availed
so much, that the Hollanders were permitted to pass by the Customhouse, and in
the Afternoon Sailing by the City Ianchefoe, arrived at Quasui.

The twentieth in the Morning, Weighing again, they crossed the River Kiang,
and at Noon arrived at Singkiangfoe, where he sent his Secretary to the
Sionkin, Brother to one of the Lipous in Peking, to Request his Highness, that
he might be dispatched from thence with all speed: For which Courtesy, all
that he had should be at his Command and Service: To which his Highness
(according to the Secretaries Relation at his return) answered, The Ambassador
not needing to exchange his Barques there, might go when he pleased. Soon after
the Secretaries return in the Barque, came his Highness Interpreter to give the
Ambassador a Cup of Bean-broth in his Master's Name; for which he, by the
Interpreter Maurice, Presented him with a pair of Pistols, which he accepted
with many Thanks; his Men also had a quarter of a Piece of Perpetuana.

A Captain who had the Command over a thousand Men in this City, and had
Presented the Ambassador with some Provision, came to bid him Welcome; for
which Civility he received five Else of Stammel.

The one and twentieth, in the Morning, leaving the City of Sinksianfoe, they
Sailed along the outside of it, where they saw abundance of Jonks and Cojas,
(as at Ianchufoe) which were newly repaired; of which, the Netherlanders asking
the reason, received answer, that it was customary for all Towns to repair
their Vessels once in three years.

In the Evening they arrived at Tayanchcheen, where casting Anchor for that
Night, they Weighed again the next Morning, being the two and twentieth: Upon
the way, the Ambassador was informed by some Barge-men that came from Suchu,
that the Viceroy Singlamong was arrived there with his Train to go from thence
up to Peking.

In the Afternoon they reached the City of Yanghsu, and the next day Anchored
at the City of Uchinopeen, and on the twenty fourth at Xuciquan, a Village two
Leagues from Suchu, before a Custom-house, where they lay all Night.

The next Morning passing the Boome, they arrived in the Afternoon at the City
of Suchu, where two Blacks belonging to the Viceroy Singlamong's two Sons,
came aboard the Ambassador, to tell him, that their Masters were a Month since
gone by Land to Peking, and that they followed with their Goods; adding
moreover, that Singlamong was yet in Hoksieu, and was to remain there, so that
the Barge-mens relation proved false. In the Afternoon about three a Clock,
they arrived at the West-gate of the City of Suchu.

Here the Hollanders were met by two Conjurers, one a Man, and the other a
Woman, both in handsome Apparel, of which there are great numbers in all parts
of China, that for a small reward, proffer their Service to foretell all future
Events, and procure a good Wind; they also came to the Netherlanders, to put
their Art in practice, to hasten or shorten their Journey; but they not
approving of such Magical assistance, sent them away with a small Gift.

This Conjuring is at large described in the following Description of the
Empire of China.

The Governor of this place came to visit the Ambassador, and Present him and
the chiefest of his Retinue, as Nobel and Putmans, with a well-tasted Liquor,
for which he received some Else of Stammel.

Diverse sorts of Liquors made of Rice, are drank by the Chinese.

In the fifth* Territory, Fuencheufu, in the Province of Xensi, is a very
pleasant Drink, and not inferior to either French or Rennish Wine, being made
of Rice and Kids flesh, which last being bruised, is laid to soke in the Juice
of the Rice. This Liquor is highly esteemed by the Chinese, being strong of
operation, and of a sweet and pleasing taste to the Palate.

In the fifth County Hinhoa, of the Province of Chekiang, they boil the best
Liquor in all China, of Rice and Water.

The six and twentieth in the Morning, the Netherlanders left the great City
Suchu with a fair Wind, and came that Evening to the South Suburb of Ukiajeen,
which City is neatly built, and though not very big, yet it is surrounded with
strong* Walls. The Inhabitants thereof maintain themselves with Merchandising
and Husbandry.

In the Morning setting Sail from thence, and having got about three Leagues
and a half farther, they were forced, the Evening coming suddenly upon them, to
make to their Harbor.

The twenty eighth in the Morning, they set Sail again from thence, and in the
Afternoon past by Kiangfoe, where they went out of the Province of Nanking,
into that of Chekiang, and in the Evening arrived at a Village called Sinning.

The twenty ninth, Weighing again, they had in sight the City of Ukiajeen,
which having past, in the Evening they rested at Tangheg.

The thirtieth they came to the North-Suburb of Hanksieu, before a Customhouse,
where the Channel being shut up by a Gate under a Bridge, the Ambassador sent
to desire that it might be opened, and the Barques suffered to go through; but
the Watchmen answered, That they must first have order from the Poutsjensy, or
the Emperor's Farmer; so that the Secretary Vander Does was sent to the
Governor and Conbon at Hanksieu with a Letter, in which the Ambassador desired
to be speedily dispatched, and if their Highnesses pleased, he would come to
Complement them. Moreover, the Secretary was Commanded to ask them, If their
Highnesses would permit the Ambassador to come and speak with them, and bring
those Presents, of which their Highnesses had received the Inventory at their
Journey up to Peking.

In the Morning, the first of October, the Gate being opened, the Ambassador
went through with his whole Retinue: Soon after, the Secretary coming aboard
again, related, That he had been at the Generals the last Night, but could not
be admitted to Audience. To the Letter which he sent him by his Clerk, he had
returned answer, That he would send a Mandarin early the next Morning, to let
the Ambassador through the Gate, and withal, conduct him to his House; but it
being too late for the Secretary to go to the Conbon that Night, he went
thither the next Morning, to deliver his Highness the Ambassador's Letter, and
met him as he was coming out of his Court-gate, (to Complement a great Lord,
which the day before came thither from Hoksieu) and received in answer, that
his Highness humbly thanked the Ambassador for his Civility, and that he would
expect him.

Mean while, the Vessels went so far into the Suburb, that they came to Anchor
against a Bank.

The second, the Toya of that place came to Welcome the Ambassador in his Vessel.

The third, nothing happened of remark.

The fourth, all the Goods were taken out of these, and put into six other
Barques, lying on the other side of the Bank; with which Putmans and Vander
Does went the next Morning to the other side of the City, there to Reimbarque;
the Ambassador, Nobel, and some of the Retinue going before by Land, to give
order for Shipping of the Goods.

On the seventh in the Morning, leaving the South-Suburb of Hanksieu, they
arrived in the Afternoon at Foejenjeen; the ninth at Nienchefoe; and the tenth
at Lanqui, where the great Barques were changed for small; because here the
River began to be very shallow.

The Governor of this Village invited them to Dinner, which in regard they
could not put off, they went thither, and were very kindly entertained, with
various Meats, Music, and Drolls, toward Evening taking leave.

On the twelfth in the Morning, they left Lanqui; and on the thirteenth came to
the City of Longuen; as on the fourteenth, to Kietsieu.

The sixteenth in the Evening, the Ambassador came with his Vessel to Sinhoe;
but the rest staid behind, not able to follow for the shallowness of the Water,
and strong contrary Tide; yet on the seventeenth in the Morning, they arrived
there in safety.

The Ambassador and his Retinue were also lodged in the same House, wherein
they lay at their Journey going up.

Here all things were prepared to travel over the Mountains, when the
Ambassador finding that there wanted three hundred and fifty Coelies to carry
the Goods and People, he asked the Mandarin Guides how many Coelies were
allowed by the Emperor's Order, for the carrying of the Goods, and prepared by
the Pimpous? To which they replied, an hundred and eighty nine; and because one
of the General of Hanksieu's People had told the Ambassador at Fojenjeen, that
he should find so many Porters ready to carry the Goods over the Mountains, he
sent the Secretary on the eighteenth in the Morning to Tjangtjen, a League and
a half from thence, to enquire of the Mandarin, who had the Command of that
Village, and there Resident, what Orders he had from the General of Hanksieu?
Whereupon he declared, That he had no other Order concerning any Coelies, than
what he had from the Pimpous; so that the Ambassador gave immediate Order for
the hiring of an hundred and fifty Coelies, with which he went on the next day;
and on the two and twentieth came to Poutchinfoe in the Province of Fokieu; and
on the three and twentieth, Nobel, Putmans, and Vander Does, returned Thanks to
the Almighty, for helping them safe over the steep Mountains.

The twenty fifth, having Shipped their Goods, and Imbarqu'd themselves, they set
Sail with the Tide, from the City of Poutchinfoe, and rested before a
Watch-House at the Village Siphea.

The twenty sixth, going forward, they came, having Sailed two Leagues, to a
Rocky place, where the River was very shallow; by the strong Current, one of
the Ambassadors and one of the Mandarin Hiulavja's Barques were beaten against
a Rock, whereby they grew very Leaky. This Night they also lay still before a
Village, wherein was also a Watch-house.

The twenty eighth, they dropped Anchor again before another Watch-house, and on
the twenty ninth arrived at the City of Kienningfoe, where staying till the
next day, they set Sail again on the thirtieth, and arrived on the last at
Ienpingfoe, which since their departure from thence in March, was above a third
part consumed by fire.

The first of November, the Ambassador and his Retinue proceeding on their
November.
Journey, were unexpectedly in the Afternoon about twenty Lys from a Village
called Sukauw, met by the Merchant David Harthouwer, and some other from
Hoksieu, informing him of the condition of their Affairs. Toward Evening they
came to Sukauw, where they lay all Night*

On the second before Daylight, going from thence, they came in the Afternoon
to Lamthay, the Suburb of Hoksieu, after a Journey of nine Months, and twelve
days.

Going all together to their old Inn, they found there the Toucy Liulavja, who
told and showed them a written Order from the General, That all those Goods
which they had brought with them must be searched: Whereupon the Ambassador
answered, That this manner seemed very strange to him, and that he had never
heard of any that searched an Ambassadors Goods; nay, that it was not done in
Peking, nor any place else in all their Journey: But if the General would have
it so, he might follow his Order, and begin with the Ambassador's Chest first.

This Answer somewhat changed his Intentions, granting moreover, That the
Ambassador's, and other Persons of Quality's Chests, should not be searched,
but those of the Retinue, and in which the Presents were, could not pass
without; whereupon, they being all brought in and opened, all things that were
in them were set down; in which Toucy Liulavja spent all the Afternoon.

The fourth in the Morning, one Lapora and the Mandarin of the Inn came to tell
the Ambassador, That the Viceroy Singlamong had sent for his Excellency to the
Court, to bid him Welcome; whereupon they all went thither, and were kindly
received by his Highness. After many Complements past on both sides, the
Viceroy asked the Ambassador, If he had not told them the truth of all their
Adventures before they went to Peking? They would not believe him then, but now
having been in Peking, themselves might judge that he was a Man of Truth: To
which the Ambassador answered, That his Majesty's real Intentions had
sufficiently appeared, and the Lord Maetzuiker in Batavia, would without doubt
be thankful to him for his Favors: They were also sensible, that the King's
Envoy in Peking had been a great instrument, and helped much in their receiving
of great Honors from the Emperor, Taisins, Kings, Lipous, and other grand
Lords: Moreover, he hoped that from this Embassy there would follow more
Friendship, to the profit of both Nations, than had hitherto been: Whereupon
Singlamong replied, That those were only outward businesses, but he had done so
much for the Hollanders, that it cost him two thousand Tail, and the General
his Place. To which the Ambassador answered, As to what concerned himself, he
would do all that lay in his power to serve the Viceroy, but as for the two
thousand Tail or the General, he knew nothing of it; but he was heartily sorry
that no better News was come from above. The Viceroy replied, That he had
only told it cursorily to the Ambassador, and that they should henceforth
speak no more of it. Soon after the Tables being furnished with Meat, and the
Ambassador having eaten a little took his leave, the Viceroy advising him to
go and visit the General. Coming into the Viceroy's base Court, a Mandarin
that was to conduct him to the General told him, that if his Highness were not
at leisure to speak with him, that then he might return to his Lodgings; so
that the Ambassador staying in the Viceroy's Court, sent the Secretary Vander
Does, with the Interpreter de Hase, to enquire if the General were at leisure
to grant the Ambassador Audience: Not long after returning, he said that the
General had sent Answer, That it was not customary to make an Address to him
the same day that they had been at the Viceroy's, therefore his Excellency
would do well to come the next Morning, and then he would grant him a Hearing.
Whereupon the Netherlanders going to their Lodging, found the Mandarin Liulavja
with express Order from the General, That the rest of the Chests that were not
searched must be opened, which the Ambassador suffered to be done without any
contradiction.

At Night it was judged convenient for diverse reasons, that their intended
Visit to the General the following Day, should only be Complemental, without
speaking a word of any Business; but to tell him, that what the Ambassador had
to impart to his Highness should hereafter be done in Writing.

The fifth in the Morning they went to the General, who after some stay
permitted them to come into his Presence; where the Ambassador was placed on
his left Hand (but the upper among the Tartars) on a Stool a little distance
from his, and Nobel, Harthouwer, and others on his right Hand, on Stools and
Benches. Being thus seated, the Ambassador (the General being silent) said,
That he was very joyful to see Talavja in good health, and that he was
permitted into his Presence. To which he replied, That it was but his Duty to
grant Audience to all Strangers. Then the Ambassador proceeding said, That the
Embassy was now finished, and that he had the Emperor's and Lipous Letters by
him, which being Sealed must be delivered to the Lord Maetzuiker; so that now,
since Talavja's Word was as much there as the Emperor's, they would seek in all
things possible to obey him. To which the General making no Reply, after a
little silence, asked for the Ambassador's Son: to whom the Interpreter said,
That if the Ambassador had any thing to request of his Highness, he should
acquaint him with it now. Whereupon he desired that the Merchants might fetch
in their Debts, and balance their Accounts; and that the rest of the Goods of
the last Year, and those which they had brought back with them from Peking,
might be sold, that he might prepare himself for his Return to Batavia. To
which the General said, He knew very well that the Debts must be paid; but he
had received a Letter from the Emperor, in which the Hollanders were forbid to
sell their Goods. Whereupon the Ambassador replied, That in Peking it was meant
the new-come Goods, but his Desire was only that the last years Trade which
was granted by the Emperor, might be finished. Moreover, that they might lay
out the Silver which they had brought from Peking, that by that means it might
remain in the Country, which else would be carried away. The General answered
again, That he must observe the Emperor's Orders, as the Ambassador the Lord
Maetzuikers, and that they might not sell prohibited Goods; not but that he
judged it better for the Silver to stay in the Land, than to be carried out
from thence. Lastly, the Ambassador desired that he might only send some
Provisions to the Ships; which the General granted, giving him a Note of them.
Then the Ambassador saying he durst not detain Talavja any longer, desired to
take his leave: The General replied, That he was glad to hear such civil
Expressions from him; and so they parted.

The Ambassador coming to his Lodgings, judged it convenient, since he was
permitted to send some Provisions to the Ships, to take hold of the
opportunity, and to send the Hilversan Flyboat with all the Papers and Answers
to Batavia, with a Letter to advise the Council there of their success.
Likewise, that he might oblige the Conbon and General to be assisting in their
Business, he thought good to present the General with half a Piece of Purple
Cloth, one String of Blood Coral, six Pieces of Linen, two of Says, two of
Amber, two of Cloth-Serge, one Gun with a Stock of Palm-Wood, two Swords, a
pair of Pistols, one Sword-Blade, ten Flasks of Rose Water, and one Piece of
black Cloth. To the Conbon they intended one Piece of red Cloth, six Pieces of
Linen, two of Says, two of great Amber, two of Cloth-Serge, one String of
Blood Coral, one Gun, two Swords, one Piece of Perpetuana, ten Flasks of
Rose Water.

The same day Nobel, according to their Resolution, went to the Factor Lapora,
to enquire if any Silks could be bought for Silver or Merchandise; but Lapora
telling him the difficulty of it, they attempted no farther.

The sixth in the Morning the Ambassador and the chiefest of his Retinue went
to the Conbon's Court to Complement his Highness; before whom being brought,
having waited a considerable time, several Complements passed as at the
Generals, viz. That the Ambassador was glad to see Talavja in health, and that
he had the favor to appear in his Presence; adding, That the Hollanders had
received many Civilities from the late Conbon, and hoped that they should also
participate of his Highness's Favors. Whereupon the Conbon asked if the
Ambassador enjoyed his Health in his Journey to and from Peking? whereto he
answered Yes; and that he had received great Honor there, and was come away in
Friendship, desiring nothing more, than to leave Hoksieu also in Love and
Amity, for which he desired his Highness's assistance. The Conbon replying
said, That the Ambassador had brought the Chinkon to Peking, wherein the
Emperor had taken great pleasure, why then should not he be kind to him? he did
not meet him by the Way, therefore he would now send him some Provisions for a
Present. Soon after the Conbon asked the Ambassador when he intended to go from
thence? To which he answered, When the General and Conbon pleased; and that he
never doubted but the Goods of last Year might have been sold with freedom, and
they might also lay out their Silver for Commodities; but since he understood
that it could not be permitted, he therefore desired to avoid all trouble, that
he might be gone so soon as it was possible, and would rather suffer damage,
than do contrary to the Emperor's Order. Hereupon the Conbon said, that he was
not well informed therein; and withal asked the Ambassador if he would
immediately be gone, or stay a little longer? To which the Ambassador replied,
That so soon as the Merchants had received their Debts, and all things
balanced, then he would be gone, the sooner the better. After which no other
Discourse passing, the Netherlanders took their leave.

Mean while Putmans went to the Generals Court with an Inventory of the
Presents which the Ambassador had designed for him the Day before, to show it
to his Highness, but was forced to return without Audience, being ordered to
come again the following Day: wherefore the Ambassador sent Nobel and Putmans
again on the seventh, and also to proffer the Conbon his Presents, but they had
as ill success as Putmans the Day before, for they could not be permitted to
Audience.

After the Interpreter had taken the Inventory of the Generals Presents from
them, and showed it to his Highness, he brought Answer, That the General would
accept no Presents.

Toward the Evening the Interpreter Kako came to the Lodge, with Commands to
search the Blyswiik Frigate.

The eighth in the Morning the Viceroy Singlamong's Interpreter, and his prime
Factor called Iongsavija, came to bring the following Presents: First, for the
Lord Maetzuiker sixteen Pieces of Satin, twenty of Sarsnet, four Brokkado's,
six hundred and ten Pieces of Porcelane, one Picol of Tee.

For the Ambassador, eight Pieces of Satin, two Brokkado's, ten Pieces of
Sarsnet, a hundred Pieces of Porcelane, and one Picol of Tee.

For Harthouwer, six Pieces of Sarsnet, two Brokkado's, eight Pieces of Satin,
half a Picol of Tee, and a hundred Tee Cups.

Moreover, they said that the Viceroy at that time had no such fine Goods by
him as he could have wished for, to have presented the Lord Maetzuiker and the
Ambassador withal; desiring that his Excellency would not refuse these
Trifles; adding also, That their Lord was very sorry the Hollanders had no
better success in their Business at the Court of Peking, and that he declared
it was not his fault; but on the contrary, had used his utmost endeavor to
assist them for the obtaining of their Desires: but since it so fell out that
the Emperor would not grant them, they must have patience (because nothing
could be done against the Emperor's Order) and hope for a better Event. To
which the Ambassador answered, That he humbly thanked the Viceroy, and since
he could not refuse his Kindness, he would accept of the Stuffs: but as to
their Business he knew nothing of it, because the Emperor's and Lipous Letters
were delivered to him Sealed, and he commanded in that manner to deliver them
at Batavia; and that the Orders therein mentioned (whatever they were) should
be strictly observed. Furthermore the Ambassador said, That he desired nothing
else now, but that he might sell the Commodities which were remaining of the
last Year, and afterward go away, without being willing to request the
disposal of those Commodities which were come since, because he would not stay
for an Answer from the Emperor; or that they might not write to him about it.
To which they replied, That they would acquaint the Viceroy with it; yet it
was a Business which did not concern him, but the General and Conbon, therefore
the Ambassador must request it of them. The Ambassador replying said, That
there would immediately be a Letter ready for that purpose, to be carried to
the General and Conbon. Some Complements passing on both sides, and the
Ambassador giving them a Gratuity, they returned.

Soon after the Ambassador sent Putmans with the following Letter to the
General, which was to this effect:

THe Ambassador has understood by a Letter from your Highness, that three
Holland Ships are arrived at Tenhay to fetch the Ambassador; and also that a
Ship at her going by to Japan put in there for Letters from him. Talavja has
commanded that the Ambassador should send down thither to command the going
away of the three Ships. The Ambassador has acquainted the Lipous in Peking,
that three Ships were to come from Batavia to fetch him. The Ambassador knew
not but that the Trade granted the last Year by the Emperor might be finished;
wherefore he desires that he may dispose of the rest of those Goods (of which
he here sends an Inventory) in such manner as was done in Peking; and that then
the Ambassador would immediately go away with all his Ships and Men. The
Ambassador would be very sorry if any more trouble should happen. And to
manifest that the Ambassador will not only obey and serve Talavja in words,
but in deeds, he humbly desires, that if the remaining Goods may not be sold,
that he may obtain leave of your Highness to go away with all his Retinue and
Goods with the first opportunity, and that in few days after no more Ships
should be seen.


Putmans returning said, That he not only could not be admitted to Audience,
but that the General would not take the Letter.

The ninth in the Morning the Ambassador sent a Letter by the Factor Lapora to
the Viceroy Singlamong, being to return him thanks for the Presents received
the Day before, which was to this effect:

THat the Ambassador has found sufficiently since his Return to Hoksieu, his
Highness's good Inclinations. That the Honor and Friendship which the
Ambassador received in Peking he believes did proceed from the Viceroy's
Recommendation. The Ambassador declares, that he has endeavored in this
Chinkon as much as possible he could, to preserve the Honor of the Realm of
Holland, the General in Batavia, and also his own Reputation. The Ambassador is
exceedingly rejoiced, that the Viceroy Singlamong's Heart is really inclined
to him, and therefore esteems his Presents, being from so great a King, very
much. That the King in Batavia has been pleased to present the General is his
Highness's Civility. The Ambassador is very well satisfied, and exceeding
thankful for them; but he finds that this satisfaction is mixed with a great
desire to know how and after what manner he shall manifest his thanks;
therefore wishes that he may be informed either by his Highness, or some Person
else, if the Ambassador during his stay there, or in Batavia, or wherever it
might be, could do the King any acceptable Service, which if it be in the
Ambassador's power, he will account it a great happiness, that he may manifest
that he esteems more to do well, than to write or speak well.


The thirteenth in the Morning the Secretary Vander Does, Nicholas Berkman, and
the Interpreter Maurice, went with a Chinese Vessel down to Netherland Haven
and Tenhay, that according to their Resolution the Night before they might
dispatch the Helverzum Flyboat, and the Pimpel Pink, and likewise take a view
of the Ships.

After their departure the Toucy came to tell the Ambassador, That the General
and Conbon would buy all the rest of the Goods, and that he should write down
the lowest Prices of them on a piece of Paper, and that then their Factors
should come to receive and pay for them with ready Money. The Ambassador
hereupon showed him to the Merchants, who were busy making an Invoyce of them,
which when done was given to him.

The fourteenth and fifteenth nothing happened of note.

The sixteenth a Servant sent from the Toucy brought a written Order (as he
said) from the General, that the Storehouses must be searched, because some
Counterband Goods were come with the Embassy, and the like* Whereupon the
Ambassador immediately sent the Merchant Harthouwer and Interpreter de Hase to
the Toucy, with Commands to tell him,

1. That the Toucy would be pleased to pay that which he owed to the Company,
being seven hundred Tail. 2. That the Toucy knew very well, that the Debt which
was owing from the late Talavja, or General, and others, was above four
thousand Tail; also that he should seek to procure the payment thereof, and
bring the Silver to the Lodge. 3. That the Ambassador would henceforth suffer
no more Searching, except by express Order from the General. 4. That if he had
searched the Ambassador's Chest by the General's Order, it was well; but if
not, the Ambassador had suffered disgrace by it, because he had not been so
served in Peking, nor any other Place in China.
At his Return Harthouwer related, That the Toucy excused himself to the
Ambassador, alleging that it was not his fault; the last written Order was not
sent to him, but to the Interpreter, to see for some Bundles of Gazen, which
were not set down by his People: Moreover, that he received nothing but
civility from the Ambassador; and as for the Searching, it was by the General's
Order; that he would come the next Morning to pay his Debts, and also lay out
some Goods for the General and Conbon to buy; that the rest might be sold to
other People; likewise that the other Debts should be brought to the Lodge.

The seventeenth the Toucy Liulavja came with a Note of the rest of the
Presents, with the Prices at which the General and Conbon would buy the Goods.

The Ambassador ordered Harthouwer to tell the Toucy, That he did not credit
him, neither would he have any thing to do with him, but would send to the
General himself to know if those Prices were set down for them, and that then
he should have an Answer. Whereupon the Toucy desired Harthouwer to come to his
House the next Morning, and then he would go with him to the Conbon to ask the
Question.

In the Afternoon the Secretary Vander Does, Nicholas Berkman, and Maurice,
arrived from Tenhay and Netherland Haven, with relation of the good condition
of all things about the Ships, and that the Men longed only for fresh
Provisions.

The twenty fourth the Ambassador commanded Nobel and Harthouwer, that they
should go to the Toucy's House the next Morning, that according to his Request
they might go together to the General and Conbon, and to ask if the Prices were
for their Highnesses? and likewise to whom they would have their Presents
delivered, that they might not be defrauded, and in the last place earnestly to
desire, that they might have liberty to send fresh Provisions to the Ships,
otherwise the Ambassador would desire to be gone with all the speed possible.

The eighteenth in the Morning Nobel and Harthouwer went to the Toucy, and
coming with him to the Conbon's they stayed till Noon, yet could get no
Audience; but the Conbon sent them word, that they should deliver the Presents,
and also the rest of the Merchandise to the Toucy Liulavja, except the Strings
of Blood Coral, which they must deliver to himself the next day, when he would
grant them Audience.

Against the Evening the Toucy Liulavja coming to the Lodge to fetch the
forementioned Goods, said that Nobel and Harthouwer need not come with the
Blood Coral the next day, but that the Ambassador must in Person appear at the
Conbon's Court about six days hence, and then bring the Coral, and also an
Account of those Debts that were owing, along with him, and then the
Netherlanders would have Orders to be gone within ten days.

The remaining Goods with the Presents being accordingly delivered to him, for
the most part he carried away that Night, and fetched the remainder the next
Morning.

The nineteenth Poutsiensy, Assensy, and the General's Interpreter came to the
Lodge, to ask when the Ambassador would be ready for his departure? Whereto he
answered, That so soon as the Accounts of the owing Debts, being Audited, were
paid, he would give them no farther trouble, but take Shipping immediately.
Whereupon they replied, Would he please only to give them a Schedule thereof,
and they would take care that satisfaction should be made in three or four
days. The Ambassador answered, That if what they promised were cetarin, he
should be clear for his Voyage within a Week. Then the Ambassador asked if the
Hollanders might buy no manner of Goods? To which they answered, That he might
buy course Commodities, as Porcelane and the like; but they must first acquaint
the General with it; mean while the Hollanders should draw up what Provisions
they wanted for their Voyage, which was immediately done, and delivered to the
Mandarin Liulavja.

The twentieth in the Morning the Ambassador sent Nobel and Harthouwer to Court
with this following Letter.

THe Ambassador seeks in all things to obey Talavja, and give him satisfaction.
Officers that provide for Strangers.
The Poutsiensy and Assensy have eask'd him what day he would be gone? to which
he answered, That he could be ready on the twelfth of this Moon, and therefore
desires that the Provisions for their Voyage may be brought according to the
enclosed Bill, and sent down to the Ship at Nanthay, and likewise the Silver
and Porcelane. The Ambassador requests likewise that he may buy and carry the
following Goods along with him, viz. China Roots, Tee, Anniseed, course
Porcelane, some Stuffs, Stools, Cabinets, and other Trifles.


Nobel and Harthouwer returning in the Afternoon gave account, That they could
not be admitted to Audience by the General, but after the Letter being
delivered to him by his Interpreter, he permitted the Ambassador to buy the
Provisions which he desired, but nothing else.

Soon after the Toucies, Liulavja and Hayongloja came again to tell the
Ambassador, That the General considering better on his Request, had granted
that he might buy eight or ten Picol of China Root.

The one and twentieth nothing happened of any note.

The two and twentieth the forementioned Toucies came to the Lodge to tell the
Ambassador, That his Retinue*which came with him from Peking, must produce all
those Stuffs which they had bought by the Way, because they would buy them
again: This they said was the General's Order, which if they would not obey, he
would search their Chests, and if he found any Stuffs in them, he would seize
them as Forfeit.

The Ambassador hereupon calling his Attendants together, commanded them,
whoever they were, excepting none (because he would not come in any trouble) to
bring out all their Stuffs, and deliver them to the forementioned Lavja's;
which being accordingly done, their Mandarins taking them, put them into a
Chest, and carried them out of the Lodge.

At Noon, according to the Resolution taken the Night before, Nobel went to the
Viceroy's Court, to proffer his Highness a String of Blood Coral; which he
freely and kindly accepted in the Presence of all his Attendants.

Mean while the Mandarin Liulavja came to the Lodge from the General and
Conbon, bringing Money with him for the remaining Goods which they had bought.

This Mandarin also informed, that the Overveen Frigate, and Balfour, who had
brought some Renegade Chinese from Quelang, might not go away with the
Ambassador, but must stay there till they had order from the Emperor concerning
it. Moreover, the Ambassador must go to the Conbon the next Morning, and
afterward to the Assensy, and two days hence to the General and Poutsiensy, to
speak with them about the forementioned, and what other Business else: which
the Ambassador promised the next Morning to observe.

The next Morning, being the twenty third, the Ambassador went with Nobel,
Harthouwer, and others, to the Conbon, taking with him a Note of the sold
Merchandise, and also the String of Blood Coral, which on the fifth Instan they
resolved amongst other Goods to present to his Highness, as the Toucy Liulavja
had told the Netherlanders on the eighteenth. Coming to the usual Hall they
found the Toucy Liulavja, who soon after was called to the Conbon, and at his
Return told the Ambassador privately, That because there were so many People
with him, his Highness had judged it best, that the Ambassador should deliver
the Chain of Coral to him, that he might deliver it to his Highness, who was
afraid to receive it in the presence of so many Persons, and for the weight
thereof, and Pieces of Coral, he might place in the Note amongst the other
Merchandise if he would not trust him with them, which the Ambassador also did.
His Highness, as Liulavja said at his return, had received the Coral with many
thanks. Not long after the Ambassador was also called in, and seated by his
Highness, who after some Complements said, That he would willingly have
Entertained the Ambassador now, but because he had not been Treated by the
General, he would stay till that was over. The Ambassador thanking him for his
Civility, desired, that since he intended to be gone very suddenly, and his
Servants were now busy Packing up their Goods, that his Highness would please
to excuse him from coming to his Feast, and that he esteemed this Visit as much
as the greatest Entertainment. To which his Highness replied, That he would
consider of it, and if he did not invite him, he would send the Dishes prepared
to the Lodge. Then he asked when he thought he should be ready to go his
Voyage? who replied, Against the twelfth of their Moon, or the twenty sixth of
ours: which pleasing his Highness very well he said, That he could not assist
the Hollanders in the Transporting some Silk-Stuffs, alleging that it was none
of his fault, but the Emperor's Order, who had strictly forbid it. Then the
Ambassador gave him the Inventory of the Goods that were sold, and an Account
of the Moneys that were owing; likewise a Note of the Gifts ready to be
presented, adding that he humbly thanked his Highness for permitting him to
sell the remaining Goods. After having looked over the Note of the Presents,
the Ambassador told his Highness, that the Mandarin Liulavja had the day before
informed him, That the Ship come thither with the Renegade Chinese and David
Balfour, might not go away with the Ambassador, but must stay in Netherland
Haven, and Balfour at Lamthay, till Order came from the Emperor about it, to
whom they had written: The Ambassador therefore desired, since the Vessel was
very old, not being fit to stay there, that she might go away with him; but if
this could not be granted, he would be obedient, and press no farther, but
leave her behind. Whereupon his Highness in excuse said they had contrived to
dismiss all the Ships together, but the Mansjuwee would not consent till they
had an Answer from Peking.

The Ambassador also asked a second time if they would please to dismiss them
all from Lamthay. Whereupon his Highness answered him, That the Ambassador
should not trouble himself about the Ship, for he would take care that it
should be furnished with all Necessaries; nay, if the Emperor would not be at
the Charge, he would pay it out of his own Purse; asking besides, if the Person
that came with the Chinese from Quelang was at Lamthay? To which being
answered, He was, he said that he would consult with the General if any others
should stay, or all have their Pasport.

Then the Ambassador demanded if he might not deal for some fine Porcelane or
Tee? To which his Highness first answered as if he permitted it; but afterward
beginning to retract, he changed his Discourse, beginning to enquire how many
Men they had, that thereby they might the better accommodate them with
Provision: which said, the Ambassador took his leave, and went away.

Coming into the outer Court, he found the Mandarin Liulavja, whom he asked if
he should now go to the Assensy? To which he was answered, No, because he had
not been Entertained by the Conbon; but he must go to the General's Court the
next Morning.

After this Nobel acquainted the Ambassador, that he had spoke with Lapora and
one of Singlamong's Factors, about Bartering for Silk, and that Lapora had told
him the Viceroy would deliver Silk to the Netherlanders at Tenhay, provided
they would leave Money for Security at Hoksieu.

The twenty fourth in the Morning the Ambassador went to the General, into
whose Presence he was brought, after a stay of half an hour in the Court; being
placed by him, the General said, That the Embassy now was complete, and he
might depart when he pleased; for he had received a Letter from the Emperor, in
which he was commanded not to detain, but to dispatch him so soon as possible;
so that his Excellency had already stayed beyond the limited time. To which the
Ambassador answered, He would now therefore endeavor to part in Friendship, and
as he had said before, be gone by the twelfth of that instant Moon, which if
his Highness judged too long, he would go sooner: who straight replied, That if
the Ambassador went away by that time, it would be very well; but he must carry
no Silk-Stuffs with him, because they were Counterband Goods: yet the
Ambassador being come a remote Journey, he granted him to carry Porcelane, and
the like Trifles; for which he returned thanks: which pleasing his Highness, he
said, That he knew not of the Ambassador's coming, which if he had, he would
have prepared something for his Entertainment; but however he hoped he would
accept of a Collation at his Lodgings. Then the Ambassador thanking his
Highness, and seeing that the General did not make mention of the Overveens
stay, said (as he had done the day before to the Conbon,) That the Toucies had
told him, that the Ship which was come with the Renegade Chinese from Quelang,
and likewise the Company that Manned it must stay there; therefore the
Ambassador desired, if it were possible, that the Ship might go along with him.
The General having considered a little answered, That the Ship must stay; but
if his Lordship would leave any body at Lamthay, was in his own choice: After
some Discourse concerning it, the Ambassador said, That if his Highness would
please to credit him, it was all one to him whether he left any one at Lamthay
or not.

Mean while the Conbon coming thither went first into a private Chamber, and a
little while after placed himself by the General. Then the Ambassador began
again to speak of the staying of the Ship: To which the General answered, The
Ambassador need not be afraid, he would take care concerning the Vessel, that
nothing of any harm should befall the Hollanders. Which Answer satisfying the
Ambassador, he delivered such another List of the remaining Goods that were to
be sold, and his Presents, as the day before he had done to the Conbon; after
which taking his leave he departed.

In the Afternoon the General's Interpreter came to tell the Ambassador, That
the General, Conbon, and Manichuer would come in Person to the Lodge to search
the Goods.

In the Evening it was resolved, since the General had put it to the
Ambassador's choice, to leave any of his People there or not, to leave none;
but if any farther mention should be made, to pretend as if they would
willingly leave some there, because it was known that the Tartars always did
contrary to the Hollanders Desires: Moreover that Nobel should the next Morning
go to the Poutsiensy and Assensy, and proffer them each their several Presents;
and because they had asked to buy some Blood Coral, Nobel should take two
Strings along with him, and ask but an ordinary Rate for them.

The twenty fifth Nobel, according to the Resolution taken the day before, went
with the Presents to the Poutsiensy and Assensy, to deliver them the two
Strings of Coral; and at his Return related, That they had received the
Presents with many thanks, and the Strings of Coral at a certain Price.

Mean while the Mandarin Liulavja came to the Lodge, saying that the General
would not come that day, but the following Morning to see the Goods, and that
the Ambassador might Ship off all his bulky Commodities. Concerning the China
Root which the Ambassador had requested to carry out, the General would permit
him to Transport but six Picol. The Ambassador, according to the Mandarins
Request, Shipped of all his great Goods, but said, that if the General would
not grant him to carry more than six Picol, he would not trouble himself with
any.

The twenty sixth the Ambassador Shipped the Money, and all such Goods as could
not be sold, and likewise their traveling Necessaries.

The Poutsiensy and Assensy came to the Lodge with some Grand Mandarins, to
thank the Ambassador for the Presents which he had sent them, and withal to
tell him, That all those who had Chests or Trunks in the Barques, must go to
the Bridge to open them, because the Conbon was there in Person to see them,
which accordingly was done. Nobel and some others going thither, at their
Return said, That the Conbon causing some Chests to be carried into the
Governor of Minjazen's House, had opened and searched them there, and also
looked upon several Gifts which the Emperor had presented them with; which not
satisfying, he went Aboard the Blyswiik Frigate, and opened all the Chests there
one after another, yet found nothing of any Counterband Goods. Then he said
that the Ship which was come from Quelang should stay there, and that the
Governor of Minjazen would tell the Netherlanders when they came thither,
whether Balfour should remain there or not. To which Nobel answered him, That
he would acquaint the Ambassador with it: Whereupon taking his leave, the
Blyswiik at his going away fired three Guns.

Because the Ambassador could not come to the Viceroy Singlamong the two last
days, in regard he was told that the General, Conbon, and Manchuwer, would come
to the Lodge to search his Goods, and that it was now done the day before by
the Conbon only, the Ambassador, Nobel, and Harthouwer went thither the twenty
sixth in the Morning to take their leaves; where he was no sooner come, but had
Audience immediately granted, and soon after dispatched; so that the
Netherlanders took their leave without urging a word of any thing. Returning to
the Lodge, they found the Toucy Liulavja, who hastened their departure, because
the limited time was already expired: Whereupon all things that were yet ashore
were put into the Vessels, and they likewise Embarked themselves to be gone at
High Water.

In the Evening the old Conbon's Factor came to deliver the Ambassador twenty
four Pieces of Silk-Stuffs, which he said were left him by his Lord to give to
his Excellency, being half for himself, and the other half for the Lord
Maetzuiker: These Stuffs the Ambassador gave to several Persons.

Not long after the Chinese Secretary Soukjen brought a written Order from the
General, that Balfour must stay behind. To which the Ambassador answered, That
so soon as they were Aboard the Blyfwiik Frigate, he would speak with the
Mandarins about it.

In the Afternoon the Netherlanders arrived Aboard the Blyswiik, into which
upon the Mandarins command all the Goods were Shipped out of the Barques,
because the Mansjuwer (of whom they were very fearful) should not see, nor
search the Goods a second time; which was accordingly performed on a sudden:
but the Provisions they permitted to lie somewhat longer in the Barques, that
the Cattle might the better be preserved alive, because the Ship was so full.

The twenty eighth in the Morning some Mandarins coming to the Barques with
Provisions, caused all things that were in them to be thrown into the Ship, by
which means a great many of the Cattle died; all which the Netherlanders
endured with patience, stowing their Goods as well as they could.

Soon after the Hollanders set Sail with a fair Wind, and a Tide of Ebb, which
coming stronger in the Afternoon, they got within a quarter of a League from
the Losantat or great Tower, where they came to an Anchor; which was no sooner
done but several Mandarins came Aboard them, saying that Balfour must stay, and
not go from thence before an Answer came from the Emperor. To which the
Ambassador answered, That the General had left the staying of Balfour to his
choice, on which he relied, therefore did not believe the Mandarins. Moreover,
as to what concerned the Ship, they should believe him, that she should stay
there on condition they would furnish her with Provisions; which if they would
not do, she should go. The Mandarins used many arguments to persuade the
Ambassador to let Balfour, or some Person else stay in his stead: But the
Ambassador not varying from his first Resolution, they took their leaves.

The twenty ninth the Netherlanders weighing Anchor again, drove with the Tide
of Ebb by the great Tower and Fort of Minjazen, where they found them all up in
Arms. Some Batsiangs coming from the Shore called to the Netherlanders to come
to an Anchor: but they not harkening to them, went on; just before they passed
the Fort, the third Person of Minjazen came by the side of the Ship in a small
Champan, to tell the Ambassador that the Governor would fain speak with him. To
which he answered, Tha^ when he was come to Netherland Haven, the Governor
might come and speak with him there when he pleased; with which Answer they
went away again, not bringing word when he would come or not.

Moreover, besides several sorts of other Vessels (as is at large related in
the Description) most of the Rivers are Navigated by Champan and Batsiangs,
which are small Vessels. They rise up round with a broad Head; the Stern is not
joined together, but on the top is separated; between which a Mat holds an Oar,
wherewith he makes swift Way; the middle is covered with a Mat of Rushes: He
which Steers (as represented in the Sculp) is Habited in a Coat made of Coco
Leaves, and he in the Head has a kind of Umbrella on his Head against the Rain.

The Chinese also keep great Feasts in their Vessels on the River, making
Merry with varieties of Meat and strong Liquor; in which manner the greatest
Mandarins often recreate themselves, but in bigger Boats than the common People
use, with a fine Covering over them, on each end of which stands generally a
Man with a crooked Horn.

Against the Evening the Tide of Ebb being spent, they dropped Anchor about half
a League from the Overueen Frigate, lying in Netherland Haven; whither the
Ambassador immediately sent his Sloop, with Orders for her Boat to come and
take out some of the Cattle, and likewise that the Sloop should go to the rest
of the Ships to hasten their Boats to fetch Provisions.

In the Evening the Overveens Boat coming thither, they loaded her full of
living Cattle, with which they sent her again Aboard.

The thirtieth about Noon they drove with the Tide Ebb through the second
Strait, and coming within a Cannon Shot of the Overveen they ran aground on the
Point of the Western Shoal in Netherland Haven; from whence getting off again,
about Midnight at high Water they came to an Anchor close by the Overveen.

The first of December nothing happened. December.


The second, the Ambassador hoping to put off some more of their Goods, wrote
the following Letter to the General at Hoksieu, viz.

The Hollanders have sufficiently testified their Reality; and the Ambassador
esteems nothing more than to show, that what he has promised to Talavja may be
performed. Your Lordship has been pleased to command, that the Ship from
Quelang, and the Commander Balfour should stay here till an Answer came from
Peking; now the Ambassador desires to know how long the Ship must stay.
Besides, since his coming hither he has found some Goods, viz. Blood Coral,
Amber, Cloth, and other Merchandise, brought in the Ships from Batavia, and
likely to be carried back again thither, unless Your Lordship will be pleased
this one time to give leave to sell them, because they were included in this
Chinkon. The Ambassador hopes that the Emperor's Letters to the Lord Maetzuiker
will bring him good tidings, therefore he could not but acquaint Talavja
herewith, and desire his Answer upon it, especially having seen by some Letters
which he found in the Ships, that the General of Batavia might be moved to
deliver the Castle of Quelang to the Emperor, if he would grant the Hollanders
a free Trade in China.


Nobel and the Secretary Vander Does were sent to the Chinese Jonks lying in
the Crab-hole, to enquire if there were none Aboard that could Translate the
forementioned Letter, and deliver it to the General, which if there were they
should leave it with them. But their coming amongst the Jonks caused great
amazement amongst them, neither could they be accommodated; so they went to the
Jonks which lay within the second Strait, where finding some Mandarins and a
Secretary with them, they did their Business according to their desire.

This Letter being Translated Nobel sent with a Batsiang up to Hoksieu, with
promise to return with an Answer within two days; so that the Ambassador judged
it convenient to stay so long with the Blyswiik in Netherland Haven.

The third in the Morning, the Mandarins of the Jonks came aboard the Bleiswyk,
saying, That they durst not carry the Letter which Nobel had given them the day
before, except a Hollander went with them to Hoksieu: Whereupon, the Ambassador
answered, That if they would not deliver the Letters, they knew what they had
to do; if any thing other than well did come of it, it was not his fault.

This, startling, made them change their resolution, asking if they should
deliver the Letter, and the General should desire, that a Hollander should come
to him, if the Ambassador would then promise them to send one thither, of which
they would willingly be assured, that they might give his Highness a positive
answer.

The Ambassador, after serious consideration, judged it convenient to answer,
That they should Request of the Governor of Minjazeen, in the Ambassador's
Name, if he would please to send any one with that Letter to the Sontok, and if
they had an answer upon it, and that Talavja Commanded, that an Hollander
should come to him, that then they would consider of it; with which answer
going away, they took the Letter with them.

The fourth, it was thought meet by the Ambassador and his Council, since they
had nothing more to do there, only to wait for News from above, to set Sail for
Tinghay, to make all things ready there; but Nobel was ordered to stay there
with the Overveen, that if any News should come from Hoksieu, he might inform
the Ambassador of it, and give such Orders as should be requisite.

In the Afternoon the Ambassador fell down with the Bleiswyk to the first
Straight, behind the Pyramids, where they dropped Anchor till the next Ebb, but
were forced by a strong Gale out of the North-East, to remove beyond the first
Shole, and wait for better Weather.

The fifth in the Night, the Bleiswyk set Sail again with a Northerly Wind and
Ebbing Water; and getting beyond the Calf Sands, came on the seventh in the
Morning, by Daylight, before Sotias Bay, within the Turrets Isles, that in the
Afternoon, with a Sea breeze, he might put into the Bay of Tinghay.

Having cast Anchor, the Ambassador went with the Bleiswyk's Sloop aboard the
Victoria, to stay and go over in her.

Here it was judged convenient, that Nobel and Putmans, with the Ship Batavia,
and Harthouwer, and Bartolz with the Crane, if no other News came from Hoksieu,
should set Sail for Batavia.

In the Afternoon, the Bleiswyk Frigate came also to Tinghay, where the
Ambassador immediately unladed part of her, distributing the Provisions and
Money amongst the Ships Victoria, Batavia, and Crane, that so he might not run
the hazard of all in one Ship.

The eighth in the Afternoon, the Overveen's Boat arrived at Tinghay from
Netherland Haven, with a Letter from Nobel, Dated the Night before, the
Contents of which were:

That two Commanders had been aboard him, with a Letter from the General of
Hoksieu, to the Governor of Minjazeen, of which he had sent the Translation
Enclosed.

The Superscription they could not give to Nobel, for want of some to write it;
the Povi, as they said, had accounted himself too good to answer the
Ambassador, but had writ to the Governor of Minjazeen, not expecting any
further answer from the Ambassador, as might be seen by the last Clause.

To the Proposal of Quelang, he had sent no manner of answer, But that the Lord
General, according to the forementioned Commanders sayings, must the ensuing
Year write himself to the Emperor, concerning that or the like business.

And in like manner, about the selling of the Merchandise, as appears by the
second Clause; by which they may plainly see, that the Ships with their
Merchandise must be gone again, which was strongly affirmed by the third
Clause, as appears by the Translation.

In the Translation, no mention was made in how many days an answer would be
there from Peking, as the Ambassador had desired to know; besides, no body came
to look after the Overveen, to furnish her with Provisions, which they had so
faithfully promised, and to his judgment there was no staying for it: The Tides
and Weather were good, which with the approaching New Moon, according to the
general course of that season, might turn to be bad and tempestuous.

Therefore he expected the Ambassador's Order, whether the Overveen should stay
longer in Netherland Haven, or go to Tinhay: The forementioned Translation
written by the General of Hoksieu, to the Governor of Minjazeen, was to this
effect.

I. THe Povi has received the Letter from the Holland Ambassador, wherein he
desired to know, how many days Balfour should lie there with his Ship: My
Answer thereupon is, that he shall stay till Order comes from the Emperor. II.
The Foreign Commodities are forbid by the Emperor to be sold, therefore I
cannot grant the Ambassadors Request; but when the Lord General shall send
Letters the following Year, then I will write to the Emperor about it. III.
According to the Emperor's Command, it is not well done, that the Ambassador
stays so long, because it will not be good for their business the ensuing Year,
when they would come thither again. IV. Lastly, I Command you to deliver this
Letter to the Ambassador, and to acquaint me so soon as he is gone from our
Coast: Hereupon I expect a speedy Answer.
Nobel's writing concerning the Overveen, being by the Ambassador and his
Council considered on, it was judged convenient to send for the Frigate to
Tinghay.

Therefore the Ambassador informed Nobel, that he had received his Letter with
the Translation, and thereby understood, that Povi had answered very slightly
concerning Balfours and the Overveens staying, without being able to depend
upon it; their hopes of venting their Merchandise, was also now quite vanished,
so that he resolved, and had found it convenient to send for the Overveen to
Tinghay, because the Governors did not keep their promise in furnishing her
with Provisions.

If the Chinese should ask him the reason of the Ships going away, he should
answer them, that it should lie under Tinghay, so long as they had any
Provisions left whereby he might see if they intended to keep her there any
longer, and govern himself accordingly.

Theninth nothing happened of remark.

The tenth, three Chinese Jonks that came out of the North Sailed by the
Ambassador in the Victoria, up the Channel of Hoksieu. In the Afternoon Nobel
arrived at Tinghay in the Overveen, and having dropped Anchor, he went aboard of
the Ambassador, to tell him, That the eighth instant in the Evening, some petty
Officers were come aboard from the Chinese Jonks, to ask when the Ambassador
would set Sail, and Nobel go from thence with the Frigate? To which he had
answered, That the Ambassador would leave that place with the first fair
Weather, and that he would be gone from thence with the Overveen the next
Morning, with which they seeming to be pleased, took their leave.

The twelfth, it was resolved in Council, upon the Ambassador's Proposal on the
seventeenth instant, if good Weather, to set Sail for Batavia, without urging
the Governors any more to permit them to Trade, because they saw, by all
Circumstances, that no good was to be done there that year.

The fourteenth, the Overveen Frigate set Sail by Siam to Batavia, according to
their resolution taken on the twelfth: Soon after her departure, two Chinese
Coya's came to Tinghay, where some Officers coming to the Ambassador said, That
they were sent by the Governor of Minjazeen, to enquire when the Ambassador
would be gone: Who answering, said, That he had been indisposed, or else he
would have been gone e're that time, but that he resolved three or four days
hence to set Sail from Tinghay.

Moreover, the Ambassador told them, that it was very strange to him, that no
advice came from Peking, about the coming of the Ships, because he had
acquainted the Lipous, that he expected Ships to come to Hoksieu with
Merchandise, and also to fetch him, and that the Lipous had answered him, that
so soon as they received advice from the General, they would consult, and give
Order concerning it: But since no order was come from the Lipous, it was a sign
that the General or Governor of Minjazeen had not yet written about it to
Peking; and considering he had informed the Lipous of it himself, they would
resent it very ill, when they should hear of the Ships being there, and they
were not acquainted with it, and serve this General and the Governor of
Minjazeen, as the former General had been; for it would be a business of great
Consequence, to let the Ambassador go away with three such deep laden Vessels.
Hereupon the Officers making no reply, said, That if the Ambassador did stay
some days longer, that several Mandarins would come to him in great Jonks from
the General in Hoksieu: To which the Ambassador replied, That they, and who
e're else came, should be welcome to him, and received as friends, desiring
that they would acquaint the Governor of Minjazeen with what he had said; which
they promising to do, asked to know the day on which the Ambassador would
depart, which he said, would be the third from that, and if any one came to him
in the interim, it was well, but if none came, he would assuredly be gone; with
which answer they returned.

The fifth in the Morning, the Netherlanders saw four Jonks, and two Coya's
coming out of the Channel of Hoksieu, which the next Morning were seen about
the Wood-Bay, where they stood to and again without coming nearer to the Ships:
But the Coya's came close to them, out of one of which, a Servant belonging to
the Governor of Minjazeen, came in a Champan or small Boat aboard the
Ambassador, sent to him from his Master, to enquire concerning his Excellency's
Health, and when he would set Sail; and said moreover, that the Povi had writ
to the Emperor, that the Ambassador went away from thence the twelfth of the
last Moon, and now it was publicly known, that his Excellency was not yet
gone; therefore he came to know the certain time, when the Ambassador would set
Sail, and withal, to tell him, that if he intended to stay any longer, he
should go and lie between the Isles, without the sight of the main Land; and to
declare his mind, whether he would be gone, or not. To which the Ambassador
answered, That he would set Sail from thence, but that the General and Governor
of Minjazeen might perhaps answer for it, that they let the Ambassador go away
with three such deep laden Vessels; with which answer, the Servant took his
leave.

When the Netherlanders saw that the Jonks which kept without shot from them,
made into the Channel again with their Coya's, they according to their
resolution taken on the twelfth, made Preparations to set Sail for Batavia.

The seventeenth in the Morning, the Ambassador set Sail with four Ships, viz.
the Victoria, Batavia, Crane, and Bleiswyk, from the ruined City Tinghay; and
Steering his Course East-South-East, between the Turret-Isles, close by the
Island Naerd, and about Midnight, guessing themselves to be past the
Rough-Isle, they Steered South-West and by West: In the middle of the
Morning-Watch, the Wind began to rise, and the next day proved very Stormy,
when as they supposed they saw the Isle of Quemuy; as the following day they
judged from their Soundings, that they were near the Sandy Banks.

The twentieth, passing the Makaw Islands, they Steered their Course to the
Isle of Ainan, which was descried on the two and twentieth, having Tinhosa
about Noon, two Leagues and a half Northward from them.

The Ambassador having been indisposed for some days, and beginning daily to
grow weaker, by reason of the hollow Seas, and small Breezes, which made the
Ship roll much, he sent the Bleiswyk on the twenty fourth to the Overveen and
Crane, to tell them, that they should keep together, and he would with the
Bleiswyk go before to the Island Pulo Timaon, where he would stay for them.

In the Evening, there being a Serene Sky, the Ambassador saw the Mountain of
Sinesecuwe on his side, and in the Morning the Cape Avarelles Valze. The Wind
being at North-East, and their Course along the shore South and by West, and
South-South-West, they came in the Evening up with the Point of Holland* from
whence they Steered South-West and by South, to raise Paul Candor, which Isle
they saw in the West, on the six and twentieth in the Afternoon; and the next
Evening, Anchored behind the Goats Horns, where the Crane also arrived the
following day.

The last of October, the Batavia Frigate arrived at the South-East side of
Paulo Timaon, but the Wind shrinking, she was forced to drop Anchor half a
League from that wherein the Ambassador was aboard.

Here the Ambassador gave Order to take the Silver out of the Victoria and
Crane, and put it into the Bleiswyk again, and likewise sent his Sloops to the
Batavia, to fetch the Silver out of her: Whereupon, the Bleiswyk was according
to their Excellencies Order in Batavia, sent with all the Silver, Gold, and
other Commodities to Malakka, to the Governor Balthazar Bort, to be sent from
thence to Bengale.

The Ambassador informed him by Letters, that he was received with all kindness
at the Court in Peking, and left the same with much Honor and Friendship; but
could not inform him, what was obtained by this Embassy, because the Emperor
had sent his Letters Sealed to the Lord General; but that it was certain, that
for the future they should Trade in Canton, and not in Hoksieu; in the removal
of which, if all things else were well, he found little trouble.

The first of January, the Fleet left Paulo Timaon, and in the Afternoon, the
January.
Bleiswyk taking leave of the Fleet, steered her Course to the Streights of
Sinkkapura. In the Evening, the Ambassador saw Pulo Aura, a League and a half
North-East from him.

The second in the Morning, he stemmed the Mountain Monapyn; and on the third
had Pulo Lingen on his Stern.

The fourth, entering the Streights of Banka, he arrived on the seventh before
Batavia, where the Ambassador delivered the Emperor's Sealed Letter to the Lord
General, and gave him an account of all his Adventures.

Thus having brought the Embassy out of China to Batavia, we will return
thither again, and declare what properly concerns the Chinese, and their
Country; and first begin with their Entertainments and Diet.

Feasts, or Entertainments.
THe Chinese, according to Alvarez Semedo, spend most of their time in
Feasting, with extraordinary Costs and Charges. On the meeting of Friends, and
good success in any Business, they prepare a Feast; and sometimes also in
Troubles and Adversities, in which they come to comfort each other; nay, at
Entertainments, are the Consultations of the Chinese, advising with one
another at Meals what they shall take in Hand.

This is the usual life of the Common People, and especially of Handicraftsmen,
which are divided into Companies, which they call Mane, because in every
Company are thirty Masters, (as many as there are days in a Month) which make a
Feast every day by turns.

If they have not Conveniences in their own Houses, they may hire public
Halls, in which are all manner of Necessaries, being built for that purpose; or
if they will keep their Feasts in their own Houses, without any further
trouble, then they only set down the number of the Persons, Guests, and
Retinue, and what Dishes they will please to order, which are punctually served
in, according to the Bill of Fare.

The Northern Chinese differ much in their Customs from the Southern, who are
in general, more civilized than the other.

The Southern Chinese, in their Feasts esteem of a Quelque-chose, or of Minced
Meats and Hashes, more than great Joints and standing Dishes, entertaining more
upon the score of good Society than Debauches; yet they will do their parts
well at their Trencher, and as sufficiently at the turning off their Glasses:
They are entertained with Wine before Dinner, of which they take and taste till
they refuse; then they fall to their Rice, and neither speak nor Drink till
pretty well satisfied.

The manner of the Northern Chinese is quite otherwise, for they are not
Ceremonious nor Complemental, but delight in well-fill'd Tables, with great and
full Dishes.

After the usual Ceremony which is observed through all China, they begin first
with Eating, every one taking as much as he can on his Trencher, of what he
likes best, which they eat without Drinking.

Rice is their Banquet.

After Meals, they spend an hour in talking, which ended, they seat themselves
again, at Tables filled with Potation-Dishes, and Salt-Meats, as Gammons of
Bacon, dried Tongues, and the like, which they do not without cause call
Ushers, or Vehiculums, preparers of the way, that the Tope may the better go
down; for they no sooner take a Relishing Bit, but a lusty Godown follows.

They keep their Breakfasts at seven a Clock in the Morning, and their Dinners
at five in the Afternoon, but drink no Wine at either: Only at Night, at a
light Supper of relishing Meat, they give themselves full liberty and fresh
scope of good Fellowship; therefore their Feasts are Nocturnal, spending the
Day upon their serious, either Business, Exercise, or Studies.

In the Winter Nights they use Candles made of Oil mixed with Wax, but their
Summer Lights are of three sorts of Wax, one of Bees, another of certain
Snakes, which is very white, and the third comes from a Tree called Kieujeu,
but that is not so good as our European, yet much better than our Tallow, and
their Candles likewise exceed ours.

Persons of Quality make great Preparations for their Feasts, Erecting
Banqueting Houses for that purpose, both in the Cities, and at their Country
Houses, furnished with Pictures and other Rarities: And though the use of
Hangings be very rare, yet if those that are invited to a Feast be Officers or
Noblemen, they furnish their Houses with Tapestry, from the top to the bottom:
The number of Tables is a testimony of the greatness of their Entertainment:
They generally place no more than four Persons at a Table; but at very grand
Meetings, every Guest has a peculiar and sometimes two Tables, one to sit at,
and the other to set away his empty Dishes.

The Tables are neither covered with Clothes nor Napkins, but Varnished with
the Wax of the Gum called Cie: They use no Knives, for all their Meat, except
Eggs, Fish, and the like, is brought before them ready Hash'd: Neither use they
Forks nor Spoons, but two small Sticks two handfuls long, with which they very
dexterously and neatly take up their Meat; nay, put a single Corn of Rice,
either raw or boiled to their Mouth, without letting it fall. They never put
Salt, Pepper, nor Vinegar or Verjuice amongst their Meat, but Mustard and the
like Ingredients, which they Compound with extraordinary Art, having several of
them of a curious relish.

Their common Dishes are Flesh and Fish, boiled, or broyl'd on Grid-Irons, and
fried in Pans, with variety of Sauces, not unpleasing to the Palate.

Their Pottages, of which they are great lovers, are never made without either
Flesh or Fish.

The Emperor Che, who began his Reign before the Birth of our Savior, Anno
1150. first used Sticks of Ivory to Eat with, and Ivory Dishes; but these
Sticks are not always made of Ivory, but sometimes of Ebony, or some other such
like Materials, and tipped only at the ends, with which they touch the Meat, with
Silver or Gold; yet the Inhabitants of the Counties Iunningfu, in the Province
of Iunnan, a Rustic and Salvage People, use not the forementioned Sticks, but
put the Meat into their Mouths, sooping it down by whole handfuls.

The Chinese sit at their Tables, on high and artificial wrought Stools, and
not cross-Legg'd like the Tartars.

Anciently they used neither Stools nor Tables, but sat on the Ground
cross-Legg'd, after the same manner as most of the Asiatick and African People
yet do, insomuch, that they have but one Character for a Table and a Carpet.

Tables were first brought in use among the Chinese, near the Reign of the
Emperor Han, which ever since they have observed, and have them and their
Stools very curious.

They use many Ceremonies, as well in the middle, as in the beginning o^ ending
of their Feasts: The Master of the House, as their Taster, first sitting down,
when he has taken a Morsel and tasted the Liquor, then recommending, invites
his Friends to sit down, and do the like. In the middle of their Feast they
change their small Dishes into great, and all present, Masters, and whatsoever,
have the freedom of drinking what they please, but none enforced to more.

Persons of Quality make Feasts when they return from a Journey, and it often
happens, that one Man will go to seven or eight Feasts in a day, only to oblige
his Friends by his Presence. When they have time, they send some days before
Letters to peculiar Friends, desiring them to come to their Feasts, which if
they cannot, being otherwise engaged, then they excuse themselves again by a
Letter, and they put off their Feasts till they can come; with which they
acquaint them by another Letter, called A Letter of Request: At the day
appointed, those that are there first, stay without in a Hall till all the rest
are come, then they go into the Dining Room, where the Master of the House
using some Ceremonies, puts all things in a readiness, which done every one
seats himself according to his Quality; and the Invitor sits down in State, to
animate his Guests to Eat and Drink: They sit a long while at Table; for
besides their Discourses, they have Music and Comedians, who strait Personate
whatever they call for or desire.

Their Feasts end in many Complements, which the Guests make to the Master, to
whom they send a Letter the next Morning, extolling the noble Entertainment,
and all things thereto belonging, and hearty thanks for the honor which they
received by it.

The Chinese, as Trigaut witnesses, eat all manner of Dainties which we have
in Europe, and very well know how to dress and prepare them, but they bring but
very little of a sort to their Tables; for they account the glory of their
Feast to consist in the variety of Petits and Hotch-potches: neither do they
eat Flesh and Fish apart, as we, but mix them together.

Moreover, no manner of Meat being once put on the Table is taken away till
Dinner is ended; wherefore they not only fill the Tables, setting one Dish by
another, but heap them up like their own Turrets. No Bread nor Rice is set on
the Table before the Guests, except at some small Feasts, or toward the latter
end; if there be, then they drink no Wine, for the Chinese drink not any
before Rice.

They have also several Games at their Feasts, like ours, where every one that
loses is forced to take up his Cup, at which all the rest rejoice and clap
their Hands.

The Chinese are very mannerly at Meals, and keep their Dinners early.
Mushroms they account a great Dainty, sending for them from the Mountain
Tienno, lying in the County of Hancheufu, belonging to the Province of
Chekiang, near the small City Lingan. They are carried through all China, and
being Salted and dried last good a whole year: They steep them first in Water
before they boil them, by which means they become as fresh again as when first
gathered.

In no place in all China is more Butter and Milk used than in the City of Atl.
Si^euf.
Sucheu, in the Province of Nanking; for Martinius relates, that he saw none in
any place else.

The Inhabitants of this City exceed the other Chinese in preparing their
Meats with Sugar, Salt, Vinegar, Wine, and Herbs.

The Inhabitants of the twelfth County Xunningfu, in the Province of Iunnan, a
salvage People, stick not to eat, according to the forementioned Martinius, all
manner of Creatures that are not venomous.

The People of the fourth Territory Chingvenfu, in the Province of Queicheu,
have no Salt, but use the Ashes of an Herb called Kine in stead thereof.

Amongst those of the Province Kiangsi are some, which all the year long gather
up the Bones of dead Cattle, and lay them in Porcelane Dishes at their Feasts,
to fill up their empty Platters, that their Dishes may be heaped one upon
another, according to the Custom of the Country.

Marriages and Matrimonial Ceremonies.
THree thousand years since to this day, according to an inviolable Law,
Marriages have been observed in China. Anciently they used many Ceremonies in
Betrothing each other; and amongst others, to give their Hands as we do; but
most of them are changed, some quite extinguished, and others new. At this day
they observe two kinds of Marriages, one firm, as with us, not to be dissolved
but by the Death of one or both. In this the Woman is conducted with many
Ceremonies to her Husbands House. The second is a kind of Concubinate, yet
suffered by that Country amongst such as have no Children; but that limitation
is a mere pretense, for the Rich take Concubines or Mistresses, without any
scruple, though they have several Children.

In this the Betrothing differs much from that of a true and lawful Marriage;
for here they Treat with the reputed Father or Fosters of a Maiden, which in
truth having no Relation, but have only brought them up with intent to sell
them to the first amorous Chapman. But to speak properly this is no Marriage,
because neither any Promises, nor Matrimonial Ceremonies pass between them; for
the Law of the Country permit all Women to take any other Man, if the first
has put her off. Besides, these Concubines eat apart by themselves in peculiar
Rooms, and are under obedience of the lawful Wives, being at their Command as
Servants on all occasions: Neither do their Children show that obedience to
them, as those of the lawful Wives do, neither call them by the Name of Mother.
At their Death those Children which are born of them, are not obliged to Mourn
three years, nor desist from their Study, nor leave their Employment or
Government, as the legitimate Issue do at their Fathers or Mothers Death.

At the Man's Decease the legal Wife and Children possess the Estate in common;
but if the Wife die, the Concubine still remains with the Husband, and so do
the Children if she has any.

There are some that take Mistresses only to beget Sons; whom when grown and
mature, if the lawful Wife do not affect, they are sent abroad, or else Married
to some other; yet the Child that is thus Begotten and Born, acknowledges no
other Mother than the true and lawful Wife.

Widows are permitted to Marry if they please; but modest and chaste Women
seldom do, though young and without Children, but live retired in their
Father-in-laws House, for which they are highly esteemed.

In lawful Marriages they commonly observe the Constitutions, Qualities,
Conditions, and Likeness of the Persons; but in the other they look only upon
Beauty and Breeding.

None, according to their Laws, may Marry their Fathers Relation, in what
Degree soever, nor with a Person of the same Name, but freely with their
Mothers Friends, though never so near Allied.

A Virgin seldom Marries a Widower, they being called, The Bed and Pleasure of
the House.

No Marriages are Contracted without a Procurator, though they have been never
so great Friends; to which purpose one is chosen out of the number of those Men
and Women who folllow no other Trade.

The Bridegroom never sees his Bride but at the going in of the Door, where he
receives her as his Wife.

The Fathers bestow their Children in Marriage when they are very young, and
sometimes in their Infancy, nay before they are Born, whether Male or Female:
Their Promises in this kind are faithfully performed, notwithstanding the
Father dies before the time, except one of the betrothed happens to be defamed
and lose his Estate, or both Parties disagree. If the Son for some private
Reasons will not perform his Fathers Commands, he may be forced to it by the
Laws of the Country.

No mention is made of the Bride or Bridegrooms Portion till their Fathers
Death.

Amongst Persons of meaner Quality it is not customary to buy Women, but only
they give their Brides Father a piece of Money to buy her Garments and Attires,
according to their Capacity; from whence perhaps some have averred by mistake
that the Chinese buy their Wives.

Persons of Quality never speak of the Brides Portion, because her Father is
obliged by the Laws of the Country to do what he can, and to provide them
Housholdstuff from the Door (as they say there) to the top of the Chimney,
except the Bed; all which seldom amounts to above fifty Crowns, so low a Price
do Goods bear in China. Besides which the Father gives his Daughter two or
three Maids to wait upon her, and some Silver, but never Lands or Houses,
unless he be very rich, or else Marries her to a Person of Quality, or that he
has no Heir Male himself. After they are Betrothed, with their Parents
consents, then begin their Complements and Courtships: And first, the
Bridegroom sends the Bride a Present of some delicate Meat, Wine, and Fruit;
Secondly, the Marriage-Day is pitched upon by Astronomers with great
Ceremonies; Thirdly, the Brides Name inquired for; Lastly, the Bridegroom must
send her some Jewels, Pendants, and Precious Gems.

The day before the Bride comes home to her Husbands House, her Goods are
carried thither from her Fathers at Noonday by certain People employed for
that purpose, who walk two by two, some carrying Tables, others Chests,
Curtains, Hangings, and the like.

The next day, as it is customary in some Provinces, the new Married Man, his
Father and nearest Relations, go to seek the Bride, whom having found, they
conduct home in State in a Sedan.

In other Provinces more to the South, the Man sends one in the Evening to
fetch his Bride in a Sedan made for that purpose, richly Lined; behind follow a
great number of People with Torches and Lanterns.

After the Mother has done the last Offices for her that she shall do as a
Maid, and bid her farewell, then she is locked up in the Sedan, and the Key sent
before to her Husbands Mother. As she goes along, the nearest Relations walk
before, and the Servant-Maids given her by her Father, go on each side of their
Mistress. When they come thither, her Mother-in-law unlocks the Sedan, and
desiring her to come forth, presents her to her Husband: Which done, they both
walk to a private Chapel, in which the Images of their Predecessors are
erected; where having kneeled four times, according to the Custom in those
Ceremonies, they come and show the same Reverence to their Fathers, sitting in
a large Hall on Stools.

Then the Bride goes away with her Mother-in-law, Chamber-Maids, and
Match-makers, into the Women's Lodgings, which are kept so strictly that none
dare offer to look into them, no not the Father-in-law himself, or her own
Brothers; so that when a Father will punish his Son for an Offense, which is
often done notwithstanding he is Married, he is safe as in a Sanctuary, if he
can but get into his Wifes Chamber, because his Father dare not come thither,
nor speak with his Son's Wife, except on some extraordinary occasions, such is
their care for the preservation of Modesty, and the Honor of the Women.

They are also seldom permitted to go abroad, except on necessity, and then are
carried in a Sedan, made for that purpose, and when locked up, not the least
Cranny through which she can peep.

The Women in their Privacies, to pass away the time, entertain themselves with
little Dogs, Birds, and the like pleasers of Fancy.

A Month after the Marriage Day the Bride returns to her own House, which they
call Queinim, that is, Returning to Rest.

All the Sons have equal shares of their Fathers Goods, and those of the
Concubines as the begotten of lawful Wives; for in this case the Father is the
only Person that is considered: but as for the Daughters, they receive nothing
but what is given them on their Marriage Day.

If the Father dies before he has Married his Daughter, then her Brothers are
to provide for her; and likewise if her Father has wasted, or given away all
his Estate by Marrying of his Children, then the Brothers are obliged to
maintain themselves.

There are some peculiar Families, whereof the eldest Inherits, notwithstanding
he has several other Brothers. The Children are called Quecun, Chu-Hui, Heupe
Cheihei.

And with many Ceremonies, as Trigaut witnesses, they Betroth one another,
which is done by the Parents when they are in their Infancy: But one thing they
chiefly observe, which is, that the Bridegroom differs not many years in the
age of the Bride. This Promising or Betrothing, the Parents make between
themselves, without acquainting the Children, who nevertheless always consent.

All Persons of Quality Marry with their Equals, choosing their Wives of as good
Families as themselves.

As to what concerns the Concubines, which every one keeps according to his
pleasure, the fairest and most beautiful are in greatest esteem, not regarding
Birth or Riches; for they buy them for a hundred Ducats a piece, and sometimes
less.

The common People or the Poor buy Wives for a small Sum, and sell them again
when they please; but the Emperor and his Family in their Marriages look only
upon the Beauty of a Person, without regarding whether she be of Royal
Extraction or not: But Women of Quality shun this Choice, partly because the
Emperor's Women are of no authority for their life-times, being locked up in
the Palace, and secluded from the Eyes of all Friends and Relations; and partly
because the Magistrates of Marriages choose but few out of many to be the
Emperor's lawful Wives.

The Emperor has one prime Wife, which may only be styled Empress; besides
which he may Marry nine other, somewhat meaner, and then thirty six more, which
all bear the Title of Wives. He has also many Concubines, which are not called
Wives, nor were ever Betrothed, whom he picks and chooses at his pleasure. Those
which bring forth a Son are esteemed the most, and accepted of best; and she
who has the first Male-Issue takes place, because he is to succeed his Father
in the Throne.

This is not only usual with the Emperor and his Family, but likewise
customary through the whole Empire. The prime Wife sits with her Husband at the
Table, and all the rest (especially those that are not related to the Imperial
Blood) are Servants to the Husbands Father, and Waiting-Maids to the lawful
Wife, not daring to sit in the presence of either. The Sons acknowledge not
their real Mother, but the prime Matron, and Mourn only when she dies three
whole years, and follow no Employment during that time, which they mind not at
the Death of their Mother which bare them.

They strictly observe that no Man Marry a Woman that has the same Surname
which he has, though they are no way allied to one another; not in the least
minding how near they are a Kin to each other, if their Names do but differ;
nay, the Fathers Marry their Sons to their Mothers nearest Relations.

The Bride brings no Portion with her; and though at that day when she is
carried to the Bride-grooms House, she takes so much Housholdstuff with her,
that whole Streets are stopped up with it, yet all this is bought at the
Bridegrooms Charge, who some Months before sends her a Sum of Money to that
purpose. Thus far Trigaut.

The Household generally consists in Stools, Benches, Chests, and Umbrella's.
Moreover, the Bride must bring the Bridegroom a Horse and Bridle, four Servant
Maids, and two Boys: The Bridegroom also furnishes the Kitchen with all
Provision, presents the Bride with several Pieces of Silk-Stuffs, Cotton-Cloth,
and a Garland of Flowers, with a Gold Bodkin; for which she, as a sign of her
constant Love, gives him a Suit of Cloth of Gold, or rich Silk. The Bridegroom
also gives to her Father a hundred, and to her Mother fifty Tail of Silver:
which done, the Wedding begins, first Entertaining each other eight days in the
Bridegrooms House, and three days more at the Brides.

Their Weddings are very expensive, being celebrated in great State, and ended
with Comedies, Masks, Music, and the like, to the great admiration of
Strangers.

The day after the Wedding, the new Married Woman is conducted in a stately
manner, attended by a great number of her Friends and nearest Relations to her
Husbands House, either by Water in a Pleasure*boat, or by Land in a Sedan, or
Chair. Upon the side of the Shore walk several Musicians and Singers, Playing
on Instruments and Singing. Upon the Brides approach the Priests hold up at a
distance some Golden Half-Moons, which they give to the Bride, wishing she may
not change like the Moon, but embrace him with a pure and constant Affection: A
great assurance they have of these Half-Moons, believing that as long as the
Woman keeps them, she will never change her Love to her Husband.

When China was Governed by several Kings and Lords, they took one another
Emperors Marriages. Semedo.
Daughters to Wife as in Europe: but since those Governments were united, the
Emperor has been forced in his own Realm to take one or other of his Subjects
Daughters, it being contrary to their Law, that the Emperor should Marry any
Woman out of his own Dominions. But though the Emperor be so bound up, yet
Persons of Quality do not willingly Marry their Daughters to him, because upon
trial and dislike he may send them home again. Neither may he Betroth himself
to a Maid of his Alliance; therefore they search through the whole Empire for a
Virgin of twelve or fourteen years of age, beautiful, and endu'd with all
manner of Virtues and Breeding, after the same manner as sacred Writ testifies
they sought for Abishag the Shunamite for David, and Hester for Ahasuerus: When
they have found such a one according to their liking, she is put into the
custody of two Ladies of Honor, ancient Matrons, who search her, to see if she
has no imperfections about her Body. When those after all their Searchings
have found her faultless, she is conducted to the Court with a great Train, and
being accepted as a Person which from that time belongs to the Emperor, she is
shown to his Majesty in his Palace. The Emperor after the usual Ceremonies
passed* gives her as Wife to the young Prince his Son, from which instant she
is the true and lawful Queen. In the Palace also they order some chaste and
virtuous Women to attend her; who being endu'd with all manner of Virtues,
instruct her in all Courtly Behavior, that she may justly deserve the Name of a
Queen, which they call Chemu, that is, Mother of the Empire.

If we would speak of them according to their Historians, all the Empresses
thus brought up, have been Women of great Merits, charitable to the Poor, very
Prudent, and of quick Apprehension.

Such a one was the Daughter of a Bricklayer, who being brought to the Dignity
of Empress, always kept her Father's Trowel by her; and when the Prince her Son
began to grow too ambitious, she showed him this Trowel which her Father had
used, whereby she brought him to Obedience.

The Maidens Relations are immediately advanced to high Dignity, and Places of
Honor, and her House and Family afterward accounted Rich, and of great
Quality, and the more she wins upon the Emperor's Affection, the higher their
Friends are raised.

The Marrying of the Empero's younger Sons is much after the same manner, only
they use not so much care in the choice of their Wives: but the manner of
bestowing their Daughters is several; for they send for twelve young Men of
seventeen or eighteen years old, the tallest and handsomest that can be found,
to come to the Palace, and set them in a Place where the Princess may see them;
whom having viewed, she takes peculiar notice of two; which being shown to the
Emperor, he elects one of them for his Son-in-law.

When the Emperor Vanlie, Grandfather to the Emperor Theumchin, who Reigned
about Anno 40. having two Youths brought before him on the forementioned
account, saw one of them very richly Habited, and the other, though comelier,
in poor Apparel, asked him why he was not so well Habited as his Companion?
whereto he answered, O Emperor, the poor Estate of my Father will not permit me
to appear in a better Condition: The Emperor replied, Because you are poor I
will take you for my Son-in-law.

The other Youths are sent back again, and accounted Noble, because they were
allotted to this Choice.

The Emperor's Son-in-law has immediately a Fumme set over him, being two
Learned Mandarins of the Court to be his Tutors, and instruct him in all
Princely affairs.

Till the Woman has Children, the Man is bound to show Reverence three times a
day with bended Knees, but when she is Delivered of a Child this Duty ceases:
Yet there are many Ceremonies and Shows of Obedience that continue; for which
reason Persons of Quality shun to be the Emperor's Sons-inlaw; and this Custom
of choosing twelve is no more observed.

Is the Emperor accidentally casts his Eye on a Person of Quality, or a Learned
Person, to make him his Son-in-law, they humbly desire and beg to be excused of
it, fearing to live discontentedly all his lifetime, if the Princess should
take any dislike against him.

As to what concerns the Emperor's prime Wife, who is called by the Title of
Hoamheu, which is Empress, she has her Seat behind the Emperor: the other six,
and the next in Degree, are called Queens, and in great esteem.

Besides these, the Emperor has thirty Ladies of Honor, the rest being
Concubines, to the number of three thousand, are young and beautiful Women,
brought thither from all parts of the Empire, whom the Emperor visits at his
pleasure, as his Fancy leads, or their Beauty attract.

The Emperor Theumchim being a Chaste Man, they said of him, Pu you cuin, that
is, He goes not into the Palaces of Women; and some others such there have
been: as on the contrary, there have been more, whose wandering Affections have
been so unsatisfiable, that not pleased with their own Fancies to choose a Mate,
they kept a little Wagon, drawn by Goats, letting them run whither they would,
and into what Chamber soever they went and stood still, there the Emperor
pitched for his amorous Dalliance.

Another that would not take that trouble to go into the Women's Palaces, caused
them all to be presented to him in Pictures, and her whom he liked best he sent
for. Thus far Semedo.

The Tartar Emperor which at this day Governs, being a Youth of eighteen Years,
has twelve Empresses for his Service.



Funerals* and Mourning for the Dead.
ALl the Chinese Books which Treat of their Customs, endeavor nothing ^igant
(...)*
more than to incite Children to show Obedience to their Parents, and Respect
to their Ancestors; which they show in nothing more than in their Funerals and
Obsequies: for they not only Habit themselves in Mourning, but bestow great
Cost on a Coffin.

In the preparing for their Funerals, which may rather be called a glorious
Show, they strive to exceed one another according to their State and Quality;
nay, often go beyond their Capacity. They Mourn not in black, but White. The
Sons at their Parents Death wear a course Flaxen Coat, or rather Frock, which
reaches down to their Feet, their Hats and Shoes are also very pitiful to
behold; and they tie a Cord about their Wastes like the Franciscan Monks. This
Mourning, according to an inviolable Law, for Father or Mother is strictly
observed by the Children three whole years, for this reason (as they say in
their Books,) that they should requite their Parents, and as a testimony of
thankfulness that they have carried them three years in their Arms, and brought
them up with great trouble during their Infancy. But the time which they Mourn
for other Relations is much shorter; for some leave off Mourning within the
Year, others in three Months, as in Europe.

The lawful time to Mourn for the Emperor or Empress, is also three years,
which all the Subjects observe through the whole Empire: But now upon the
Emperor's permission, made known by Proclamation, Days are reckoned for
Months, and so the whole Realm in a Months time express their Sorrow for the
Emperor's Death in Mourning.

The Funeral Ceremonies and Customs of the Chinese observed at Burials, are
written in a large Book, wherefore upon any ones Decease, those that are to
take care to Interr the Body repair to that, wherein their Mourning Clothes,
Shoes, Caps, Girdles, and the like, are not only described in it, but also
represented in Pictures.

When a Person of Quality happens to die, the Son of the Deceased, or nearest
Kinsman, acquaints all the other Relations and Friends with it by a Book
written in a mournful Style. Mean while the Coffin is made, and the Body put
into it, and likewise the Hall or Chamber in which the Corpse stands, hung, and
covered with white Cloth; in the middle of the Chamber is an Altar, on which
stands the Coffin, and the Effigies of the Deceased.

Into this Chamber on certain Days come all the Kindred of the Deceased clad in
Mourning; whither they bring Rice, and setting two Wax-Candles on the Altar,
burn Perfumes to the Honor of the Deceased. When the Candles are lighted, then
they show Reverence to the Dead by bowing their Bodies and Kneeling four times:
but they first put Frankincense into a Perfuming Pot with Fire, which is placed
against the Coffin and the forementioned Image. Whilst these Ceremonies are
performing, one or more Sons of the Deceased stand on each side of the Chest
crying and lamenting; behind the Coffin all the Women of his Alliance, standing
behind a Curtain, cry without ceasing. The Priests have ordained a Custom to
burn Papers, cut after a peculiar fashion, as also white Silk-Stuffs; which is
done (they say) that thereby the Deceased may be provided of Clothes in the
other World.

The Children oftentimes keep their dead-Fathers and Mothers in a Coffin in the
House three or four years together, without the least nauseating smell coming
through the Crannies, being colored all over with the Gum which they call Cie.
All which time they set before them every day Meat and Drink as if they were
alive.

The Sons during this time of Mourning do not sit on their usual Stools, but on
low Benches covered with white Cloth; neither do they sleep on Beds, but on
Mats of Straw, spread over the Floor near the Coffin. They eat no Flesh, nor
drink, but upon pure necessity, not being suffered to be at any Feasts, nor for
some Months to go abroad publicly, but are carried in Sedans covered with
Mourning Cloth.

Many other things they observe, which would be too tedious to relate.

At the Day when the Corpse is to be carried out, the Friends and Relations are
invited by another Book, and meet all in white Apparel to attend the Funeral;
which is performed like the Romans Processioning; several Shapes of Men, Women,
Elephants, Tigers, and Lions, made of Paper, but curiously Gilt and Painted,
being carried before, and afterward burnt at the Grave. The Priests mumbling
their Heathen Prayers, follow the Corpse also in a long Train, and use several
Ceremonies by the Way, beating on Drums, playing on Pipes, Cymbals, Bells, and
the like. Before go likewise several Men, carrying of great Copper
Perfuming-Pots on their Shoulders.

Lastly, the Bier on which the Corpse lies, is brought in great State under an
Arched Canopy, made very artificially of Wood, and hung with Flannel, which is
carried by forty, and sometimes by fifty Men.

Behind the Bier follow the Sons on Foot, every one leaning on a Crutch, as if
fainting with sorrow. Next follow the Women Kindred in Sedans hung with white
Curtains, so that none can see them. The other Women which are not so nearly
Allied to the Deceased, are also carried in Mourning Sedans.

All their Curch-Yards and Tombs are near the City.

If it happen that the Sons at their Parents Deaths are from home, then the
Funeral is deferred till their Return.

Also when a Son is informed of his Father's Death, he prepares, if he be a Man
of an Estate, a great Feast, to which he invites, and makes mournful Complaints
to all his Friends; then returning home with the first opportunity, he renews
the same Ceremonies again in order as before; nay, a Son is obliged by the Law,
though he enjoy the greatest Office in the Empire, or be one of the prime
Council in Peking, or of the Colaos, who is the next Person of the Emperor, yet
he must come home and spend three years in Mourning, before he is permitted to
go again to his former Employment.

But this is only to be understood for their Parents, and not for any other
Relations.

Only Generals and Magistrates are free from this Law at the Death of their
Parents.

If any one die out of his native Country, then he who is left to take care of
the Corpse uses all endeavors, without sparing either Cost or Charges, to carry
it home, that there he may be Interred in the Grave of his Ancestors; for every
Family has a peculiar Burying place on some Hill in the Suburb of the City.
The Sepulchers are large, built of Marble, and adorned with several Shapes of
Men and Beasts. They also erect great and stately Tomb-stones, on which are
Engraven in a noble Style the famous Acts of their Predecessors.

In this manner has Trigaut described their Mourning; but we will also annex
what Alvares Semedo, Adrianus de las Cortes, and Adam Scall have written
concerning the same.

In many things concerning the Life of Man, the Chinese agree with the
European Philosophers, but differ much about the Concerns of the Dead. The
Europeans make little ado about their Funerals, whereas the Chinese esteem
nothing more, and are very careful in their Lifetime to give Order to their
Children for them, who show all obedience and dutifulness in performing the
same after their Deaths.

It is a general Custom in China, not to bury the Dead naked, though a Child of
two years old, but put it into a Coffin, according to every ones Capacity; in
which the richer sort, notwithstanding the Chinese are of a covetous
disposition, strive to exceed one another, endeavoring to get the best and
sweetest Wood that grows.

Those that have no Children, spare not to give a thousand Crowns for the Wood
of a Coffin, though it be nothing near so much worth; which being made and
beautified with Ornamentals of Gold, Silver, Painting, Imagery, and the like,
is brought home, and oftentimes set in their Chambers to delight them by
looking upon it. On the contrary, those which being stricken in years have no
Coffins, are always sad and melancholy.

This Custom they generally observe through the whole Empire; and as they
received their Religion from the Indians, they have likewise borrowed many
other things of them, imitating them especially in three sorts of Burials, viz.
in the Earth, in the Water, and in the Fire; for the Iapanners will some throw
themselves headlong from the tops of Mountains; others tying Stones about their
Necks, leap into Rivers; and do many other things to shorten their Lives: But
the Chinese have not such stout Hearts to bury themselves alive; but poor
People, who have not wherewith to purchase a Coffin, burn the Corpse, and bury
the Ashes.

In the Province of Suchuen the Dead are burned, and the Ashes gathered and put
into Vessels, and so thrown into the Rivers or Brooks.

Their Coffins are made of hard black Planks, the Seams covered with Iews-Glue,
or Gum, by the Portuguese called Charan, or Giaro, and by the Chinese, Cie and
Cia.

Every one has his peculiar Place, or Tomb, without the Wall of the City, for
they are not permitted within.

Some build handsome Houses there, walling them round, and planting Cypress, and
other Trees, according to the nature of the Soil.

These Places are valued according to the opinion which they have of the
Ground; for if a Conjurer has judged it to be lucky to Build on, they
exceedingly enhanse the value thereof: nor do they ever buy any Land without
the advice of those People.

At their Burials they observe one Order, to put the chief Corpse of the Family
at the upper end, and set the other side by side according to their Degrees.

Their Graves are neatly hewn out of Stone, and on the top adorned with Shapes
of Beasts, as Hearts, Elephants, and Lions, with Encomiastick Inscriptions.

Persons of Quality, especially those that are single, bestow more Cost,
building stately Palaces and Rooms under Ground like Cells; which are made very
convenient to lay the Corpse in.

Here all the Relations meet at the time of their Deaths, to do their Offerings
and other Ceremonies.

For the Poor which have not Money to buy a peculiar Burying-place, there is a
common Churchyard in every City, wherein they lie buried all together.

They chiefly desire to be buried in their Predecessors Graves, though never so
far from the Place where they die, as it often happens to Governors of remote
Provinces of the Empire, and thither their Friends, to do them the last honor,
convey them.

The first Ceremony observed at any ones Departure is, that the Sick, when
dying, is carried on a Mat to give up the Ghost in a Hall: Yet Persons of
Quality are not removed, but die on their Beds.

When a Father dies, then the eldest Son plucks off his Cap from his Head, and
comes with his Hair disheveled to the Bed, and tearing the Curtains and Sheets
in Pieces, lays them on the Corpse; then the Body (if a Male, by Men, if a
Female, by Women) is according to their Custom washed; which done, they lay it
in a Cotton Cloth, or else in Silk, and put on his best Apparel; next to the
Corpse they lay the Badges of his Office, and Degrees of his Learning which he
attained in his Lifetime. The Body thus Garnished, is laid in a Coffin, which
stands in a Hall hung round about with black. The Effigies of the Deceased
drawn to the Life, with his Arms and Livery, are all placed at the Head of the
Coffin, and at the Feet stands a Table covered with a Carpet, before which is a
Curtain drawn for the Women to stand behind unseen. The Children and Nephews
sit mournfully on Straw. In the first Gallery leading to the Entrance into the
Hall, stand several Trumpeters on both sides, and two with Tabers at the Gate
of the House in the inside; before the House in the Street hangs a Bundle of
Pieces of Paper made fast to a Stick which reaches down to the Ground, as a
sign of their new-begun Mourning, and to give notice to their Neighbors:
Afterward the Children of the Deceased acquaint their nearest Relations and
others by a Letter of their Loss; who thereupon come to visit them in this
Order: First the Visitant walks into the outer Court before the House, and
there puts on Mourning, the Drums beating the whilst; which done the Trumpets
sounds as he passes through the Gallery: so soon as he enters the Hall the
Women behind the Curtain begin to cry, and then approaching the Table he lays a
Paper Purse of Money upon it, to defray some of the Charges; after he has
bowed his Head three or four times on the Corpse, and kneeled down, the
Childring lifting him up, place him on their left sides, and show the same
Reverence to him: After all these Ceremonies passed, every one seats himself
without speaking a word.

All those Friends which come thither as Visitants are received by one of the
Deceased's Relations, Clad in a Mourning Garb, who conducts them into an
Antichamber, where desiring them to sit, proffers them Tee, dried Fruit and
Sweetmeats, of which they eating but little, take and put it into their Nets
and go away.

These Civilities are so strictly observed, that Friends, though they dwell not
near, but in some other Cities, come Riding thither; or if it be too far, they
send one of their Family to excuse them.

These Ceremonies ended, the eldest Son is obliged to go and visit every one in
the City, which came to Mourn with him; yet to shun so much trouble he goes
only to their Doors, where leaving a Letter he proceeds to the next. Then they
speak of the Funeral if their Purses be able to hold out, if not, they keep the
Coffin in the House till the next opportunity, which happens sometimes not in a
whole year. At the time appointed all the Friends are advised thereof by a Thu,
or Letter; who when met, go to the House: Before them are carried great Images
of Men, Horses, Elephants, Lions, Tigers, and other Beasts, made of Gilt Paper;
then follow other Shapes, viz. of Wagons, triumphal Arches, Pyramids, and the
like, adorned with Silk and Roses of diverse colors: all which things are
burned when the Coffin is put into the Ground, if it be a Person of Quality.
These Images are followed by great numbers of People that come out of curiosity
to see the Funeral: Next walk the Friends all in Mourning, then the Bonzi
Singing their Prayers, and Taboring on Basins; who are followed by a second
sort of Bonzies, that let their Hair and Beards grow, and play on several sorts
of Instruments; these again by a third, that shaving their Hair, differ in
their Doctrine from the rest; then come the Acquaintance, and the nearest
Relations; the last are the Children and Nephews all in close Mourning
barefooted, hanging down their Heads, and carrying a Stick of two Foot long in
their Hands. All this Company walk before the Corpse, which is carried (if of
costly Wood, Gilt and Varnished with their Charan) uncovered, on a great Bier,
by thirty, forty, or fifty Men, for the greatness of the Funeral consists in
the number of Bearers. Behind the Coffin the Women follow Crying, being locked
up in their Sedans, and covered with Mourning. When they are come to the Grave,
they use many Ceremonies before they put the Corpse into the Ground; amongst
which one, and none of the least, is a great Feast for all the Company in a
stately large House; which done, every one returns home, and observes the time
of Mourning and the usual Ceremonies, which are as follows, viz.

First they Habit themselves in close Mourning, which is all in White, not
only China, but also in Iapan, Corea, and many other neighboring Countries,
though in Reason it cannot be supposed, that that Color was from the beginning
made for that use, but brought in fashion amongst them only by Custom, without
any other Reason, because the Chinese know that White is a joyful Color,
which they also manifest at certain times: but to give our Opinion of it, we
must know, that the Chinese make all their Stuffs of Cotton, and Hemp; Silk
and Cotton are much too fine for course Stuffs, therefore they can make use of
nothing better than Hemp, for that is naturally of an unpleasing Color, and
therefore they have chose this last for that purpose: and as Hempen Cloth is
generally white, it may be believed, that White only was by them chosen to be
the Color of their Mourning.

Three whole years this Sorrow continues, during which time the Children sit
only on little Benches, covered with White. They eat not at Tables, nor sleep
on a Bedstead, but on a Mat, laid upon the Floor. They also abstain from Wine
and Flesh; neither do they go to Baths or Feasts, nor abroad but in a close
Mourning Sedan. But that which is more, they never converse (as they say) with
their Wives all that time; nor are employed in any public Business of State:
and if they have any Employment, though a Viceroy or Colao, they are forced to
forsake it to attend the Obsequies, and spend their time in Mourning; which
when expired, they not only enjoy their Places again, but are after promoted
to higher Dignities. This time they account so holy, that they receive no Pay,
though Captains of Companies.

Some years since it happened, that a Commander of the Province of Canton, who
was more desirous to follow his Employment than keep the full time of his
Mourning, made his Account so, that the time which he spent in his Journey to
the Court should be part of his Mourning time, which he wanted to make up the
three years: but coming to the Court with intention to enter into his Office
again, he was sent back to his House, to spend the remaining time of his
Mourning, before he might appear there.

The number of three years is strictly observed, for an acknowledgment that the
three first years they were carried more in their Parents Arms than on their
own Legs; wherefore as a sign of Obedience they may not err from that Order
which their Predecessors maintained.

The Women Mourn but one year, the near Relations three Months, and the
Acquaintance three days: And because these accidents often happen, there are
few but what have Mourning Coats lying ready by them. Thus far Semedo.

Father Adrian de las Cortes, makes mention of the Chinese Mourning for their
Parents after this manner, viz. The ordinary Mourning Coat, which both Men and
Women wear, is very wide, made of course white Hemp, ravel'd and full of
Patches. The Sons carry a Cane in their Hands, on which they lean when their
Fathers die; but when their Mothers die, a Stick or Truncheon of Wood. On their
Heads the Men wear a Bonnet of course Linen; from whence a great ravel'd Cloth
hangs down over their ^aces. The Maids wear a Coif on their Heads of course
Linen; a Girdle of Towe ^y'd about their Middle hangs down with one end to the
Ground.

Their time of Mourning for their Father and Mother is three years, in requital
(as we said) of their three first years, in which their Parents suckled, and
carried them in their Arms.

For the Death of Friends they Mourn a longer or shorter time, according to
their acquaintance and obligations.

The Friends of the Deceased go not with covered Faces, nor Sticks in their
Hands like the Sons, as appears by the inserted Sculps and Directions of the
following Letters and Figures.

Mourning Habit for Father and Mother.
A An ordinary wide Coat ravel'd, and with many Patches. B A Mourning Cane,
serving for a Crutch when a Father dies. C A Mourning Stick for a Mother. D A
Mourning Cap or Bonnet of Hemp for the Death of Father or Mother. E A Coif of
the same. F A Veil for Women for their Father or Mother. G A Girdle of Towe for
a Father. H A Girdle of Towe for a Mother.
Mourning for Relations which are neither Fathers nor Mothers.
1 A course Coif of white Linen. 2 Ordinary Mourning Stockins ravel'd out. 3 A
Bonnet like a Mitre, of course Hemp. 4 An ordinary Mourning Girdle. 5 Ravel'd
Mourning Shoes. 6 A wide Coat much ravel'd. 7 An Apron much ravel'd.
After the Death of either Father or Mother, amongst other Ceremonies which
they observe, especially at the Funeral, they have a Custom not to sit on
Stools for a certain time, nor sleep on Beds, nor eat Flesh, nor drink Wine,
keep from their Wives, speak not aloud, go not out of their Houses, except in
Sedans covered with course Linen, and many other things more, till time has
worn away Sorrow.

Except Militia Officers, all Persons are obliged, though the prime Colao's, to
forsake their Offices for three years for their Father or Mothers Death, which
time they are to spend in Mourning for them. Thus far De las Cortes.

In this manner the Chinese perform their Funerals, or Interr their Dead; but
the Tartars, who at this day Govern the Realm of China, observe quite another
manner. The Jesuit Adam Scall describes them both in the following words:

Both Tartars and Chinese (says he) take a peculiar care for the burying of
their Dead; for they imagine that all the happiness of their Successors
dedepends upon it: wherefore they often lay by three, four, five hundred, nay a
thousand Crowns in their lifetime to be bestowed on their Graves: To which
purpose they also gather Planks of Cedar, and other like lasting Woods, which
they send for two or three hundred Leagues off, to make them Coffins, wherein
they may for ever, as they suppose, lie secure; which the Jesuit Martinius
testifies in these words:

It is (says he) by them accounted a great happiness for him, who before his
Histor. Sinens. lib. 5.
Death makes himself a Coffin of the best and strongest Wood, some of which
costs sometimes two thousand Crowns; for they send for the most durable and
best Wood out of remote Countries, so that there is no City but there are
Coffins to be sold in it, nay most People buy them before their Deaths, and
keep them in their Houses.

The upper Planks (says Scall) of the Tartars Coffins are sloaping like a
Roof, and Painted on the outside, not regarding the thickness of the Planks,
because they put their Coffins to no other use, than to hold the Body for a
short time, and carry them out in; for coming to their Funeral Piles, they burn
the Coffins with the Corpse. But those of the Chinese are narrower at the Feet,
and broader and higher at the Head, the upper Plank smooth, and reaching over
the sides, that the thickness thereof may be seen, which is chiefly observed
and taken notice of. They are very careful to choose a Burying-place; for if
they have not Land of their own, then they purchase it at a great Rate. Those
Places are principally made choice of in a dry Soil, where no Rivers nor
Highways are near, nor any Temples or Towers, but must be on a Plain, which
neither rises before nor behind. Such a Place being chosen, they surround it
with a Bank of Earth lik a Half Moon, which rises in the Middle, and runs
sloaping down on both sides, yet not smooth but scollope-like; at the upper end
of which they bury the eldest, and below him on each side the Sons and Nephews,
not in one Grave, but every one apart under a little Hillock, and the chief of
the Family under the highest Hill: In the middle on a Stone Table are placed
variety of Provisions, Perfumes, and other things, in honor of the Deceased.

Any one that amongst a Family is raised to a higher degree of Honor than his
Predecessors, erects his own Tomb in his lifetime; whereon they Carve the
Shapes of Men or Beasts, according to every Man's Quality and Estate, Planting
the remaining part of the Ground with Cedar Trees, and Walled round.

The Tartars differ herein; for though they, according to the convenience and
Place, require the same things as the Chinese, yet they observe not the same
manner in their Burial; for the old People are buried apart, and the younger by
themselves.

The Chinese also erect a Tombstone, on which is Engraven the Age of the
Deceased, his Office, and the Emperor's Favors to him: and to prevent the
Characters from being defaced, and the remembrance of the Deceased's Exploits
from being worn out; besides the Tombstone they bury another square Stone in
the Ground with the same Inscription, that when the first is worn out, that may
appear perfect, and serve as a Memorial of all his Achievements.

When any one dies, whoever he be, all the Friends and Relations come about the
Corpse, crying and Mourning over it.

Persons of Quality send a piece of very thin white Linen, with a Letter to
their Friends, to acquaint them of the dead Corpse, who at an appointed day come
thither, bringing with them Perfumes, Wax-Candles, and Money; coming into the
House they go to a Table, placed opposite to the Coffin in the midst of the
Hall; having set fire on the Perfumes that stand upon the Table, they step a
little backwardand show Reverence to the Effigies of the Deceased, Painted at
the Head of the Coffin, by kneeling four times, and bowing their Heads to the
Ground, whilst they make a mournful Cry.

These Ceremonies being performed, the nearest Relations appear also on one
side of the Coffin between the Curtains; and coming forth show the same
Reverence, also kneeling, and bowing their Heads four times to the Ground. The
time of Visiting ended, the nearest Kindred come the next day into the House of
Mourning, from whence they convey the Corpse to the Grave, or at least to the
City Gates; for which Kindness the Children go from House to House in
Sackcloth, and with their Faces looking down on the Ground, return Thanks, by
showing Reverence to their Visitants, who on purpose stand at their Doors.

But the Tartars observe quite another way of Interring their Dead, viz. on the
same day that any one dies, the Corpse being put in a Coffin, and the Friends
having Wept over it in the House, they carry it away, except the Deceased was a
Viceroy or Governor.

The Relations accompany the Hearse, and afterward placing themselves in Rows,
on each side of the Funeral Pyre; those of her Family set fire of the Wood, and
so burn the Body, whose Ashes on the third day are gathered, and put into a
Porcelane Urn, to be buried.

Yet far greater Honor is shown to the Viceroys, whether Tartars or Chinese,
for when a Tartar King dies, his Servants, after some formal Lamentations, are
placed on each side of the Court-Gate, that they may be seen, holding his
Achievements; for some have Helmets, others Bonnets, those Girdles, others
again Swords, Belts, Bows, Quivers, and other like things in which he
delighted. Thus ordered, they make a continual doleful noise all the time of
their standing there.

In the same Order his Horses stand to be seen, held by his Grooms, with rich
Saddles, and Caparisons of Velvet.

There stand also Camels handsomely Harnes'd, and laden with the Goods that are
to be used at the Funeral, and by them, under the Gates Drummers and Trumpeters.

At the appointed day the Corpse is carried out, before which ride Trumpeters
Sounding mournfully, then follow twenty or thirty choice Camels, with Silk
Bridles and Saddels hanging at their Necks, and laden with Tents and other
Furniture, to be carried to the Grave; next follow such as bear Silk
Umbrella's, and Painted and Gilded Fans; then Ensigns, Flags, Pennons, and the
like, with Silver Chargers; after those, richly Caparison'd Horses, laden with
his best Household Stuff, and led by Grooms; and lastly, the Sedans which the
Viceroy used.

The place of Burial is encompassed with a Mat in stead of a Wall, within whose
Enclosure stand Tents, furnished with rich Goods, to be burnt. In the middle
appears a great Hall, also made of Mats, to put the body in: Those that were
the last that attended the Train, appear by this Hall first, and behind them
stand the rest, each, according to their Qualities: The remaining vacancy
within this Enclosure, and behind the Hall, being for the Women: When they are
all within, standing for a considerable time, they make a hideous noise, more
like howling than weeping; which done, and all things ready for the Offering,
the Priests, or other Persons appointed, Garnishing Tables with Fruits and
Preserves, and Meat in great Silver Chargers, they deliver a Cup with Wine to
the chiefest Viceroy there present, who holds it up three times as an Offering
to the Deceased.

Mean while, a Letter of Recommendation from the Emperor is produced, wherein
the Merits of the Deceased are set forth, and he Honored with a Noble Title.

The chiefest of the present Counselors, having read this Letter with a loud
Voice, throws it into the fire and burns it; so bowing their Heads three times,
they rise again, and begin to cry: Then those of his Family set fire on a Paper
Mountain, covered all over with Purple Flannel, into which they throw the
richest Clothes, Hats, Saddles, Gold and Silver Vessels, Sedans and Beds of the
Deceased, which being consumed, they gather the melted Gold and Silver, and
putting it into Paper, on the third day throw it into the fire again, adding to
it other Riches, till all be burnt: The Horses bereaved o their Caparisons, are
let loose, and bought by those that please for half their worth.

This done, all the Invited depart, being conducted by one of the Viceroy's,
out at the Gate, where he thanks them.

But the Tartars are not satisfied with this one Funeral, for seven days after
they renew it again, and a third time seven days after that, till all things be
consumed that the Deceased loved and esteemed.

Moreover, if the Deceased had a more than ordinary beloved Concubine, or Prime
Favorite, they murder themselves; for the Concubine, whether willing or
unwilling, is forced to Hang her self, to comfort, delight, and accompany (as
these ignorant People say) the Deceased in the other World: Yet the more
understanding Persons, being somewhat better instructed, have of late, dreading
such horrid Murders, Petitioned the Emperor, by his Proclamation, to forbid
such Cruelties; and likewise the wasting and burning of Household Stuff, and
other Materials, which his Imperial Majesty has accordingly Ordered, so that
in stead of rich Cloth of Tissue, they only burn Gilded Paper, and have in a
manner left off the Barbarous Custom of killing themselves at the Grave.

Having ended their Offerings, and crying a second or third time in the
presence of all those that are afresh come to the Funeral-Pyre; they erect a
Hall or Court, being the Tomb, (as if for a live Person) surrounding it with
Walls, along whose sides are several Apartments, after the same manner, like
those in which the Deceased in his life time recreated himself; in these they
place the faithfullest Servants: In the middle thereof, they make the Tomb of
Bricks, on a square Mount, round about which they place the Cushions and Sedans
of the Deceased, on the Walls on each side hang his Girdle, Sword, Belt, a
Quiver full of Arrows, and a Bow: In this Hall, for a whole year, they bring
Meat every day, which they put at the Foot of the Mount for the Deceased, as if
he were to feed upon it, whilst those that bring it, stand on one side crying.
These are for the Great Ones; but the Tartars of meaner quality, wanting
Estates, build no Hall over their Graves, but placing only Meat, or Tee near
the same, go away again.

The Chinese on the contrary, after their Friends and Relations are met, and
having shown the usual Reverence to the Deceased, go out of the House in this
Order: Before on a long Stick is carried a Red Silk Cloth, whereon is written
the Name, Titles, Age, and Quality of the Deceased, in Silver Characters; then
follow a great number of Children, who carry all manner of Flowers, made of
colored Paper, upon Canes, besides Representations of Men, Beasts, Gardens,
Houses, and the like, Painted on Paper to delight the Eye: If the Deceased in
his life time was famous for his Zeal in Religion, then his Images (curiously
Painted) are born before him; after which comes next in order the Effigies of
the Deceased, on a rich Bier, followed by the Bonzues, Playing on Tabers,
Cymbals, and other Instruments; then Anticks and Stageplayers come Riding on
Horseback, in the same Habits they are to Act in at the Grave, and all the way
as they pass, showing Tricks and using other Mimick Gestures: The Orphans walk
just behind the Corpse, leaning on Sticks, and supported under their Arms by
their Servants, as if excess of sorrow had thus weakened them: The Bier on
which the Corpse stands, covered with rich Silk Clothes, is carried by eight,
sixteen, nay sometimes thirty two Bearers. When they come to the Grave, those
that have attended the Funerals, throw what they have carried on a heap of
Paper, which setting on fire, they go to the Tables that stand before the
Corpse, Garnished with several Fruits and Perfumes, besides a scalded Hogg and
Lamb at each end; then three or four of the Eminentest set fire of the Perfumes
before the whole company. Lastly, They step aside and make room for him who is
to write on a Board made before, being three Fingers broad, and an Ell long,
the Name and Quality of the Deceased, first they set down this Mark (...),
which signifies Emperor; and for this cause they that are to do this, must be
clad in such Apparel, as any of Quality might appear in before the Emperor.
This Person with the Pencil in his Hand, craves pardon of all the Spectators,
for his bold attempt, excusing his unworthiness of that Office; then he writes
over the first Mark, on the upper end of the Board with black Ink, another in
this manner (...) for then that which signified Emperor is changed, and is as
much as Lord; so that in this manner, with the first under written Name of the
Deceased, a full Sentence is made, viz. The Lord N. N. This Board the
Deceased's Friends carry with his Image to his House, that it may be yearly
Worshipped and remembered by his Predecessors. So soon as this Inscription is
finished, the Writer goes by them all, having Bowed and Kneeled four times: But
before the Friends depart, they are either entertained in a House, raised of
Mats, or in the next Chapel, at a Noble Treat, at which the first Cup is given
to the Children, as they say, to wipe off their Tears. At their return home,
some Tausus or Conjurers come to the Mourning House, that by the sprinkling of
certain Water, they may drive away (as they say) evil Spirits, and bring Peace
and Quiet to the House.

The Chinese and Tartars use one Color, but not one Fashion for their
Mourning.

All the Tartars, both Friends and Relations, wear a long Coat of Sackcloth,
reaching down to their Feet, and gird it about their Middle with a Hempen Cord;
they put on their oldest Buskins, and worst Hats, without the red Silk-Fringe,
which at other times they wear for an Ornament.

The Hair of their Head or Beard is not shaven in all that time.

After the expiration of a Month, every one throws in a fire of Paper, and
other such like Materials, their Mourning Girdle, with which they judge their
Mourning to be ended, and Habit themselves again in their usual Apparel.

Neighbors and acquaintance show that they Mourn by pulling their Silk Fringe
from their Hats.

The Tartar Women, in the time of Mourning, change their Apparel, being usually
Black, into White; their Coifs, which else are covered with their Hair,
resemble a White Cap, with Tassels that hang over their Shoulders.

The Chinese Mourning alters yearly, their first year, both Men and Women wear
all over their Bodies a Suit of Sackcloth full of holes, with Shoes of White
Cloth, and a Rope about their Wastes, seeming thus by the carelessness of their
Garb, to express their sorrow for the Death of their Parents. The second year
their Habit is made of slight Cloth, their Hat of the usual Fashion, but of
another Color, their Shoes handsomer, and their Girdles of Hemp left off. The
third year they may wear Silk Clothes, and their Hats of the same Stuff, but
White, or else of the usual Color, which is generally Black.

In this time they follow no employment, though of the greatest concern, nor
may sit opposite to or by the Visitants, as others, but on a low Bench.

In the first Months, they not only abstain (as is usual in Fastings) from
Flesh, Fish, Milk, Wine, and the like, but eat very unsavory things, neither
seasoned with Salt nor Herbs: And as the time of Mourning for a Wife, Brother,
more distant Relations or Friends is much shorter, so is also their Apparel and
Meat better.

The Childrens Mourning for their Parents is three year, which time the Wife
must observe for the death of her Husband; the eldest Son, or his Wife, is by
his Parents Mourned for a year, and as long a time the Man Mourns for his Wife,
and one Brother for another.

This long time of Mourning, observed by the Children, for the Death of Histor.
Sin. l. 1. c. 23.
their Parents, has (as Martinius tell us) been observed by the Chinese ever
since the Emperor Xun's time, who Mourned for* his Predecessor Ya, being his
Father, three whole years at his Grave, without stirring thence, and intrusting
the care of his Realm (during that time) to his Viceroys; and as the same
Martinius adds, from thence it is, that they Mourn in that manner for their
Parents, always staying in their Houses, laying down all Offices, changing
their Meat and Furniture to meaner, and always sitting on a low Bench; upon
this account also they drink no Wine, but live only on Pot Herbs: Their Clothes
are very Fantastic, made of Sackcloth; their Lodging Rooms meaner, nay, they
frame their manner of speaking to a much more sorrowful Tone, and whereas
before they used to write with Red on Paper streaked with Vermilion, now they
use only Yellow or Blue Colors, as a token of their Sorrow.

It is very strange to observe the Duty and Reverence which the Children show
to their Dead Parents, wherein no other People may be compared to them, for
many (though Magistrates) when observing that their Parents being grown very
old, have need of their help, they desire the Emperor to excuse them from their
Office, without urging any thing, but that according to their Duty they may go
to assist their aged Father, which the Emperor seldom refuses.

As to what concerns their Mourning three years, the Chinese Philosophers give
this reason, That it is most fit, those which in their first three years have
received their Parents Love, should spend so much time after their Death in
Mourning and bewailing their loss; therefore it is no marvel, that the Chinese
count it the greatest misfortune in the world to have no Children, because they
know that no body will look after them in their Age, nor at their Death Mourn
for them.

The reasons why they make White to be Mourning, and not Black, is, as
themselves say, because White is Natural, when as all other things are Died, or
Artificial; by which, as they say, is signified, that in Sorrow, neither Art
nor Pride must be shown, for where a true Sorrow is, Nature sufficiently
expresses it. Thus far Martinius.

With great preparation and Pomp the Emperor Zungte, Father to this present
Emperor Adam Schall.
was Interred.

The next day being the eighth of their first Moon, after the Emperor's Death,
his Corpse was put into the Coffin about Noon: There was not one Tartar in all
Peking that served in public Affairs, but he went thither with his Wife and
Daughters, which so thronged the Courts, that none were able to get through: The
eldest were received into the first Court, next the Emperor's Lodging, where
they all together bewailed his Death, with many loud Shreeks and Cries; in
which (to admiration) they obse^e an exact time, with stops and pauses, as in
Music.

After all, the Tartars divided into eight Companies, let into the Emperor's
Hall by two and two, there bewailed his Death, they went away, and made room
for others, so that the Cry continued without any cessation, the Multitudes
still going out, and coming in.

Mean while, there were not a few that fasted three days, not daring to go out
of the Gates, nor their Servants suffered to bring them any Refreshment.

Father John Adam Schall at that time present, there taking compassion of the
People, which were ready to perish for Hunger and Thirst, Petitioned the
Governors, either to furnish them with Provisions on the public Account, or
else set the Multitude return home; alleging, that there were Women amongst
them, and that their weak Sex was not able to endure such Inconveniences, and
likewise ancient People, that worn out with sicknesses, were not used to
undergo such hardship.

No sooner was Schal's Petition delivered, but the Governors looking upon his
Request to be just, let all the People go away, with resolution, that all the
Mandarins should every Morning for the seven following days, Weep half an hour
in the Emperor's Chamber; after which, every one should retire and observe the
established Month of Fasting for the Emperor.

The fourteenth of the first new Moon, they gave the new Emperor Konchi his
Oath, at the performance whereof, every Bench were in particular led into a
Hall.

The chief of the first and second Order went to the upper Hall, where having
with the rest lamented over the Deceased Emperor's Body, the Oath was publicly
read before them all; to which they all showed Reverence by thrice Kneeling and
bowing their Heads to the Ground, and calling upon the Dead to witness the same.

Then going from the Court, they went to an Idol-Temple, where they gave him
the Oath again, and finished their began Work with the same Ceremonies.

When on the seventh day, after the Emperor's Death, the slight Roofs made of
Mats were taken away, the chief Funeral-Priest seated himself in the open
Court; after which, the chiefest being called into the Hall, and the rest
standing at the Door, they began again to Cry, which dured longer than
ordinary, because the Queen Mother was there present, and began first with all
her Women. Then many Silver and Gold Vessels were brought out of a Tent erected
for the Corpse; and Tables being also set about the Coffin, richly Garnished
with Sweetmeats in Silver Chargers, all which was thrown into the Fire. The
remaining time, as from the first day when they went to lament, the City
Servants and petty Governors holding all that had belonged to the Emperor, as
his Horses, Achievements, Flags, and other things of State, stood in a Row at
the Entrance of the Palace, from whence they stirred not till the Mandarins
went away. On the first of the second Moon the Crying and forementioned
Ceremonies were again renewed, early in the Morning in the presence of the
Queen Mother, and the Tables, which four Men could scarce carry, were again
with Clothes, Carpets, and the like, thrown into the Fire. The last day they
met to accompany the Corpse, which was placed behind the Palace in a Hall on a
neighboring Mount, which abounds with Deer, Hearts, Stags, and the like Beasts
for the Emperor's Recreations, till the Imperial Tomb should be made ready in
some other Place. First the Way, which from the Palace runs to the Mount, was
Grabell'd and laid plain, to prevent the rising of the Dust, to which
inconvenience the Streets in Peking are very subject. Thither came all the
Grandees Habited in white Mourning, to accompany the Corpse; before went nine
Elephants with Turrets on their Backs; forty Camels, caparison'd with red
Cloths and Bridles plated with Gold, and rich Symiters hanging down by their
Necks, were laden with Tents and other Furniture: then followed an hundred
Horses, led by yellow Bridles, without Gold, except the Buckles, which were
only Gilded: next in order were Drums, Trumpets, and others with Instrumental
Music to the number of a hundred; behind which were carried fifty Gilded
Hammers, and above an hundred Flags of several colors, with wild Beasts,
Birds, and twenty eight Stars, stitched with Thr^ of Gold; then again fifty
Hammers, after which were led a hundred Saddled Horses, the last thirty laden
with rich Flannel, and the Emperor's Clothes condemned to the Fire; next these
came twenty Youths, every one holding an Imperial Quiver, imboss'd with Pearls
and Precious Stones, besides Bows and Arrows, and just before them walked
twelve Greyhounds; behind these came the Emperor's Sedan, born by sixteen Men,
in which when living he used to be carried, richly Gilt, and on the top adorned
with a Golden Ball; the Bearers were clad in a Livery of a Saffron color,
Embroidered with Roses of Gold* next them were carried several Gold and Silver
Chargers; behind which followed the Bier with the Emperor's Corpse, covered with
Cloth of Tissue, Embroidered with blue Clouds and Flowers, supported by thirty
two Bearers, all in a Saffron-colour'd Livery, and adorned with Golden Roses;
behind the Corpse came Soldiers with Pikes and other Arms; then the Emperor's
Mother in a Sedan covered with Purple-Silk; next hers, seven more covered with
white Cotton, in every one of which was a Queen, or Concubine of the Emperor's;
then followed many Grandees on Foot; lastly, all the Magistrates, and those
that showed Reverence by kneeling and bowing to the Corpse as it passed by,
followed disorderly one among another to the Grave, which was environed with a
Wall, but the multitude pulling it down, quickly made room for all comers.

The Governors of the first Degree going into the base Court before the Hall,
where the Bearers had set down the Corpse, stood and cried all together, as
likewise those that stood about them; at length one of the chiefest Viceroys
lifting up a Golden Cup with Wine three times, they all bowed their Heads down
to the Ground: then the Viceroy offered the forementioned Cup as an Oblation:
Before the Corpse stood a Table strow'd full of Silver and Gold Flowers, and all
sorts of Perfumes: Then they began again to cry till they all went away,
leaving the rest of the Ceremonies to be performed the next Morning. At every
Gate the chief Viceroy Offered before the Coffin a Cup with Wine, which he
lifted up three times as before, and then delivered it to a prime Councellor,
who put it aside to be Offered again at last with the rest.

The next Morning, being the twenty seventh day after the Emperor's Death, they
all met again by the Corpse, and every one standing in their appointed Places
began their general Lamentation. Having performed all Ceremonies as on the day
before, the Letter given by the Emperor to his Son, containing the Praise due
to the Deceased, was publicly read; whereupon the Magistrates doubling their
Shreeks and Cries, returned into the base Court, whilst four of the chiefest
Persons of Quality going to the Paper Mountain, covered with yellow Silk,
carried in an open Cloth, a Sable Suit of the deceased Emperor, with his Hat
raised on the Crown with Pearls and Diamonds, and likewise a Sable Quilt
whereon to lay his Head. Others in ten Carpets bore ten several Suits more of
the Emperor's; and Saddles and Caparisons for Horses were also laid on the
Heap, besides Flags, Fans, Gold Plates, and the Emperor's Sedan; all which
being brought to the Heap of Paper, covered with yellow Silk, they set on fire,
and threw in the Tables full of Flannel Clothes, many Gold and Silver Vessels,
which being melted streamed down the Hill like a Rivulet. Then the Governors
untied their Girdles, which being of white Cloth, they had fastened about their
Middle, and so throwing them into the Flame they were released of their
Mourning. Lastly, they pulled off all their Mourning Habit, and leaving it
there went home.

Three days after the prime Governors of the first Order came thither with the
Tartars (the Chinese being locked out) and prepared a new Funeral, at which
they used the same Ceremonies, carrying Fans, and leading Horses and Cammels.
The same four Grandees brought another Suit of the Emperor's, and a Hat, having
only one great Pearl on the Crown, which they, as before, threw on Paper
Heaps, and likewise some Saddles beset with Pearls and Diamonds, which done
every one returned home.

All these Ceremonies are renewed from day to day till the hundredth day;
during which time no Music may be heard, nor any Plays acted through all the
City; and they continue mourning after the hundredth, for the Tartars watch by
the Coffin continually.

After the expiration of two years, when the time was come to carry the Corpse
to the appointed Grave, twenty four Leagues from the City of Peking, all the
Mandarins conducted the Corpse on Foot out of the City, where they took leave of
it on their bended Knees.

Zungte the Emperor of China and Tartary, made some years since a very great
Adam Scall.
Funeral for one of his Concubines which was after this manner:

He accompanied the Corpse in Person out of his Palace Gates, where the Body was
laid in State till the expiration of a hundred days, at the end of which to be
burnt, and by his Order to have Offerings made for it every fourth day; the
Materials for which, besides the other Preparations, cost the Emperor above ten
thousand Ducats. Amongst other wasteful Ceremonies he caused all the Tables,
with their Silken Cloths to be thrown into the Fire. The Bier followd, as we
said, before, by the Emperor, was covered with Velvet; before it were carried
three Sedans, seeming to be all Gold, though only Gilt, which being beset with
Precious Stones, made a glorious show; before the Sedans went three Wains drawn
by Horses, which being covered on the top, were also richly Gilded: thousands
of People made daily a great Cry, and the rest of the Ceremonies were all like
the forementioned, in which, they say, was spent eight hundred thousand Ducats.

With a peculiar magnificence and splendour was formerly solemnized the Funeral
of a Chinese Emperor and Empress. Semedo describes that of the Empress, Mother
to the Emperor Vanlie, who deceased Anno 1614. on the last of May, in the
following words:

IMmediately after the Death of the Empress, the Court and City, as well
Noblemen as Burgesses, Habited themselves in Mourning, and chiefly the
Empresses Officers left off the Badges of their Offices and put on Mourning,
wearing a Hempen Cord in stead of a rich Girdle* for a black Silk Hat, one of
Chinese Cloth. In this manner they went four Months till the day of the
Funeral; but the common People wore only a Mourning Hat for the space of
twenty four days; which was so strictly observed, that none upon pain of being
severely punished durst leave them off. The second day the Emperor went out of
his Palace into that of his deceased Mother, which lay a little distant, yet
enclosed within the same. Before the Corpse was Dressed in white Linen, and put
into the Coffin, the Emperor came every day in Person with his Attendants to
visit and show Reverence to it in the same manner as all Children do to their
Parents, and Offering to her the most odoriferous Perfumes. The same Ceremonies
were also strictly observed by all the Emperor's Wives and Concubines,
Children, Nephews, and prime Persons of his Palace. The Emperor also commanded
that the Deceased's Apparel, Beds and Furniture should be burnt, judging it to
be a disgrace to suffer any Person of a lower Degree to make use of them. The
third day the Empress was laid in the Chest wherein she was to be buried. The
Chest, or Coffin being very large, and of thick Boards, was made of the best
and most costly Wood that could be got in the whole Empire, and made fast with
Silver Plates and Handles in form of Dragons: the Boards, neither Painted nor
Gilt, were curiously rubbed, the Cover only Plated with Gold. The Emperor
himself laid out the Body on a Quilt with a Pillow made for that purpose, and
threw an unvaluable Treasure of Pearls and Precious Stones upon it, and placed
fifty Pieces of Gold, and fifty Pieces of Silver Cloth on each side thereof.
This being done, and the Coffin locked up, the Emperor and his Attendants showed
Reverence again to the Corpse. The fourth day renewing their Ceremonies, they
put on their Mourning Apparel; at which time the Coffin stood in a large Court
on a raised Ascent, in a manner like a Throne, with fifteen Tables about it;
the first stood before the Emperor, the rest before his Women, Children, and
chiefest Allies, which all in their Qualities after the Emperor Offered
Perfumes. The fifth day was ordered foe those that were without; first all the
Nobility, or Gentry, called Que Cum Chu Cheu Heupi, Habited in their honorable
Robes, came to the Palace; after them all the Empresses Favorites, viz. those
that were Married to her Daughters or Neeces; and lastly the Mandarins of the
six Courts of Judicature, whose Authority extends through the whole Empire,
every one Clothed according to his Quality, and what suited his Employment'
Military or Civil. All these showed Reverence to the Corpse in the same manner
as is already related: which ended in the Palace, several Edicts were
published, the Contents whereof were as follows, viz.

I. That all the Mandarins, as well Military as Civil, should on the following
day appear in the Palace to Mourn for the Empresses Death, which being done,
they should immediately go again to their Houses and Courts of Judicature, and
there spend three days in abstaining from Flesh, Fish, Eggs, and Wine; that the
following three days they should attend at the Palace Gate, and one by one come
and visit the Corpse, with due Reverence and shows of great Sorrow; after which
every one might return home. II. That all the Mandarins Wives of the four first
Orders, should for three days be there present in Mourning Apparel from Head to
Foot, and bewail the Empresses Death, strictly forbidding to Dress themselves,
or wear Jewels in their Houses during twenty seven days. III. That those of the
Emperor's Council, called Hanlim, should make Epitaphs and Funeral Orations in
praise of the Empress. IV. That the Quanlosu, which are the Overseers of the
Emperor's Treasury, should without delay pay all the Charge which would be
requisite for the Offerings and Funeral. V. That the Bonzies should Toll the
Bells of their several Temples, as a sign of Mourning and Sorrow. VI. That no
Meat should be sold in the Markets for seventeen days, and every one Fast,
according to the Emperor's Example, who for the three first days did eat only
a little Rice and Water, and all his Retinue nothing but Roots. VII. The prime
Councellor of their Laws was commanded to give Mourning to all Ambassadors and
Agents then present at the Court, and bring them to the Palace to show
Reverence to the Corpse according to the Custom of the Country. VIII. That all
the Mandarins which had Served out the time of their Employments, or those that
aimed at other Places, should also come to the Palace and show Reverence, and
perform their Duty in Mourning over the Corpse three days. IX. That the Freemen
of the City should come every Morning and Evening for the space of a whole Week
to the chief Governor's Palace, and there show Reverence.
They also sent Letters to all the Mandarins distributed through all the
Provinces and Cities of the Empire, that after they had received tidings of the
Empresses Decease, they should use all means possible to make their Relations,
both Men, Women and Children show Reverence, by three times kneeling and bowing
of their Heads, and besides other Ceremonies Mourn twenty seven days.

This Order is expressly given to all Mandarins, as well those that are in
Office as others, whether Civil or Military. It is likewise Ordered, that the
Burgesses shall wear a Mourning Hat for the space of thirty days. They also
forbid that any Instruments should be touched, either in the Mandarins Palaces
or Houses, or in any Place wherein Travelers are Lodged upon the Emperor's
Charge. This was proclaimed by certain Mandarins that follow no other
Employment.

After all these Ceremonies before the Funeral, the great Magician at the Court
in Peking, was commanded to choose the Days wherein the remaining Funeral Pomp
was to be solemnized. After much study and care he pitched upon the ninth day
of the sixth Moon, being four Months after the Empresses Death, for the Coffin
to be carried out of the Palace, and the fifteenth of the same Month to the
Grave. The time being come, the following Order was published, to be observed
at the Funeral.

I. That all the Mandarins of the Court should with the chief Counselors, six
days before go out of their Houses into their several Chambers at Court, and
there fast three days, as is before mentioned. II. That the Receivers of the
Emperor's Revenues should prepare all Necessaries, as Torches, Perfumes, Images
of Men, Horses, Lions, Elephants, Silk Umbrella's, and other Ornamentals, to be
burnt at the Grave: The Charge whereof was said to amount to thirty thousand
Escu's. III. That the Lords of the Council Hanlim should make new Funeral
Elegies. IV. Because the Emperor intending to accompany the Corpse to the Grave
about seven Leagues from the Palace, happened to be somewhat indisposed, he
would send a Grand Courtier in his stead, to perform that necessary Duty. V.
The Martial Officers must keep Watch in the City, and by the Grave, and also to
guard the Corpse thither. At every Gate of the City (which were nine) stood a
thousand Armed Men, from the Place where the Corpse lay to the Grave, the way on
both sides was Guarded by Soldiers. Three thousand conducted the Body, and
forty thousand were chosen to Watch by the Grave during the whole time of the
Funeral Ceremonies.

VI. All the Streets from the Palace to the Grave must be Railed in, that there
may be a free Passage on each side to prevent crowding; and likewise at the end
of every twenty Paces must stand Baskets with yellow Sand, to damp the Dust
from rising in those Places through which the Corpse was to be carried, besides
Tents and Pavilions for the convenience of those that followed the Horse. VII.
The Commanders of the Treasury had Order to provide Money to pay the Mandarins,
Relations, Commanders, Soldiers, and all those that attended the Funeral. VIII.
That three days before the Burial they should renew their Mourning, showing
Reverence, and making Offerings as they had done at the beginning.
All things thus prepared, the Emperor and the Prince his Son, went with all
his Officers to the Temple of their Predecessors, which is in the Imperial
Palace, where the Emperor in close Mourning showed Reverence to the first
raiser of his Family, and Offered many Silk Coats and Wine to the Deceased.
Then he caused a Book to be read, which had been written in the praise of them;
which being with many other Ceremonies performed, they returned to the Palace,
whilst by the Emperor's Order, Coats and other Ornamentals were thrown into the
Fire and burnt.

During the eight days which were yet remaining they Offered to the Heavens,
Earth, Planets, Mountains and Streams. Then Reverence was also shown by the
Emperor's Order to the Spiritual Protectors of the nine Palace Gates, through
which the Corpse was to be carried. The like also was done to the six Bridges of
the River which runs before the Palace, Offering at all those Places Beasts,
Wine, and Perfumes.

The Coffin with the Corpse was placed on a triumphal Arch, richly wrought and
hung with Silk, interwoven with Gold, and in many places Plated with Gold,
Engraven with Lions, Dragons, and the like; about it stood a great many
Torches, and Vessels with Perfumes. The fifth day appointed by the Magician to
carry out the Corpse, the Emperor appeared, with his Wives, Children, and
Allies, at the Place where the Chariot stood. Having cried for the Deceased, he
Offered to their God of the Spirits so to conduct her, that she might have a
happy Journey to the Enjoyments of Peace and Quietness. Those that were
commanded to attend the Corpse in the Name and Place of the Emperor, and to make
Offerings at the appointed Places, were all in a readiness under the first
Gate, where they no sooner received the Hearse, but they began to walk in such a
handsome Order, State, and Silence, as was wonderful to behold: Getting that day
no farther than without the Walls, where stopping at the appointed Place they
put the Corpse under a Pavilion, made Offerings on Tables placed for that
purpose, burnt Perfumes, and performed all other Ceremonies; which no sooner
done, but a Messenger was sent to the Emperor, to inform him that they were got
thither and had performed their Duties. The following day they began with those
Ceremonies with which they had ended the last Night, and then proceeded on
their Journey, which lasted thirteen days, because of the Offerings and stops
which they made by the Way to the Mount, where the Emperors Tombs are. The
concourse of People from all Places was so great, that they were past number.
When the whole Train was come thither, the Corpse was taken off from the
Chariot, and placed upon another stately and triumphal one, no less costly than
the first. Then they offered a Steer, which they sprinkled with Wine, besides
Coats and Perfumes, to the honor of the Earth, with Prayers to the God of the
Spirits, that he would receive the Corpse. At the same time nine Mandarins, sent
from the Emperor, observed the like Ceremonies, and Offered to all the
Emperor's Predecessors that lay in that Place. On the Funeral day, being the
fifteenth day of the sixth Moon, they made several Offerings to conclude their
Ceremonies; of which, and what they had done by the Way, they gave an Account
to the Emperor, who showed his bounty to those that had been careful in the
observing of them, and expressed his Affection to his Mother in showing
Reverence to her after her Death, and for her sake released all Prisoners that
had committed but small Crimes. It was also Ordered, that those Provinces which
were too highly Taxed should have an Abatement. He took off likewise many
Impositions laid upon Imported Goods, and distributed with his own Hands many
thousands of Ducats, wrapped up in Paper according to the Custom of the
Country, being all in honor to the Soul of the Deceased.

With the same Ceremonies a Chinese Emperor's Funeral was solemnized.

When an Emperor lies on his Deathbed, and that the Physicians begin to Semedo.
despair of his Recovery, the Colaos or chief Relations, and the prime
Controller of the Palace, called Suikien, come to visit him, and to know his
will and pleasure from his own Mouth, and the Contents of his Testament: Then
they privately go to the Prince which is Heir to the Crown, and consult with
him, that they may do nothing against his will, who is ready to enter on the
Throne. Being thus informed of the one thing and the other, they write down the
Will and bring it to the Emperor, that he may approve and allow of it: from
thence they go and show it to the prime Councellor called Hanhyuen, who
ingrosses all the Emperor's Business; which being done, the Will is Sealed with
the Imperial Seal, and kept in the Star Chamber belonging to the Emperor^
Council so long as the Emperor lives.: after his Decease they show it to the
Court of Judicatory, that they may proclaim it in all Places of the Empire, and
observe it punctually.

Most of the Inhabitants in the Province of Iunnan, by reason of their
Neighborhood Mart. A^l. Sin.
with the Indians, lay the dead Corpse on Heaps of Wood, and burn it; but those
that study the Chinese Philosophy observe the Customs of the other Chinese,
and use Coffins. But though they burn their Dead, yet they consume not living
Persons with them as the Indians do; for the Chinese account it barbarous, and
not to be admitted amongst the Laws of civilized Men.

The Inhabitants of the City Sintien, in the Province of Queicheu, express
great sorrow for either Father or Mothers Death, by cutting off the Hair of
their Heads.

The Chinese, as Martinius witnesses, are no less curious than superstitious
in choosing the Ground for their Graves, judging that all their Fortune and
Happiness depends upon it, because of a Being for the Dragon, to whom they
ascribe their Salvation; wherefore they observe the shapes of the Hills on
which they intend to make their Graves, and Dig up the Ground, not sparing
either Cost or Charge, hoping to find the Head, Heart, or Tail of a Dragon: for
they believe that thereby all Happiness and good Fortune will attend the
Deceased's Successors.

Many People experienced in this Art, go through all China, and observe the
shapes of Hills, just as the Astronomers take their view of the Stars.

Government.
IN the first Age before the general Deluge, the Government of China was
divided amongst Tribes or Families, and the chief of every Tribe had his own
Government, after the same manner as the ancient Fathers Abraham and Lot; but
since Anno 2952. before the Birth of our Savior, they have been Governed by
one sole Monarch or Emperor: for the Names of the two other Forms of
Government, viz. Aristocracy and Democracy, the Chinese had never heard of:
Nay, the Netherland Agents that were sent Anno 1655. to the Great Cham, Emperor
of East-Tartary and China, had great trouble with the Chinese and Tartars, to
make them understand the two last Forms of Government, which they could not
apprehend.

The Emperor of China is sole Master of the Lives, Goods and Chattels of all
his Subjects, he only being chief Lord of all; wherefore the Empire of China
may justly be called A perfect and absolute Monarchy.

It is without doubt, that in ancient times under one supreme Governor Trigaut.
were several substitute Lords, as Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and the like; but
eighteen or nineteen hundred years since those Titles of peculiar Governments
and Power, were at once taken away and rooted out: only in the Province of
Iunnan are free Lords or Dukes to this day, that have their peculiar Dominions,
which is in no Place else in China: Yet they acknowledge the Emperor, but
Govern with an arbitrary Power over their Countries, and succeed each other in
their Government.

The Emperors, according to an ancient Custom yet in force, regard not Martin*
Histor. Sin. l. 7.
their Subjects, but look upon them as Slaves, though they are or have been
never so great Magistrates: for because the sole Government consists in the
Power of one only, they esteem themselves Masters of every Man's Goods, and
likewise of the Lives of their Subjects; therefore no Honor or Preeminency is
given but by the Emperor, neither is the ascent to the greatest Place of
Dignity locked up from any sort of People, though the scum of the Commonalty,
but opened to every one at the Emperor's pleasure* for which reason he is by
every one honored as a God, on whom all things depend, and by his severe
Government is terrible, and to be feared. From hence it often proceeds, that
for the smallest occasion, the most deserving Persons are by him bereaved of
their Employments, and others punished with Death, especially those whose
Valor and Experience in Martial Affairs may upon the least suspicion be
feared. This is not unknown to Colonels and Generals, especially the Grandees
which Command great Armies; who for that reason are no less mistrustful of the
Emperor than he suspicious of them: from whence they often rise to a Rebellion
or Mutiny; for if they after a Conquest against their Enemy have discharged
their Soldiers, they know they cannot escape death: which not deserving, they
will rather choose to make themselves to be feared by their valiant and heroic
Exploits: from whence in the time of War arise continual Mutinies in China; and
the greater the Mutinies be, the fiercer they are maintained by every one
without respect of faithfulness.

The Chinese, before the Europeans coming thither, firmly believed that their
Martin.
Empire contained almost the whole World: not reckoning their neighboring
Kingdoms, they made their Emperor Governor of the whole terrestrial Globe and
called him Lord of all.

According to Semedo, the Ladies of Honor, Relations and others belonging to
the Palace, call the Emperor Chu, and sometimes Tienzu, that is, Son of Heaven;
not that they believe him to be born in Heaven, but that they look upon the
Empire as the Gift of Heaven: and also to make the Respect due to the Imperial
Majesty the greater, and to seem sacred.

The Chinese Emperor, says Father Martin, is by his Subjects called Tienzu,
that is, Son of Heaven; not that they derive his Original from thence, or that
he was born there; but they call him Son of Heaven, because he is beloved above
all other Men, and has on Earth given him (as they say) the greatest Dignity
Heaven can afford: And because the Chinese oftentimes take Heaven, God, and
the supreme Godhead to be all one, therefore The Son of Heaven is as much as to
say with them, The Son of God. Thus far Martinius.

But the common and most esteemed Name of the Emperor is Hoangti, or Hoamti,
that is, according to Semedo and Trigaut, Emperor, or Supreme Emperor; but
according to Martinius, Sole Emperor, or Emperor of the Earth; which they say
is of a yellow color, for a distinction from Zangti, that is, Supreme Emperor,
or God, the Governor of Heaven and Earth.

The first Emperor which was called Hoangti, Reigned in Anno 2690. before the
Birth of our Savior, for whose excellent Virtues and public Inventions, the
pleasing sound of his Name was so beloved, that ever since all their Princes
have been called Hoangti, as the German Emperors from their first, Caesar.

There are yet two other Names which have the same signification of King,
Semedo.
or Emperor, the one being Kium, which they use to name strange Kings by; and
the other Vam, which is a Name for the Emperor's Children; to which by adding
the word Kium they make a compound word Kiumvam, which signifies Imperial.

It is also to be observed, that a new chosen Emperor changes his Name, like a
new elected Pope, who takes upon him the Name of some of his Predecessors in
stead of his own.

This Name of the Emperors, which they write in all manner of Proclamations,
and on their Coin, is taken from a peculiar Person, Extracted of Royal-Blood.

Martinius tells us, That all those of the Imperial Blood, or Family, are by
Atl. Simns.
the Chinese called Fansu, as also by the Tartars, only with addition of the
Letter r, which the Chinese cannot pronounce, and that Fansur, or Facsur; and
Fansu or Fansur signifies a Royal or Imperial House.

The Empire of China, from Anno 2207. before the Birth of our Savior, has had
a Successive and Hereditary Government; for at the Fathers Death, the eldest
Son Succeeds; and if there be no Male-Heir, then the nearest Relation.

If the Empress, (says Semedo) the lawful Wife of the Emperor has a Son, in
what time soever he be Born, he takes place before all those that are Begotten
by his Concubines, though Born before him; but if the Empress has no Son, then
the Firstborn, or eldest of a Concubine (who e're she be) is always Elected.

But Anciently, from Anno 2992. to Anno 2207. before the Birth of our Savior,
the nine first Emperors were elective and chosen by the most Voices, and took
not by Succession; but after the Death of the ninth Emperor, You, his Son Khi,
the Founder of the Family of Hia, was for his goodness and great Deserts, by
general Suffrage, confirmed Emperor in his Fathers stead; so that the Custom
of Election was changed to true and lawful Succession by Birth.

Sometimes it has happened (though very seldom) that the youngest Son,
contrary both to the Laws of Nature and the Realm, was declared Emperor, either
for his extraordinary Valor or Prudence; as Anno 209. before the Birth of
Christ, it happened to the Emperor Ulxi, who after his Father Cin's Death, was
chosen Emperor in stead of his eldest Brother F^sa.

When the eldest Son has taken Possession of the Throne, the rest only boast
of their Princely Alliance, for they have not in the least any Authority; yet
the Emperor gives them each a City to reside in, with a Magnificent Palace,
Attendants, and Revenues, where they keep Court in great State, and are served
accordingly, yet have no Command of the Citizens; and that they might not have
so much together, as to enable them to raise a Commotion, the Emperor's
Allowance is paid them every three Months, and on forfeiture of their Lives,
they may not stir out of the Limits of the City, so designed for their
subsistence.

The Empire has sometimes also been Governed by a Woman, for Anno 490. Martin.
Histor. Sini^.
before the Nativity of Christ, the Emperor Lieupang's Consort, after the Death
of Hoci her Son, Governed the Country eight years.

At the Election of a new Emperor, thirteen Contingencies are to be (...).
observed.

The first is the alteration of annual Accounts, for they begin to reckon from
the Inauguration of their new Emperor, which they use not only in common
Discourses, but in their Letters, and all manner of Writings: The Emperor also
gives his Name to that Year in which he begins to Reign; for we must Martin.
observe, that all the Years of any Emperor's Reign, when soever they die, are
reckoned for whole Years, and so make his Coronation the New-Years-Day, that
is, the beginning of the Year; and yet, though the Chinese immediately, and in
the same Year have another, yet they still show Honor and Obedience to the late
Emperor, though Dead, till the Years end, doing all things in his Name; and
likewise all Edicts and Proclamations are Sealed and Marked with the same
Signets, as if he were still living; but the Successor gives his Name to the
following Year.

The second, they instantly Coin new Money, with the Letters of his Name,
Semed^.
which does not abate any thing of the value of the old Coin.

The third, his Lawful Wife is Crowned Empress.

The fourth, they give the Name of Queen to six of his Concubines.

The fifth, they make Offerings to the Heavens, Earth, and Spirits.

The sixth, they bestow great Alms on the Poor.

The seventh, all Prisoners are set at liberty.

The eighth, all the Magistrates are nobly Treated.

The ninth, all the Women that were Concubines before, are put out of the
Palace.

The tenth, the Seraglioes, which are four in number, are filled with fresh
Beauties fetched from all parts of the Empire; during which time there are many
Marriages, because every one seeks to free his Daughter from such a retired
Life.

The eleventh, Persons of Quality, if not all, at least those of Cities, either
come themselves, or send Agents to show Obedience, and acknowledge the new
Emperor.

The twelfth, all Officers from the Viceroys to the inferior Governors of
Cities, go in Person to the Court, to show the same Obedience, and take the
Oath of Allegiance in behalf of their Towns and Provinces.

The thirteenth is, that the Emperor changes his own Name, as is
beforementioned.

The Reverence which the Chinese anciently showed to their Kings, they
performed in this manner.

They Prostrate themselves to him, bowing down their Bodies, and looking Martin
Sin* Histor. l. 4.
with their Faces to the North, for they say, that their Kings look always to
the South; for which reason all the Gates of their Palaces, Doors of Chambers,
and all Draw-Bridges face the South; from whence proceeds a Proverb, That the
Chinese, though at great distance, always honor their King, when with usual
Ceremonies they receive their Guests.

They say, that the Tartar Prince, who at this day possesses the Country of
China, and resides in the Metropolis Peking, is not the great Cham or Lord of
all Tartary, as has hitherto been believed, but a mean Prince of the Tartars,
whose Grandfather was the first King of his Family, promoted to that Dignity
by the Inhabitants of his Country, which was only a small Province in Tartary
called Muncheu.

The Father of this present Emperor, called Zunchi, was the fifth of his
Family; his Fortune seemed to be so strange in the Eyes of other Princes of his
Country, that they compared him to As the Rom^s called Scip^o Africanus the
Thunderbolt of War.
Lightning, when e're they spoke of him, for they usually said, that the Gods
and Heavens could only prevent him in any thing.

The present Emperor Zunchi's Son is called Konchi, a Youth, of about sixteen
years.

The first Ruler, of whom the Chinese make mention in their Histories, was
named Puoncu; and after him Tienhoang, Ginhoang, and Yonjui; but in those times
the Provinces were governed by the Heads of their Princical Families.

The first Emperors that before the Birth of our Savior Governed China, and
were Elected and set on the Throne by most Voices, were eight in number, viz.
from the Year before the Nativity of Christ 2952. to the Year 2207. before
which the Chinese allow of none in their Histories, which in that time are
stuffed with many strange and fabulous Relations, as well concerning the Age of
Men, as Years of the Governors; for if we will credit their Writers, the World
stood many Thousands of Years before the Deluge.

The first Emperor was

Before Christ's Birth. Reigned Years. 2952 I. Fohi 115 2837 II. Xinnung 140
2697 III. Hoangti 100 2597 IV. Xaohau 84 2513 V. Chuenhio 78 2435 VI. Ko 70
2357 VII. Ya 90 2258 VIII. Xan 33

After Xun, the Empire was Governed by Hereditary Succession, and the first
House or Family Hia was raised under the Emperor You, which continued four
hundred Years under seventeen Emperors, viz.

Before Christ's Nativity. Reigned Years. 2207 I. You 10 2197 II. Khi 9 2188 III.
Taikang 29 2159 IV. Chumkang 13 2146 V. Siang 27 2058 VI. Xaokang 22 2057 VII.
Chu 17 2040 VIII. Hoai 26 2014 IX. Mang 18 1996 X: Is 16 1980 XI. Pukiang 59
1821 XII. Kung 21 1800 XIII. Kin 21 1769 XIV. Cungkia 31 1848 XV. Ka 11 1838
XVI. Fau 19 1818 XVII. Kie 52

After the Family Hia, the House of Xang succeeded, being first raised by the
Emperor Tang, from whom sprung twenty eight Emperors, viz.

Before the Birth of Christ. Reigned Years. 1766 I. Tang 13 II. Taikia 33 1720
III. Voting 92 1691 IV. Taikeng 25 1666 V. Siaokia 17 1659 VI. Iungie 12 1641
VII. Taiu 75 1562 VIII. Chungting 13 1549 IX. Vaigni 15 1534 X. Hotankia 9 1525
XI. Zuie 19 1506 XII. Zusini 16 1490 XIII. Vokia 25 1464 XIV. Zuting 32 1433
XV. Nankeng 25 1408 XVI. Yangkia 7 1401 XVII. Puonkeng 28 1373 XVIII. Siaosini
21 3352 XIX. Siaoye 18 1324 XX. Vuting 59 1265 XXI. Zukeng 7 1258 XXII. Zukia 2
1225 XXIII. Linsin 63 1219 XXIV. Kenting 21 1198 XXV. Uvye 4 1194 XXVI. Taiting
3 1191 XXVII. Tiye 37 1154 XXVIII. Che 33

After the subduing of the House of Xang, rose the Family Cheu, Anno 1122. and
flourished till Anno 247. before our Saviors Nativity, under thirty seven
Emperors.

The first of them was a Prince called Fa, who when he enjoyed the Crown,
changed his Name to V, which signifies Valiant; and they say, that from him all
the Emperors since, at their entering on the Throne change their Names.

He possessed, in the Province Xensi, a Country named Cheu, from whence the
Family received their Denomination.

Before Christ's Birth. Reigned Years. 1078 I. Fa, or U, 7 1115 II. Ching 38
1122 III. Kang 26 1056 IV. Cha 51 1001 V. Mo 55 946 VI. Cung 12 934 VII. Is 25
894 VIII. Hia 15 896 IX. Is 16 878 X. Li 38 827 XI. Siveni 46 781 XII. Ie 11
770 XIII. Ping 51 719 XIV. Vou 23 696 XV. Chuang 15 631 XVI. Li 5 676 XVII.
Hoei 25 651 XVIII. Siang 33 618 XIX. Hiang 6 612 XX. Quang 6 606 XXI. Fing 21
585 XXII. Kien 14 571 XXIII. Ling 27 544 XXIV. King 25 519 XXV. King 44

Between which was the Emperor Menguen, who Reigned scarce a Month.

Reigned Years. 475 XXVI. Yuen 7 468 XXVII. Chinting 27 440 XXX. Ka 15

Ka is accounted the thirtieth, for after Chintung's Death, his other Sons
being Kiucie and Xocie, attempted for the Empire, and in that regard were
accounted, as being two, viz. the twenty eighth and twenty ninth, because they
acted for some time; but at last. Ka mastering them, became absolute, and so
was reckoned the thirtieth.

Reigned Years. 542 XXXI Gueilie 24 401 XXXII Began 26 375 XXXIII Lie 7 368 XXXIV
Hien 48 322 XXXV Xicini 6 314 XXXVI Fo 59 254 XXXVII Cheukuni 9

After the House of Cheu, came the Family Cin, under their Advancer Ching, who
was afterward called Xi, in the Year 246. and continued but to Anno 206.

Reigned Years. 246 I. Ching, or Xi 37 209 II. Ulxi 3 206 III. Ing 46

After the Family Cin, the House of Han followed, which flourished till Anno
264. after Christ. The first Raiser of this House, was

Before the Nativity. Reigned Years. 206 I. Lieupang, or Kaozu 17 194 II. Hoei
7 187 III. Liuheva, a Woman 8 179 IV. Veni 23 156 V. Hiaoking 16 140 VI. Hiaou
54 86 VII. Hiaoche 12 74 VIII. Ho 7 73 IX. Siveni 25 48 X. Iuen 16 32 XI. Ching
26 6 XII. Ngay 6

These are the Names of the Emperors, every one in their Families, before the
Birth of our Savior, according as they are written in the Chinese Chronicles,
Translated into Latin by Father Martyn; but those that have Reigned since the
Incarnation, I have received no account of, being not yet rendered to us in any
other Language.

After the Family of Han arose that of Cyn, and flourished after the Birth of
Christ, till Anno 1419. At the same time were also five Kings, called Utai,
which maintained War against one another, till by their Ruin, the Family Tang
took upon them the sole Government of China, which they kept till Anno 618.

In the Year 923. the Family Sung succeeded that of Tang, and Reigned over all
China, till Anno 1278. when this House was utterly subdued by the Tartars, who
set up the Family of Iuen, which Governed China till 1368. in which Year rose
the House of Taiming, from a Priest called Chu, who drove the Tartars out of
China; but this Family was The Monarch of England, and Empire of China,
^anslated and changed at once.
Anno 1644. destroyed, and by a huge Rebellion, the East Tartars of Munchu,
were invited to Aid the Prince, but the way once opened, they swallowed all,
and from their Prince named the whole Empire of China, Taising.

The Magistrates or Governors in China, taken in general, are of two Degrees or
Orders; the first are such, as not only in the Metropolis officiate the places
of Privy Counselors, but from thence have influence over the whole Empire; the
other are such as Govern peculiar Provinces or Cities.

The general Government, or that of the first Degree, are by Alvarez Semedo
described in the following words:

The Prime Government of China consists in six Benches, Chambers, or Courts,
which by a general Name are called Like our King's Bench, or Superior Courts of
Judicature.
Pu, that is, The Kings Benches.

These manage not only the Affairs of the Realm, in the Courts where they
reside, but like the Head, on which all the other depend, Rule, and give Orders
to them, according to their several places.

Every Council has his President, which they call Chamxu, with two Assistants,
the one named Koxilam, who is the Chief, and sits on the left Hand, (by them
counted most honorable;) and the other Yeuxilam.

These are the first and most profitable Offices of the Empire, except that of
Kolao's; so that a Tutang or Viceroy of what Province so e're it be, after he
has given Testimony of his Capacity, if he would be Promoted, thinks himself
well provided for, though not a Prime Councellor, to be only one of the
Assistants, that sit on the left, or right Hand.

Besides these, there is a Council of Ten, which are of equal Dignity, only
distinguished by several Titles, and deciding of different Causes: To these are
to be added, the vast numbers of greater and lesser Officers, as Notaries,
Secretaries, Clerks, Servants, Officers, and such as we call Bailiffs, besides
many others, not known in Europe,

The first Council or Court which have the greatest Command, and receive the
highest Presents and greatest Fees, are the Council of State, called Lipu, that
is properly, Council of Magistrates, for Pu signifies a Council, and Li
Magistrates.

To these belong all the Offices in the Empire, to change or promote them; for
he who is once in an Employment, rises continually by degrees to higher
Dignities.

They have also Power to restore those to their Employments that are displaced;
as if a Mandarin is for some Misdemeanor put out of his place, he may easily
obtain it again, if he be in favor with this Council.

The second Bench is called Pimpu, that is, Council of War, which have as great
a Command as those of State, viz. over all the Militia, with the Schools and
Academies, and for instruction of Youth in Martial Discipline, and the Exercise
of Arms.

The third is of the Customs, called Limpu, which though not of great Commands,
yet they are of no less Quality, for the Mandarins in which it consists, are
chosen out of the Emperor's Council Hanlin, which are next to the Kolao's, the
Prime place of Honor in China.

This Council has knowledge of all Letters, and likewise of Ecclesiastical
Affairs, Bonzies, Strangers, and the like.

The fourth Council is that of the Emperor's Revenues, called Hupu, which take
care to get in the Emperor's Treasure, Customs, Farms, and in general, all
things that bring in Money.

The fifth, called Cumpu, look after all business of Building and Architecture,
and especially what belongs to the Emperor's Palace, or those of his Children
and Officers; as also the Walls and Gates of the City, Highways, and Bridges.

The same Council are also to take care that the Rivers be cleans'd, and Ships
furnished with Necessaries, when sent out upon the Emperor's Service.

The sixth Chamber called Himpiu, that is, Council of Justice, are to punish
Malefactors, and pass Sentence of Life and Death on Criminals.

The same Councels or Chambers the Jesuit Nicolas Trigaut has described almost
after the same manner in the following words.

The Prime Counselors or Courts are six in number.

The first called Lipu, signifies, The Bench of the Magistrates.

This Council exeeeds all the rest, for they name or choose all the Magistrates
of the Philosophic, or Learned Order of the whole Realm, which are accounted
the most eminent, and continually rise higher and higher, if they have in their
Inferior Offices made but the least Proofs of their Virtue and good Behavior;
and on the contrary, if they commit but one Fault, they are bereaved of their
Employments, or put into meaner Offices.

The first choice consists in the excellent Writing in Chinese Characters, of
which, this Court judges.

The second Council (by Semedo the fourth) is called Hopu, that is, The Court
of Revenue, or Exchequer, which have the Command of the Empires Revenue and
Taxes, gathering Customs, paying Soldiers, and the like.

The third Council is called Lipu, that is, The Council, or Court of
Ceremonies, which takes care for Common Offerings, Temples, Priests, the
Emperor's Women, Schools, examining of the Learned, Weddings, and other
Ceremonies to be performed to the Emperor, on certain times and occasions.

The same Council also give Titles of Honor to deserving Persons; encourage
Artificers; send Noblemen to meet Ambassadors, and return Answers to Letters
directed to the Emperor; who looks upon it as a great disgrace to write a
Letter with his own Hand, either to one in, or without his Dominions.

The fourth called Pimpu, which signifies, Council of War, Command over Civil
and Military Affairs, which concern the Safety and Defense of the Empire, yet
they cannot resolve on any thing, without the Emperor's consent and knowledge.

This Council bestows all Military Offices, removing Cowards, and putting in
Valiant Men; and likewise, honor the deserved with great Titles.

The fifth called Cumpu, that is, The Council over all manner of Buildings,
look to the Erecting of public Structures and Palaces, for the Emperor, his
Allies, and Magistrates; and likewise to the building of his Ships, and Rigging
out of whole Navies, and the repair of Bridges and Walls about the City.

The sixth Council, called Humpu, are Judges, to Determine and Debate of
Criminals, and all manner of Differences: The whole business of Judicatory in
all the Empire depending on this Court, for they have in every Province and
City, appointed Magistrates and Clerks, which advise them faithfully of all
Transactions; so that they in this their Office, being of great concern, have
no small trouble, but that the great number of Deputies which they employ under
them, ease them of the most part; for there is a Chief Justice of the whole
Court, whom they call Ciamcui, which has two Assistants, one sits on his
right, and the other on his left Hand, being named Cilam, which three Persons
in the Metropolis Peking, are accounted amongst the greatest in Quality, and
according to their pleasure, every Court is divided into several Degrees;
besides these, all Courts have their Secretaries, Clerks, Messengers, and other
Servants.

The Emperor Ya, who began to Reign before the Birth of our Savior, Anno 2357.
first established these six Courts, according to the Relation of Father Martin,
in his first Book of the History of China, wherein he says,

Afterward the Emperor Ya brought the State of China to a new and better form,
by establishing six Courts: One of which is called Lipu, which takes Cognizance
of the Well-behaving, or Mis-behaving of the Magistrates, and to bestow on
every one according to their Merits, either higher Dignities, or else bereave
them of their Places.

The second is called Pingpu, that is, Council of War, or Prime Martial Court,
which have the same Command over the Martial Officers, as the former over the
Civil.

The third is Lipu, that is, A Court of Ceremonies, or Customs, who Supervise
Ecclesiastic Affairs, Offerings, entertaining foreign Ambassadors, and other
such like Businesses.

The fourth is called Hupu, which Receive, and render an Account of the
Emperor's Revenue.

The fifth is called Cumpu, which take care to look after the Repairing and
Building of public Structures, the Emperor's Palaces, Walls of the Cities,
Rivers, Ships, and Highways, that they may not be Dirty or Incommodious.

The sixth is Hingpu, or Court of Justice, where all Causes relating to Life
and Death are Determined; which Courts being so Constituted by the Emperor Ya,
Govern the whole Empire of China in good Order, and acknowledge no Superior but
the Emperor and the Kolaos.

According to others, the Privy-Councel consists in six Persons, who never
Consult but about Weighty Matters of State. This Council or Assembly is called
Loepol; each of these has his peculiar Chamber, and is also the Head of
another Court, in which the businesses of his Camber are Debated: These
Counselors take as many to their Assistants as they judge necessary.

The first of these is President of the Council of State, and his Assembly is
called Lipol.

The second has Charge of all Warlike businesses, Revenues of the Empire, and
has also Power to give Commissions.

The third looks after Architecture, keeping an account of what Edifices are
yearly built in the Empire; and likewise of the Charges expended in Repairing
of Towns, Forts, Highways, Streets, and Moats: This is called Congpol.

The fourth, which takes care of the Customs and Taxes of the Empire, are named
Olpol.

The fifth is (as we may call him) Lord-Chief-Justice, and Pronounces the
Sentences resolved on in his Court, called Ungpol.

The sixth and last has the Command of all Places and Offices of the
Magistrates, and gives them to those, who by their Learning, good Deportment,
and civil Carriage, are accounted the most Worthy.

In this manner the Government of China has continued many Ages, which after
the first Conquest by the Tartars, under the Emperor Xunchi, was not changed;
except, only adding to every one of the six Chinese Counselors, a Person of
his own Country; so that the Grand Council of the Realm consisted in twelve
Persons, all equally Commissioned as before-said.

These Counselors of State beforementioned, cannot resolve on any thing
without a general consent; therefore no business is concluded on, but by
Plurality of Voices: When the Assembly is broke up, and every Councellor
consults with his private Cabal; then a Tartar (as we said) is added to them;
but since that, in the Reign of the Emperor Konchi, the Chinese are put out of
all Offices, and the Tartars have wholly Appropriated them to themselves.

Besides these six, there are nine other Chambers or Benches, called Kieukim,
Semedo.
whose Offices are several, but they chiefly take care of the Emperor's
Household.

The first called Thailisu, that is, The Grand Exchequer, consists in thirteen
Mandarins, viz. one Prime Councellor, two Assistants, and ten inferior Judges;
This resembles the Chancery of the Realm, perusing all the Judgments given in
other Courts, and according to Equity disallowing or confirming the same.

The second called Quanlosu, that is, Comptroler of the Court, taking care for
the Emperor's Table, observing the Transactions of the Empress, Concubines, and
paying Wages to all Court-Officers, and others that follow public Employments;
entertaining foraign Ambassadors and the like Persons of Quality, and consists
of one Prime Councellor, two Assistants, and six petty Judges.

The third, Thaipocusu, is like the Master of the Horse, and takes care, not
only for the Horses for the Emperor's Service, but likewise (as
Post-Master-General) for all Posts, and in general, for all others which serve
the whole Empire. This consists in one prime Councellor, and six Assistants.

The fourth is that of the Ceremonies, performing all manner of Duties,
requisite at public Treats of the Emperor, Festivals, and at all other times
and occasions; and likewise those which are duly observed every Morning at the
going in and out of the Palace; and consists in one Prime Councellor, two
Grand, and six Inferior Assistants.

The fifth is that of the Customs in peculiar businesses; and though this
differs from the first, yet they observe the same things by the help of their
Assistants. They also take care to see due Offerings performed at the Emperor's
Grave; for Artificial Hills, Woods, and all things else; as likewise for
Singing-Boys, Musicians, and Beasts for the Oblations.

There is yet another Court of Justice, whose business is only to present the
Emperor with all manner of Memorials, and bringing them all together into the
Chancery, like the King's Remembrancers.

All manner of Businesses are shown the Emperor in Writing, according to
Martin* Histor* Sinic. l 9.
an ancient Custom of the Emperor Suven, who Reigned before the Birth of our
Savior, Anno 73. that the Emperor having considered thereof, he might the
better return his Answer in Writing; for it often happend (said he) that People
by fine Words, and pleasing Language, might persuade him to any thing, which
granting in a sudden humor, they had often cause to repent: From whence it
happens, that though the Emperors do seldom appear to their People, yet they
continually converse with them by Petitions or Letters.

To the six Counselors are to be added three more, the same in manner or
fashion, though differing in Offices and Employments.

Besides all these, there are yet two more; the one called Qholi, and the other
Tauli, and though both have their eyes over several Provinces, and every one
concern themselves with Businesses within their peculiar Spheres and Offices,
minding all Transactions and Disorders in the Empire. These Counselors, as it
is easy to tell of others Men's Faults, act them with great freedom, and
oftentimes commit many unjust Actions. Their manner of complaining in this
kind, is to make a Copy thereof, and to show it to the Emperor: Immediately
after the same (as they say, is Facheo) that is, Coppied out and delivered to
Clerks appointed for that purpose, which make several Writings of it, and send
them by Messengers through all the Empire, so that it is immediately known by,
and against what Person those Writings are published, and a large Description
of what he is. These Letters, which the Chinese call Iuen, thus published, the
Accused against whom it is written must immediately, Volens Nolens, do two
things, the first of which is to write a Petition, not to justify or excuse
himself, but to acknowledge that the Tauli had great Reason, and he in Fault;
that he has offended, for which he is sorrowful, and ready to undergo such
Punishment as they please to inflict upon him: The next is speedily to be gone
and leave his Place without farther intermedling, till the Emperor has given
his Answer to the Petition, which sometimes proves favorable, being permitted
to re-enjoy his Office; but otherwhiles the Emperor commands him to be punished
according to the greatness of his Crime.

It often happens, that a Mandarin by diligence in his Office, and observing
his Business more than ordinary, begets Enemies; and if any of these be
acquainted with, or allied to any Officers of these two Courts, then theydo his
Business immediately at Court, and send the Memorials from one to another, so
that the poor Mandarin is in a miserable condition, and especially if he be a
Judge, Deputy Governor, or over the Militia. Yet far greater trouble they have
with the Tauli and Qholi, who neglect not the least opportunity to prosecute to
such height, that the Emperor himself, though he have an inclination, cannot
free them.

Trigaut describes these two Councils, Qholi and Tauli, in the following manner:

Every one of them consists in above sixty Persons, all Philosophers, aged and
wise People, which before have made no small proofs of their Loyalty to the
Emperor and Realm.

These Consult of all private and public Affairs, which they Judge and
Determine, being thereto authorized by the Emperor's special Commission, which
makes them to be not a little honored and respected by the People. But above
all, their chiefest Office is to inform the Emperor by Letters, if any thing be
acted against the Laws, and also to tell the Emperor and his Allies of their
Faults.

This Office, in my Opinion, differs not much from the Lacedemonian Ephori; for
they never regard the Magistrates, nor miss to tell the Emperor of his
Misdemeanors, such is their Authority and Respect: And notwithstanding the
Emperor is often displeased with them, yet they cease not to admonish then by
words, till they have persuaded and made them sensible of their Errors.

This is likewise by the power of the Law priviledg'd to all Magistrates, and
not only to them, but every particular Substitute; yet the Petitions of the
Qholi and Tauli are most esteemed, because they do it merely as being their
Employment. The Copies of the Petitions, and the Emperor's Answer thereon, are
Printed in great quantities, whereby all Court Businesses are soon known in
several Places. There are those which make a Book of all the Petitions, Printed
as before; nay, if any thing be remarkable in them for their Predecessors, it
is writin the Chronicles.

These Governors used formerly an undaunted freedom and confidence in the
admonishing of their Kings and Emperors, when they saw them wander from the way
of Virtue, to the great admiration of the People of Europe, which are debarred
of this freedom. It is certain that these Governors understand the Mysteries of
Philosophy, and endeavor by all means possible to extol the Heavens by Praises,
and other acts of Devotion. It was not only in ancient times, but now also
customary amongst the Chinese, that the Governors, when their good
admonishment was not regarded by the Emperor, they laid down their Apparel and
Badges of their Offices before him, declaring publicly, that they would no
longer Serve in their Places; and the more boldly they throw them down, if the
Emperor designs any thing which they fear may prove prejudicial to the Realm,
and that he will not hearken to them.

It happened some years since, that the Emperor Vanlie, who clouded all his
Achievements by his insatiably lustful desires; for notwithstanding he had a
lawful Son, yet he would declare a Bastard to be Heir of the Empire: but the
Peers and Governors being against it, said they would not suffer so base an
Election; yet the Emperor not regarding their Saying, all the Magistrates that
were in the City, being to the number of two thousand, went to the Palace, and
forced him against his will, by laying off their Liveries, to declare the
lawful Heir to be Successor.

The like occasion happened Anno 1651. for when after the Death of the Guardian
and Uncle to the young Emperor, another Tartar would Govern, alleging that the
Emperor's Age was not fit for such a Management, all the Governors laid down
their Badges, whereby he was forced to desist: and in this manner a Youth of
sixteen years old called Xunghi, being the true Heir, took upon him the
Government.

Besides these Magistrates, or Privy-Councellors at the Court, there are
several Trigaut.
other Offices, or Council-Chambers, for diverse Businesses, but the chiefest
and most honorable is that which is called Hanlinyuen, into which none but
Learned Doctors are admitted.

Those which are in this Imperial Office, do nothing but Read several Books,
and may not trouble themselves with public Concerns, when as nevertheless they
exceed those that sit at the Helm, wherefore many endeavor greatly to get into
their Society. Their Business is only to write the Emperor's Letters, Annual
Chronicles, and to make Laws and Ordinances. Out of these are also chose the
Tutors for the Emperor's and Princes.

In this Society are several degrees of Honor, which every one attains to by
their writing a good Style; after which they are raised to the highest
Preferment within the Court. None are chose to be of that most eminent Office
of Colao, but out of them.

Those that are in this Society make great advantages by writing Epistles and
Encomiums of their Friends; nay, every one accounts himself happy if he can but
get them, bestowing great Charge and trouble to that end: for if they have but
the Name that they are made by them, they are accounted excellent, though never
so bad.

Lastly, those that are of this Society, are chief Counselors and Judges in
the Examinations of Causes, both Divine and Moral, and are by the Professors of
Sciences accounted Masters of Literature.

Besides all these Courts, there is one supreme Court, which is the chief in
Semedo.
the whole Empire. None can be received into this, unless they have been of the
Imperial Society called Hanlin, or Hanlinyuen before mentioned, and after they
have a considerable time been in Places of Government, and made sufficient
proofs of their Mildness, Policy and Prudence, and that no Letters of Complaint
have been set out against them. This Court consists of four, or at most of six
Persons, which are called Colaos and Coglogs.

The Emperor Vanlie, Grandfather to the Emperor Zunchin, would never suffer
more than one Colao, alleging that the rest were needless.

The Quality of Colao, to speak properly, is no peculiar Office, because they
take care of the general Government of the State, and are just like Supreme
Judges of all Courts and Dominions in the whole Empire, though they are never
all together but when they dispatch grand Business for the Emperor, who being
not always present upon the concluding, they are many times forced to be in the
Palace to answer those Petitions which are hourly brought to the Emperor. This
done, they are necessitated to find out the Emperor, and inform him of their
several Results; which having heard, he does Justice to the Parties, and
pronounces the ultimate Sentence, by either confirming or altering their
Conclusions.

These Colaos are in the highest esteem, and above all the Councels or
Magistrates, who at a certain time come and show Reverence to them as their
Superiors, in an open Hall. The Colaos during this Ceremony stand up, and all
the Officers according to their Degrees walk cross the Hall; coming before them
they turn about, and bow their Heads down to the Ground: which Ceremony is
called Quo Tham, that is, Passing through the Hall.

There is also a great difference betwixt the Colaos Robes and those of the
other Magistrates, for their Girdles are beset with Precious Stones, which they
call Yuxe, which none but Colaos may wear in the whole Empire; nay, they
receive their Orders by the Emperor's own Hand, as the Knights amongst us their
Honor from the King himself.

Father Nicholas Trigaut describes the Colaos Authority and Office in the
following words:

Besides these six Courts there is another, the most eminent in the whole Realm
and the Emperor's Palace: those which belong to it are called Colaos, and are
generally three or four in number, and sometimes six. They have charge of no
particular Business, but mind the general Concerns of the Empire, and sit in
private Consultation with the Emperor daily in his Palace. And in regard the
Emperor at present does not appear in Person at Treaties of public Affairs of
the Realm, which he formerly used to dispatch, they stay the whole day in the
Palace, and answer Petitions, which in great numbers are brought, according as
they think fit: with which Answers they go to the Emperor, who Regio Nutu, by
his Beck either confirms or alters them. Thus far Trigaut.

The like Quality and Office Father Martin ascribes to them in the following
(...). Hist. Sinens^s
words:

The six Courts, viz. Lypu, Hupu, Pingpu, Cungpu, Hingpu, are not concerned in
public Matters of the whole Realm, but only with private Consultations: for
the Governors make their Requests to the Emperor by way of Petition, who having
considered of the Business, sends them to every Court to which they belong, the
Assistants whereof, after serious Consideration, acquaint the Emperor with
their Opinons in Writing, which he then, according to his pleasure, I^m Histor.
Sinic.
either vacates or affirms; which that he may the better be able to do, he
chooses some of the prime Philosophers in the whole Empire for his Assistants,
who are called Colaos, or Caising, that is, Assistants in Government. These are
in the H^stor. Sinic.
next Degree to the Emperor, and aid him in dispatching of Business, Consulting
with him in Person, as being his Privy Council, for he is seldom seen by any
other Magistrates, Judges, Justices, or Counselors. Thus far Martin.

Those which the Chinese call Colao, we (if we observe the original of the
Name) should term Assistants to the Emperor; partly for their honorable
Employment, and partly as being next the Emperor, the prime Governors of the
whole Realm.

Thus far of the general Government and Councils, or Offices of the Realm,
which so long as the Empire was Governed by the Chinese, had their Residence
at the Courts in Nanking and Peking, for all the Councils and Magistrates which
are at the Imperial Court in Peking, were formerly (except the Colaos) in
Nanking, the Metropolis and Court of the ancient Chinese Princes; but they were
far below those in Peking, because of the Emperor's absence, who held his Court
in Peking, as at this day the Tartar, Emperor of China. The Court was removed
from Peking on this occasion:

The Emperor Humvu having driven out the Tartars Anno 1368. planted the Trigaut.
Seat of the Empire in Nanking. After his Decease one of his Nephews called
Yunlo, who in the Northern Provinces lay with an Army in the Borders of the
Empire as Viceroy, there to be a Guard against the Tartars, concluded to
bereave Humvu's Heir of the Crown, and make himself Master of it: To which
purpose having gotten the Northern Provinces to join with him, he came with his
Army to Nanking, and got the other. Provinces either by Policy, Strength or
Presents, and expelled Humvu's Son. But because Yunlo's greatest Strength and
Dependence was in the Northern Provinces, and that it was to be believed, that
the Tartars to re-gain the Empire would fall in on that Place, he settled
himself in that part of the Country, and in the same City in which the Tartar
Emperors, when they Governed the Chinese, had their Residence, there to resist
the Enemy if he should make any Attempt; yet still continued the Emperor's
Palace and the Magistrates in Nanking. But after the Conquest of China by the
Tartars, Anno 1644. the City of Nanking was bereaved of her Imperial Title, and
all the Magistrates belonging to the Emperor's Court; nay, the Palace of the
ancient Chinese Emperors, besides many stately Memorials were all pulled down
to the Ground, without any other damage to the City. The Tartars also changed
the Name of the City and Province, and in stead of Nanking called it Kiangnan;
and the City which formerly was called Intien, Kiangning. All which was done by
the Tartars out of an inveterate hatred against the Taimingian Family, because
Humvu, or Chu, the first raiser of that House, drove them or their Predecessors
shamefully out of the Empire, after they had possessed it a hundred and eight
years.

All the Magistrates, as well belonging to the Learned Council as Martial
Affairs, are by a general Name in the Chinese Tongue called Quonfu, that is, To
set before: but for their Quality and not their Office they are called Lavye,
or Lausu, or Lavja's, which signifies Lords, or Parents. The Netherlanders,
according to the example of the Portuguese, call them Mandarins, that is,
Commanders, or Governors, derived from the Portuguese word Mandarim, which is,
A Commander.

Notwithstanding all the Magistrates or Governors fly at the Emperor's Beck,
and have Orders amongst themselves, yet every one Serves in his Office with
full Power, except he be commanded to the contrary by his Superiors. There are
so many Governors in China, and Magistrates (they being, according to
Martinius, to the number of eleven thousand) that it is hard to know their
several Orders. For this reason five or six Books of a considerable bigness are
to be bought through the whole Empire, containing the Names of the public
Magistrates, and Governors of Provinces, with the Places of their Birth,
Employments and Quality. These Books, according to Martinius, are Reprinted
every three Months; which must be done of necessity, for in such great numbers
of Magistrates, without putting those into the Books that are of less Quality,
are daily great Changes, some dying, others put out of their Employments, some
degraded into lesser Offices, or losing their Parents; by reason of which last
Accident they are forced to desert their Government, though never so great, and
travel home, and there Mourn three years, and therefore great numbers are
continually at the Court of Peking, in hopes to succeed in the vacant Places.

As to what concerns the Government of the Provinces in particular, it Semedo.
stands in this manner:

The supreme Government of a Province is generally managed in the Metropolis,
and consists in Societies, that have a general Power over the whole Province.
Amongst these are two prime Courts, to which all the other, as as well of Towns
as Villages, must submit, because they receive their Commissions from the
Imperial Court. This Court consists in one sole Judge, without any Assistants
or other Officers, which is the Viceroy of the Province, in the Chinese Tongue
called Tutham, or Kiu-Muen, whose Command extends over all the Magistrates and
People of the Province. During his time of Government, which lasts three years,
he keeps several Messengers, which go to, and come from the Court at certain
times, to give an account of what has passed in his Jurisdiction. He is
received with great State into his Dominions. After his departure from Court
his Counselors and other Officers go before, and he is conducted from City to
City by the Inhabitants. Some Commanders with three thousand Soldiers, besides
all the Magistrates and Commonalty come to meet and receive him three Leagues
from the Metropolis, where he is to keep his Court.

The second Tutang, who is of no less Power, but stays but one year in his
Employment, is called Chayven. He is much respected and feared, for he takes an
account of all manner of Business, Military or Civil, Condemns or Reprieves
Malefactors, and also looks after the Emperor's Revenue: He Examines all the
Magistrates, nay the Tutang himself, and has also Power to punish Judges, and
put great and mean Mandarins out of their Employments: The Miscarriages of the
grand Mandarins he informs the Emperor of by Letters, and puts them out of
their Places till he has received an Answer from his Majesty. He also
pronounces the Sentences of Death which are given in all Places of the
Province, and appoints for that purpose the Day and Town whither all the
Malefactors must be carried, that he may know the number and Names of them, and
marks six or seven with a Pencil, and if more, he is accounted a blood-thirsty
and tyrannous Man. Those that are thus marked are Executed in the Field, and
the other carried again to Prison. He is also to look after the repairing of
the City Walls, Castles and other Structures. He never goes out but with a
great Train, that carry Court Badges, and other marks of severity.

There is yet sometime another Extraordinary Chayven, made at the Empresses
Request. He has an absolute Power, but it extends no farther than to Pardon or
Reprieve; for he Visits all the Prisons in the whole Province, sets those
Prisoners at Liberty which for petty Crimes lie there, and have no Adversaries;
and likewise such as are not able to free themselves. He Pleads in all
desperate Causes, and assists People that are helpless; recalls a rashly
pronounced Sentence, and is defender of the Poor. In short, his whole Office
and Employment extends to Mercy. For which reason these Magistrates are during
their time of Government much respected by the common People.

The third Employment is Treasurer, who takes care of the Emperor's Revenue in
his Province, being Employed by the Court of Exchequer, which sit at the
Emperor's Palace. He has two Counselors allowed him, one of which sits on his
right, and the other on his left Hand, besides twenty six Mandarins, and
several other Officers. His Business is to look after the Customs, Farms, and
all Revenues whatsoever belonging to the Crown. He Seals the Weights and
Measures, decides all Differences concerning Moneys, punishing the guilty, or
sending them (if he think fit) to higher Courts, pays the Magistrates, Allies
to the Emperor, Commanders and Soldiers, provides Liveries and Marks of Honor
which are given to famous Scholars, pays the Money for the repairing of
Highways, Bridges, Courts or Palaces of the chief Mandarins, and Ships of War.
Lastly, this Treasurer has the Command of all what comes in or goes out of the
Treasury. He also receives the Emperor's Presents from the Judges, Governors,
and Tauli, which every one makes according to their Employments, being in
Silver Coin or Bullion, all which is by him melted into Bars, each to the value
of fifty Crowns, and stamped with the Imperial Mark and the Melter's Name, that
thereby he may know whom to accuse, if the Silver should be falsifi'd. In this
manner it is carried into the Emperor's Treasury.

The fourth Court is called Gandchasci, that is, The Court of Life and Death.
In Something* like our Judges of ^yer and Termi^er.
it are two Assistants, or Tauli, whose care is to Visit, and go from Town to
Town to decide all Differences, punish the guilty, perform o^r Duties belonging
to their Offices, which extend over the Militia, and Affairs, in such Provinces
that lie near the Sea.

The fifth resembles a College of Learned Men, ordained to Examine Like our
Visitation o the Clergy or Heraldry.
Youths how they profit in their Studies, and especially to observe their
Masters of Art till such time as they have received their Bonnet and Orders to
be Directors. The prime of this famous Society is a Chancellor, who from time
to time goes to Towns and Villages to enquire after the Carriage, Deportment
and Conversation of the Learned, and to punish or chastise them according to
their several Offenses.

There are yet two Persons in every City called Hioquon, that is, Mandarins, or
Magistrates of Knowledge, which also belong to the forementioned five Courts,
whose Command extends only over the Students of the City: and though they have
not Power to give the Degrees due to deserving Persons, but only to chastise
them, yet nevertheless they are very strict and severe, because they
continually reside in one Place, and like Proctors in our Universities, come
and Examine the Scholars.

All these forementioned Courts Command over the whole Province, and the
Cities, Towns and Villages contained therein.

Moreover, every City has peculiar Governors as here in Europe, being four
eminent Mandarins, or Aldermen, as one of them is like a Mayor, which is by
them called Chifu; Chi signifies Lord, or Governor, and Fu, A Manor, or Tract
of Land; the other three are his Assistants, and called Tumchu, Tumphuon, and
Cheuquon; every one has his pecular Court and Officers.

Besides these are nineteen lesser Magistrates, which look after the Towns: two
of them have a prime Councellor and four inferior Assistants; the other nine
only one Councellor and one Assistant; the other eight have one supreme Head,
who Commands over their whole Society.

The Villages have also each of them a Judge and three Justices; the Judge is
called Chihien, the first Justice Honchin, the second Chufu, and the third
Tunfu: All these have their several Courts, or Council-Chambers, and likewise
Secretaries, Clerks, and other inferior Officers. The Judge may pronounce
Sentence of Death, but cannot execute it.

Beside these Mandarins which reside in Towns and Villages, there are some
which have neither power to Condemn nor Punish, but only to give their
Judgments to the Society.

The great Castles that lie distant from Towns and Villages, have also
Mandarins, or Magistrates, chosen from amongst the Clerks; for the least Office
that any Person of Quality aims at, is to be Judge or Justice in a Village.

Trigaut declares the General Government of every Province, as it was in his
time, after the following manner.

The Towns which belong to the prime Provinces of Peking and Nanking, are
Governed after the same manner as all the Cities and Towns in the other
Provinces. The Government of each of the thirteen Provinces consists in a
Magistrate called Pucinsu, and another named Nanganzasu; the first determines
Civil Causes, and the other Criminal: They keep their Courts in great State,
and reside in the Metropolis of the Province. To both these belong several
petty Officers, and also the chief Magistrates, which are called Tauli; but
because they Command over several Cities they are sometimes absent from the
Metropolis.

Every Fu ^r County (for a Province is divided into diverse Counties) has a
peculiar Governor called Chifu, that is, Lord of the County; and likewise over
every great City, or Cheu, and over each Town, or Hien, is a Governor, the
first called Chicheu, and the last Cihien.

These Governors of all the Counties, and chief Rulers of Cities, have every
one four Assistants, which aid them in all Businesses that happen in their
Jurisdiction, being all their Deputies.

The Chifu, or Governor of the County, has his Residence in one of the Cities,
and determines all things as Chief; for when any Businesses are consultof by
the Chicheu and Cihien, they acquaint him therewith as their Superior, and in
the first Degree.

It is to be observed, that the Chifu, or Governors of the Territories, and his
Court, and the whole County receive their Denomination from the City in which
they reside: as for example, the Governor keeps his Court in the City Nunciang,
and that City gives denomination to the whole County, Governor and Court, so
that they are called Nunciangers.

But because an account must be given of the Government of every peculiar
Province to the Court at Peking, therefore they Commission two other besides
the forementioned Magistrates to every Province from the Imperial City, to
Supervisor to the rest: one of them resides constantly in the Province, and is
called Tutam; the other is yearly sent from the Court, and named Ciayven. The
Command of the first being great over all the Mandarins, Magistrates, Subjects,
Militia, and other grand Concerns, may be compared to the European Viceroys.
The last resembles a Commissioner of Enquiry; yet by the Emperor's Commands he
has an Eye over the Business of the whole Province, viewing of Cities and
Castles, Examines all Magistrates, punishes the meanest, informs the Emperor
of the Misdemeanors of the Grandees, and after what manner every one officiates
his Place, and is the only Person amongst all the Magistrates in the Province
that pronounces Sentence of Death; he is feared and respected by every one.

Besides these Magistrates, there are many others in Cities, Towns and
Villages, as also many Generals and Colonels through the whole Empire, but
especially in Places bordering the Sea, and Garrisons. Thus far Trigaut.

All the Magistrates (says the same Trigaut) are under nine Orders; all
comprehended under the Philosopher and Military Man. Every one in these Orders
receives his Revenue from the public Stock either in Rice or Money, though but
little in respect of their Authority; for the Salary of the prime and chief
Order amounts not to above a thousand Ducats yearly. Those which are of the
same Order receive Wages alike, whether Philosophers or Military Persons; for
the chief of the Soldiers get as much as the Supreme of the Learned.

All the Magistrates have a private Seal of their Office, given them by the
Mandarins Seal.
Emperor Humvu. What they write in their Law they Seal only with Red, which is
a kind of Earth, so Red, that it is like a Vermilion, and dug out of the
Mountain Tape, near the City Lingkien in the Province of Xanso. This Mark the
Mandarins keep with great care, for upon the loss of it they are not only put
out of their Employments, but severely punished; wherefore when e're they go
out they carry it with them in a Box, or Cabinet, Locked up and Sealed, which
they never suffer to be out of their sights.

There is an excellent harmony, as Trigaut witnesses, betwixt the superior and
inferior Magistrates, and between the Governors and Privy Council, and other
Grandees and the Emperor; which they not only manifest by their readiness in
obeying him, but also by outward appearance: for they never neglect their usual
Visits at certain times, nor the Ceremony of Presenting. Neither do the meaner
Magistrates speak with the higher before the Bench, or elsewhere, but upon
their bended Knees, and with peculiar Reverence. The same Ceremony the Subjects
use to the Governors of their Cities, notwithstanding they know that they never
took their Degrees in Learning, and before their entrance to be Magistrates
were chosen from amongst the meanest of the Commonalty.

All Chinese, if they follow any honorable Employment, though they are
Mandarins, put on the Bonnet of their Office when they will speak, show
Reverence, or appear before any of a higher Quality; for to come without, would
be accounted uncivil.

The Mandarins Stools are round like Surgeons Chairs, the Back and Arms
thereof covered with a Tigers Skin, or some other Beast. Their Beards are also
set after the same manner, as may appear in the Sculp, wearing them very thin,
and letting them grow down without either Clipping or Shaving their Mustacho's
hanging downwards; they also shoot forth close by their Ears, but grow not down
to their Lips, nor under their Chin, but most frequently with three Whiskers on
each side, and one underneath.

The Mandarins and other Grandees, nay the Emperor himself, let their Nails
grow long, which they account no small sign of Gentility and Ornament. Some
Ladies, because they would not break them, wear little Cases over them.

None of the Magistrates Officiate above three years in a public Employment,
except he be new Commissioned by the Emperor, but is generally promoted to a
higher Dignity. This is done because none should get too many Friends, or gain
too much upon the Hearts of the People, in dependency of which he might
practice against the State, as it has often happened.

The chiefest Governors of the Provinces, Counties and Cities, as the Pucinfu,
Naganzafu, Cifu, Ciceu, Cihien, and the like, must every three years, according
to the Emperor's Order, appear at the Court in Peking, and there show Reverence
and Obeisance to the Emperor.

At the same time a general Muster is made at the Court of all the Magistrates,
which through the whole Realm are placed in the several Provinces, as well of
those that are there present as of those that are absent, where a strict
Enquiry is made of their Behavior: From which Enquiry they conclude whom to
depose, whom to promote, and whom to punish, without regarding or respecting of
Persons; and the Emperor himself cannot alter any thing resolved on by the
forementioned Judges in this general Scrutiny.

Those that are to be punished are not the meanest, nor the fewest, but
sometimes to the number of four thousand, whose Names are set down in a Book,
which is afterward Printed and published to the whole Empire. Moreover, the
Condemned are, according to Trigaut, divided into five Parties, or according to
Semedo, the chiefest Misdemeanors for which the Mandarins are punished, are
chiefly seven: The first contains the Covetous, which have violated the Law by
Bribes, and defrauded the Commonalty, and appropriated the Lands, Goods or
Chattels of their Subjects unjustly to themselves: for which Offense they are
not only bereaved of their Employments for ever, but also all the Marks and
Privileges of Magistracy. Amongst the second are reckoned such as have not
punished the Criminals according to their desert, but connived for favor or
affection: these are also bereaved of their Places, Liveries and Privileges.
The third are very aged People, and those that are too negligent and slothful
in their Offices; for which they lose their Employments, yet not their Marks
and Privileges. Amongst the fourth are reckoned those which are heedless and
hasty, pronouncing Sentence without any consideration, and go unadvisedly about
public Affairs: these are put into meaner Offices, or else sent to such Places
in the Realm which are supposed to be of a more easy Government. Amongst the
last are those which Govern others and their own Families indiscreetly, and
live debauched, contrary to the gravity of Magistrates: these are bereaved of
their Office and Quality for ever.

The same Examination is also performed with the Magistrate at the Court but
once every year: And after the same manner, and at the same time with great
strictness the Officers of the Soldiers are likewise Mustered.

None in the whole Realm is Commissioned to Rule in that Province wherein he
was born, except only Military Officers: This is done because the first should
not favor their Friends or Relations; but the last out of a love to their
native Country should defend it more carefully.

When any Lord Serves as Magistrate, none of his Sons or Servants may go out of
the House, make Visits, Converse with any Persons, or Treat about any Business,
for fear they should be suspected to take Bribes; but he is attended by
Servants given to all Magistrates upon the public Account. When he goes out
himself, he Seals the Doors (either of public or private Houses, wherein
Justice is administered) with a Seal, that none of the Household can come out
without his knowledge.

The whole Realm in the time of the Chinese was Governed by Philosophers; to
whom all the Soldiers and Commanders showed great Reverence, and a peculiar
Ceremony and Respect. Of these Philosophers consisted the chief Council of War,
their Designs and Contrivances being better respected by the Emperor than those
of the Militia Officers, which seldom or never were called to Council:
Wherefore none that were of a noble Mind and respected, concerned themselves
about Warlike Affairs, but rather endeavored to have the least Degree in the
Council of Philosophers, than to be the greatest Commander in Martial Concerns;
the Philosophers enjoying the greater Estates, and being held in much higher
esteem by the People. But since the Tartars Conquest of China, the Military
Affairs are in greater Request, and the Chinese exercise themselves so much in
Arms with the Tartars, that they lay aside their Learning.

Very strictly they observe the Governors and Commanders; for besides the Tauli
and Quauli, which according to their Offices take cognizance of all
Transactions, and inform the Emperor thereof. Every Province has a peculiar
Visitor, which is to punish or accuse Offenders.

The Emperor retrenches all his Officers Charges, by which he bereaves them of
the opportunity of making Parties, and running into Debt. So soon as any one
receives a Commission for Employment, when he goes to take possession of it,
all Charges for his Person, Servants and Family, besides those of his Journey,
as well by Water as by Land, (under which are reckoned Vessels, Wagons, Horses,
Men, and all the rest of the Retinue) are paid out of the Emperor's privy
Purse. He goes into no Inn all the Way which he passes, but Palaces are made
ready in the Towns and Villages, with all Necessaries, in which he takes (...)
gaping Mouths; one has two Horns on the Crown of his Head, with Ears and Hair
like those of a Hog, with their Hands tied together in a Praying posture, for
both are said to be Servants to Hoaquan; the other, which has no Horns on his
Head, but one which behind turns with a sharp Point, holds in his right Hand a
Pike or Lance, with a Serpent wound about the top of it.

Above on the left side of Hoaquan appears a Dragon, as it were flying out from
the Clouds; besides, all manner of horrid Representations stand either at the
Entrance of the Temple, or behind the Images.

Another Idol called Vitek, and by others Ninifo, whom they suppose to have
been a very wise Man, the Chinese honor with peculiar Reverence and bended
Knees, which is performed by the grandest Mandarins, placing his Image on the
Altars in the Temples, with burning Lamps and Perfuming-pans round about him.
The Idol, a deformed Monster, is often represented after that manner, as
appears by the inserted Sculp, with his Breast bare, a very great Head, large
Teats, and Tun-belly, the left hand holding a Garland, and great Iron Rings in
the Ears, from whence, they say, the use of Earrings came first into China.
Other Images are made sitting with their Legs across under them, after the
Eastern manner: Some pick their Ears with an Ear-picker, under which they hide
a great Mystery; others with a Tool like a Curry-Comb, scrape their Shoulders
and Necks; all which the Chinese, especially the vulgar, worship for great
Saints, and Offer Perfumes, Meat, and several other things to them.

The Priests of this Sect are called Ociams or Hoxons, which against the Custom
Trigan^
of the Country continually shave their Beards and Hair, but go Clothed like
others, differing in nothing but their Bonnets: Some wander like Mendicants up
and down the Country, asking Alms; others live like Recluses in the Recesses
of Rocks and Mountains, where they suffer hard Penance; others Semedo.
in public make narrow Chambers of Boards, struck full of Nails on all sides
with the Points inwards, in which they lock themselves for a whole Month, and
stand without Supporters; some promise to eat no Flesh, but drink only Cha or
Tee, into which they put Balls made of Beef and dried in the Sun before they
drink it. There are others of this Sect that belong to no Cloisters, nor are
received into them as Guests but only for one day, being Exiles, Vagabonds
Trigaut.
and Robbers: But the greatest part of them, being to the number of two or
three Millions, live in the Cloisters of the Temples, and are maintained by the
Revenues allowed them of old by the Emperors that were liberal Benefactors to
their Fraternity; nevertheless they endeavor by one thing or other to maintain
themselves: They despise (according to Semedo) a Married Life, living five or
six hundred cloistered together. They also live (says he) very strictly,
eating neither Fish nor Eggs, nor drink Wine. These beg Alms, Sing, and perform
peculiar Ceremonies and Prayers against Fire, Tempests, common Calamities, and
sudden Death: In which Services they wear only a Hood and Fan.

These Priests are accounted the meanest of the People, and Raff of the whole
Empire, because they are all Extracted from the Vulgar: for in their Infancy
being sold as Servants to the Osiams, they become Scholars, and succeed their
Tutors in their Office and Service, an Invention found out by them to advance
themselves; for there is never any found, that of his own free will, resolving
to live a holy Life, that will go into the Cloisters amongst such Company.

Through Ignorance and ill Breeding the Slave-Pupils seldom improve themselves
beyond their Tutors, but are just the same in their whole Demeanor; and as by
Nature we have a propensity to Vice, not being cultivated, so they from time to
time degenerate, growing worse; wherefore they learn no Morality, nor attain to
the knowledge of Literature, except accidentally some, though very few, which
naturally inclined to Learning, endeavor the same by their own Industry.
Notwithstanding they have no Wives, they are so inclined to the Female Sex,
that they cannot be kept from conversing with common Strumpets but by great
punishments, viz. those that attempt it are, if taken in the Act, burnt with a
hot Iron through the Neck or Leg, in which they put an Iron Chain of eight or
ten Fathom long, besides great Shackles; in which manner the Offender must walk
naked along the Streets till he has begged ten Tail of Silver for the benefit
of his Cloister: And that he may perform this Penance, one of his Fraternity
goes along with him, and with a Whip severely draws Blood from his naked Skin:
The Chain by reason of its great weight is also so troublesome to his Wound,
that Blood and Corruption gushes out of it. Others are for several days put
into little Houses like our Cages, driven full of Nails with the Points inward,
wherein the Offender not being able to lie down, is forced to stand upright,
without either Meat or Drink.

The Cloisters of these Osciams are built in Enclosures according to every ones
bigness: every Enclosure has a constant Treasurer or Governor, whom his
Scholars which he has bought for his Servants (whereof he has as many as he
will or can maintain) succeed as by Inheritance.

They acknowledge no Superior in these Cloisters; and every one erects as many
Huts or Booths in his appointed Apartment as he can, which is customary through
the whole Empire, yet chiefly in the Metropolis of Peking. The Cells when built
they Let to their great advantage, to Strangers which come thither to Trade,
which makes these Cloisters rather seem public Inns than Places of Sanctity,
regarding nothing less than the worshipping of Idols, or teaching that wicked
Doctrine.

Though the Condition of the Inhabitants of these Cloisters is mean and
despicable, yet nevertheless they are by many hired for a small Reward to
perform Funeral Ceremonies, and some other such like Offices.

Now at present this Doctrine is not a little come into request again, many
Temples being erected for the same. All the Followers thereof are either
Eunuchs, Women, or ignorant People. Yet besides these there are some which
boast themselves the prime Maintainers of this Doctrine, and are called
Ciaicum, that is, Abstinentiaries, for they refrain in their Houses all their
Lifetimes from eating either Flesh or Fish, and reverently worship with
Offerings and Prayers a row of Images, and sometime are sent for to their
Neighbors Houses to Pray with them.

The Women, separated from the Men, maintain this retired Life in Cloisters,
and shaving the Hair from the Crown of their Heads, despise Marriage. The
Chinese call them Nicu, which signifies A Nun; but not many of them live
together, and are far less in number than the Men. Thus far Trigaut.

These Cloisters (according to Semedo) are very large; the Walls which surround
them makes them seem like a City, divided into Streets, open places, and
inhabited Houses, in each of which two or three have their Residences, viz. a
Master and his Scholars, which are sufficiently provided for; and also all the
Houses receive an equal proportion of the Emperor's Allowance.

The Governor of the Cloister, who has the general Command over all, takes no
cognizance but of peculiar Businesses which are brought before him; and what
concerns other things, and the Government of their Houses, he leaves to
themselves. Yet nevertheless he gives Offices, and Titles to those that are to
receive Strangers, whoever he be that comes to see their Cloisters, and beat on
a Drum that stands at the Gate; they are obliged to go before him to the number
of thirty in their Ceremonial Habit: Coming to him they Salute him, and walk
before him to the Place where he desires to be; which they do again at his
Return. They are under the Jurisdiction of the Council of Customs; but upon the
Executing of Punishments, when deserved, they are used more favorably than
when Tried by the common Law. Semedo.


The Disciples or Followers of this Doctrine, which at this Day are in great
numbers, live together, never Marry, let the Hair of their Head and Beards grow
very long, and wear ordinary Clothes, which differ little from the other in
fashion, except in one thing, which shows that they are in Service; for in
stead of a Bonnet they wear a little Garland, which covers just the Crown of
their Heads. They account the last and greatest Good of Mankind to consist in
bodily Goods, and the enjoyment of a quiet and peaceable Life, without toil or
trouble; They acknowledge two Deities, the one more powerful than the other;
They allow one Paradise and a Hell: the Paradise, which (according to their
saying is joined to the satisfaction of the Body) is not only for another
Life, but also for this on Earth, and consists herein, that by means of a
certain Exercise and Obedience, some that are old may become young Children;
others may make themselves Xinsien, that is, Happy on Earth, to possess what
they please speedily with a wish, fly from one place to another, though very
remote, and go to Feasts, and the like. They are lovers of Music, and use
several Instruments; on which account they are invited to Funerals and public
Solemnities, and serve the Emperor and Mandarins in making their Offerings;
They boast themselves to be Soothsayers, and promise to procure Rain, and clear
Houses haunted by Spirits.

All the Chinese are strangely inclined to Superstition, but especially the
Followers of this second Sect, and give great credit to Sorcery, and
Predictions of future things.

The Emperor's Astronomers (according to Semedo) do not a little uphold this
Superstition, because they foreshew ensuing Events from the color of the
Heavens and tempestuous Weather, Thunder out of Season, by several aspects of
the Sun, which they reckon to be twenty two, and from sixteen other
Appearances; with all which they acquaint the Emperor: And they chiefly employ
their time in foretelling either Peace or War; as also Sicknesses, Death,
Changes, Insurrections, and the like: to which purpose they make Almanacks, or
yearly Prognostications, which are divided into Moons, and the Moons again into
Days, the Days into fortunate or unfortunate Hours, either to undertake any
thing or let it alone, as to go a Journey, remove out of a House, Marry, bury
the Dead, build Houses, and the like.

By this manner of Cheating the Chinese are so deluded, and so strictly do
Martin* Hist. Sinic.
they follow these Observations, that they govern themselves wholly thereby;
for if the Almanac commands to do any thing on such a Day, though all the
Elements were against it, they will not neglect it.

These Astronomers, according to a very ancient Custom, are punished with
Death, if they through neglect do not foretell the Eclipse of the Sun and Moon,
or accidentally commit any mistakes in their Prognostication: for the Chinese
account it a deadly sin not to assist the Sun or Moon when they are darkened,
with Offerings and beating of Drums, and other noise, fearing else they would
be devoured by a Dog or Dragon: wherefore the Emperor informed by People
experienced in the Course of the Heavens, of the approaching Darkness,
immediately sends Messengers Post through all the Cities of the Empire to give
notice of the Day and Hour on which the Eclipse will happen: whereupon the
Magistrates and Citizens carefully watch for the time, and prevent the
threatening danger by beating on diverse tinkling and Copper Basins.

They have Temples that are drawn or Carriages made for that purpose, in which
the Women deliver out their Almanacks; wherein a Receipt is written how they
may Conceive.

Trigaut says, that no superstitious Custom has spread it self so far through
the whole Empire, as that in the observation of fortunate and unfortunate Days
and Hours; so that the Chinese in all their Actions observe the time exactly:
To which purpose two sorts of Almanacks are Printed every year, which upon the
Emperor's Command are dispersed through the whole Empire, which makes the
Fallacy the more believed.

These annual Prognostications are sold in such abundance, that most Houses
have them: In them they find what they too punctually observe, not only the
critical Days, but the precise Hours and Minutes at what time they shall begin
or desist in any Negotiation or Business whatsoever. Besides, these Writers of
the annual Predictions go higher, Composing for their profit Books more puzling
and mysterious, with large Comments on the good and evil Days, with more
accurate Directions, especially concerning Buildings, Marriages, or Travel, and
the like Business of consequence; and though it often happens that the Weather
fall out tempestuous, let it Thunder and Lighten, Blow or Rain, yet they will
begin, though they make never so little progress.

Nasirodin, a Persian Author, who flourished Anno 1265. tells us, that the
Chinese, by him called Katayans, have a Circle of twelve Days, which according
to the Instruction of the Astronomers, they use in choosing the time to
undertake or delay any Business of consequenc.

These twelve Days are by the Chinese called as follows:

Ching, that is, Perfecting. Xeu, that is, Receiving. Cai, that is, Opening.
Pi, that is, Locking. Ting, that is, Affirming. Che, that is, Serving. Po, that
is, Breaking. Vi, that is, Running danger. Kin, that is, Raising. Chu, that is,
Dividing. Muen, that is, Exchanging. Ping, that is, Making even.
Four of these twelve Days are called He, that is Black, and are accounted
unfortunate; four Hoang, that is, Yellow, which are lucky, and promise some
good; two Hoen, that is, Brown and Dark, and esteemed ominous.

Others undertake to tell Fortunes by even and odd Numbers, and with white or
black Representations of Men and Beasts, which they alter sixty four times to
please the liberal Inquisitor. Some (after our manner) pick Pockets by
Calculating Nativities, and from thence tell the Fortune that shall attend a
Man in his whole Life; Others wheedle them out of their Money, by Phisiognomy
and Palmestry, and such Gipsie-like tricks; others by Dreams; some from certain
words which they observe in speaking; diverse from the shape of the Body, or
sitting of a Person, and an innumerable many actions more. Others go farther,
selling the Winds, and fair or foul Weather, and take upon them the Dominion of
the floating Element; for when any Merchants have Ships at Sea, or some ready
to set Sail, they address themselves to these, who live on the Shores or Banks
of the Rivers, that they may have a speedy and safe Voyage. They generally
reside two and two together, as you may see by this Sculp; one sits on a Bench
betwixt two great Bundles of Rushes, wearing a flat Cap on his Head, and on his
Body a wide Coat, carelessly folded about him, in his left Hand a Book, in which
Reading he mutters a considerable time. Next him sits his Companion on two
Fish-Baskets, likewise with a flat Cap, and the upper part of his Body almost
naked, behind over his right Shoulder hangs a blown-up Bag, out of which he
lets as much Wind as any one is minded to purchase; in his left Hand he holds a
great Mallet, with which he strikes several times hard on the Ground, that the
Spirit of the Winds, (who, as they make them believe, appears in the Air,
sitting on a great Bird in the shape of a Man, with a broad brimm'd Hat and a
wide Coat) may descend. But this Fancy is not so much practiced of late.

The Romans and Greeks agreed herein with the Chinese, and most of it is at
this day used amongst them: one thing there is which may properly be said to be
the Chinese; it consists in the choosing of Land to build private or public
Structures upon, or bury the Dead in, choosing it by the likeness of the Head,
Tail and Feet of several Dragons, which they suppose to live under Ground, and
believe, that on them the welfare, not only of Families, but also of Cities,
Provinces, and the whole Empire depends.

The Chinese account one Dragon, whom they call Lung, for the greatest
forerunner of good Luck.

Before the time of the Family of Hia, nay, the Emperor Fohi, who began his
Reign Anno 2952. before the Birth of Christ, it is said, That a Dragon was seen
flying from a Pool; and to make the Business seem of greater consequence and
consideration, they added, That they had observed sixty four Marks or
Characters on his Back, which, according to their Sages, have mysterious
significations.

The Chinese in a manner ascribe all things to a Dragon, and believe, that not
only all humane Fortune, but also Rain, Hail, Thunder and Lightning, are as
that Monster orders. They also affirm, That there is a Dragon under the Earth,
but chiefly under the Mountains; and this is the reason why with such great
Care and Charge they observe the parts of the Dragon in the making of their
Graves; for according to the goodness of the Earth they value the Riches and
Fortune of the whole Family; just as the Astronomers, from the Conjunction of
several Planets, prognosticate future Events. For this reason also the Chinese
Emperors bear a Dragon in their Arms, as the Romans an Eagle; nay, the
Emperor's Apparel is Embroidered with Dragons, and likewise on all the
Furniture for his Table and whole House is Engraven the same; nay, the whole
Court is every where full of painted Dragons.

But above all it is to be admired, that the Chinese paint five Claws at the
Feet of the Emperor's Dragons. None but those who are of Imperial Blood, or
peculiar Favorites of the Emperor, may bear a Dragon in his Coat of Arms: yet
if others do use this same Bearing, they must on pain of Death not give above
four Claws.

They say that the Foam of a Dragon impregnated one of the Emperor Ie's
Concubines without the use of a Man: which Fable the Chinese thus relate:

In the time of the Family of Hia (say they) a Dragon was seen, which vanished
on a sudden, and left a Froth on the Earth: This Froth being of a Dragon, was
like a costly, nay, that which is more, a holy Relick, and locked up in a
golden Coffer, and preserved till the Reign of the Emperor Siveni; when
afterward at his Command, without knowing wherefore, the Chest was opened, and
this Slime leaped forth as if it had been living, and ran to and again through
the Palace, none being able to hold it, and at last got into the Seraglio, and
there divirginated one of great Beauty, kept for the Emperor; from hence, after
the full time (as the Chinese relate) she was delivered of a fair Female: The
Mother fearing to gain an ill Name, and the Emperor's displeasure, laid down
the Infant, which two Married People, that accidentally walked by there,
hearing it cry, took up, and carrying it home, brought it up as their own
Child.

In the third Year of the Emperor Ie's Reign the forementioned Infant being
grown Marriagable, her Foster-father was on some occasion accused of a certain
Crime, and put in Prison: whereupon he proffering the Virgin (who was endu'd
with incomparable Beauty) for his Ransom to the Emperor, was not only
released, but returned home with great Riches. But the Emperor was so strangely
surprised with the exceeding Beauty of his new Mistress, that he was in a manner
distracted, and forsook the lawful Empress, and his Son born by her, and took
Paosua (for so the Virgin was called) for his Spouse, and elected Pefo, the Son
of Paosua, in stead of Ikie, the lawful Son of the Empress, to succeed him in
the Throne, against the consent of all his Substitute Governors.

Ikie the true Heir, being enraged by the great wrong which he had suffered,
fled from his Father to his Uncle King Xin, in the South part of the Province
of Xensi, at the place where the City Nanyang stands at this day.

Paosua during this time dwelt with the Emperor in all prosperity; but one
thing he observed, that he never saw her Laugh, which was very unpleasing to
him; therefore he tried several ways to win a Smile from her. At the same time
a Difference arising, and overtures and threatenings of War being betwixt him
and the Tartars, he put his Militia in a posture of Defense; which done, and to
teach them Alarms, he fired his Beacons when there was no need: whereupon the
Palaces, and all places every where were thronged with the gathered Soldiers;
which too often repeating, and no appearance of any Enemy, gave her occasion to
laugh heartily, to the great joy of the fond Emperor: Which false Alarms being
so commonly, when they came to be real, and not being believed, brought on that
negligent carelessness in not obeying, that it lost him his Life and Empire.

Amongst other things also, Paosua took great delight in the noise which Silk
makes when torn by force; wherefore the Emperor to recreate her, always spent
his time in her Presence, with tearing and rending of Silk.

Mean while the Emperor sent a Party to King Xin to fetch his fled Son again;
but Xin refused to deliver the Prince, unless he should be declared Heir to the
Empire: The Emperor enraged thereat, marched with an Army against Xin; who
unequal to the Emperor, yet of greater Policy, joined with the Tartars, and in
the Night falls suddenly on the Emperor's Quarters: whereupon the Beacons being
fired as before, the Soldiers seeing the Flame, supposed that the Emperor as
formerly was only caressing of his Empress, neglected their Duties; and
therefore making no resistance, most of them were taken sleeping by the Enemy,
and the Emperor himself slain by his Brother and Son.

But to return; As Trigaut tells us, several eminent Persons Study this My.
Trigaut.
stery of Dragon-Knowledge, and are sent for from remote Places to advise
withal when public Buildings are to be erected, that they may so lay their
Platform suting with the benevolent Signatures from the posture of the Dragon,
that the Edifice may for ever after be more free from Casualties: for these
Astronomers, as our Astrologers, observe the good and evil Aspects of the
Planets, with the several Configurations of the fixed Stars, so they take their
Marks from the situation of Mountains and Rivers, and whatever else makes a
variety, that signifies good success, on which they say, not only the
preservation of the House, but the welfare and Honor of the Family depends.

Semedo calls these Surveyors Tili. Others (says he) which they call Tili,
endeavor to to observe, not only the Situation of the Earth, but the Positions
of the Planetary Aspects in the celestial Houses, so to make more happy their
terrestrial Habitations.

It is a very ancient Custom, and used to this day, to take their Observations
of good or ill success, from the Color, Spots, Motions, Legs, and Shell of a
Tortoise. And likewise, as the Augurs of old, from the Notes of Birds, and
noise of Beasts, and also whatever they meet with in the Morning, the
reflecting shadows of the Sun on peculiar Houses; for if at their going out in
the Morning they meet any one in Mourning Apparel at their Door, Bonzies or the
like, they look upon it as an ill Omen. In short, whatsoever inconvenience
happens to peculiar Houses, Cities, Provinces, or the whole Empire, they
ascribe it to their miserable Fortune, or something or other that is wrongly
placed in the Houses, Towns, or the Emperors Palace.

All Streets, Shops and Markets, are full of these Astronomers, Surveyors,
Soothsayers, Prognosticators, or in a word, Juglers and Deluders, promising
good Fortune to all. Many of these are blind, and most of them poor People, yet
notwithstanding they will still hearken to their cheating Fopperies. The blind
Men run along the Streets playing on Pipes, but the Women beat on little
Kettles, whereby they give notice to all those that will be cozened and know
their Fortunes. Neither are obscure Hamlets only full of these Deluders, but
also great Cities and Courts of Grandees swarm with them; with which Practice
only some maintain themselves, keep brave Houses, and gather great Riches; for
High and Low, Noble and Ignoble, nay, the Emperor himself, and all the
Magistrates respect them.

They say that some of these Fortune Tellers reside on desolate and solitary
Mountains, between the Clefts of Rocks and barren Hills like Hermits; whither
also great numbers of People resort to know the Events of future things. Some
only write strange Characters and* Chinese Letters on Boards, containing the
future Condition of the Enquirers; yet their promising oftentimes has a double
meaning.

These Wizards have many times horrible Toads that sit near them, with a thick
gray speckled Skin, and opening their Jaws, (as they say) with their poisonous
Breath blast and wither the Grass round about them.

These generally sit bare-headed, being close shaven, and with their Feet
naked, picking their Ears whilst they mutter several words to themselves.

In the time of the Emperor Hiaou, who Reigned Anno 142. before the Nativity of
Christ, many Women, especially at the Emperor's Court, Studied Magic and
Charms, by which making themselves to appear much fairer than they were, they
subjected the Male Sex according to their pleasures. Of these some got into the
Prince Guei's Court, the Emperor's Son begotten by a lawful Wife, but without
his knowledge, because he, according to the Chinese Writings, was of a good and
pious Nature: but attaining to years, he betook himself, being ensnared by the
forementioned Charms, wholly to lasciviousness.

Amongst other things, they say there are certain Drugs, by the Chinese called
Kuan, which if the Powder thereof be given any Man to drink by a Woman, it
makes them mad after them, like our Love-Powders: But they had worse
Ingredients, with which they occasioned Distempers, nay, Death on whomsoe're
they pleased; by which means Li, the Emperor's Son, begotten by one of his
Concubines, was killed in the nineteenth Year of his Age, together with his
Wife, Children, and most of his Family, except one Nephew.

But the whole Empire is strangely besotted with the study of Alchymie, thereby
^igaut.
to get the Philosophers-Stone, by which they not only Enrich themselves by
turning all things to Gold and Silver, but also that Elixar makes them
Immortal, which many Emperors before and since the Nativity have endeavored to
attain to.

The Chinese affirm, That there are Rules and Commandments of both these Arts,
found out first by very Ancient, Learned, (which the Chinese reckon amongst
their Saints) and afterward from one to another, delivered to their
Successors: They say also, that these first Inventors, after having* performed
many excellent and sovereign Works, ascend both with Soul and (...) together to
Heaven, when they began to grow weary living on Earth.

They also tell us, That anciently a Person lived without the Walls of the City
Nanchang, which assisted many needy People, and ^ast p^ntiful* Alms amongst the
Poor, because he by the Art of Chemistry could make pure Silver. He also (say
they) had by the help of Divine Arts, a Dragon, who threatened the Ruin of the
City; after which, having Chained him to an Iron Column of an exceeding
bigness, he, his whole House and Family ascended up to Heaven; For this reason,
the Citizens out of a Superstition, erected a great Chapel for him; and the
forementioned Iron Column, the better to keep up the reputation of the Fable,
is there to be seen at this day.

But however they decline the converting of Metals into Gold or Silver by the
Stone, yet the Emperor himself, and most Eminent Persons of the Empire, make it
a great part of their business to study Immortality, from the promised
Restoration of Youth, by the wonderful Operations of this Elixar: To which
purpose, as there are many Students, so there is no want of Masters; and the
whole City of Peking every where pestered with their Laboratories; and though
never so much deluded, yet fresh hopes carry them on with a fervent desire to
bring their Work to Perfection; being persuaded by these Mountebanks, that
their failings happened from some mistakes, but now, if they would begin again,
they make no question, being since better informed, to finish the so long
expected and happy Work.

But before we leave our Alchymists, take this from Martinius, which he tells
of the Emperor Hiaou, who had not his equal amongst the Chinese, He was as
their Histories say, much transported with a belief, that by this Art he might
not only be the Wealthiest, the Happiest, and the Greatest of all Princes, but
also be Crowned with Immortality: From hence he received the Title of Van Sin,
that is, Ten thousand Years, which has descended to all the Emperors to this
Day.

To this great purpose he built a new Palace accordingly, all of Cedar,
Cypress, Camphire, and the like sweet smelling Woods; the scent of which, as
they say, might be perceived ( a) twenty one Chinese Furlongs from thence.
About five English Mile.


Amidst this wonderful Structure, he raised a Tower all of Copper, of twenty
Rods high, (a mavelous piece of Work) with a winding Pair of Stairs in the
middle, from the bottom to the top: There was also a Copper Basin, Cast in the
form of a Hand, which every Morning was filled with early De^v, wherein the
Emperor steeped the Oriental Pearls to soften them, being part of the
Preparations of the Medicines of Immortality: But at last they wrought upon his
Belief so far, that the Elexar was ready, which Drinking, would so perpetuate
Youth, that he should live according to his Title, Ten thousand Years, that is,
He should be Immortal.

The Longevity-Potion being brought, was set on the Table, which should begin
the Work of Youths Renovation; when one of his Counselors, a Minister of
State, first dissuading him from the taking of it, suddenly threw the Liquor
down upon the Floor; at which, the Emperor much incensed that he should lose
his expectation of Immortality, which had cost so much time and treasure in
Preparing, consulted with what Death he should punish so bold an Offender; when
he that stood thus liable to his fury, spoke thus mildly and undiscompos'd to
him.

Sir, You cannot put me to Death, for I have drunk the same Medicine of
Immortality already, and am Immortal; so if I die I am guiltless, because the
Medicine wants the promised Efficacy, and therefore use your pleasure; yet I
suspect, that if your Indignation fall upon me, what I have drunk will be of no
Defense, and I feel I shall certainly suffer Death, being conscious of the
Deceit of these that are Trapanners for Bread. Which mollifying Speech so
pacified the Emperor, that he gave him his Life; yet howsoever, the Emperor
prosecuted the same business, to make himself Rich, Hapyy, and Immortal.

There are also a third kind of Philosophers, by Semedo called Taokiao, and by
Trigaut, from the first Promoter, Lonzu; as likewise by Semedo, Tunsi or Tusi,
being the first broacher of this Doctrine, which agrees with the Epicureans,
who affirm, Post mort^ nulla (...).
That there is no pleasure after death, and therefore they indulge what e're in
their life seems to be easy and happy, so to prolong their lives, to continue
their present welfare they use all means possible, and not only study
Longevity, but also how to be Immortal by ingenious discoveries for
self-preservation.

But though Laotan accounts the Summum Bonum to consist in Pleasures, yet
Martinius finds him to be no way Atheistical, but declares it every where
probable, that Laotan has acknowledged one Supreme Deity, saying, Tao, or
Great Understanding has no Name; he has Created Heaven and Earth, he is
without shape; moves the Stars, though he himself is immovable; and because I
know not his Name, I will call him Tao, or Supreme Understanding, without form.

The same Philosopher makes mention in another place, of The Creation of the
Heavens.

It is not to be credited, what the Fathers report out of their Stories
concerning this Philosopher Laotan, that he lay concealed, being locked up in
his Mothers Womb eighty one, or according to Trigaut eighty years; and
afterward forced his passage into the World through her right side; wherefore
according to Trigaut he is called Lauzu, and by Martinius, Laosu; and and last
of all, Laotan, that is, Old Philosopher: The time of his Maturation, or rather
Imprisonment in the Womb, was (as they say) nine times nine Years, which the
Chinese account the fullness of Perfection, and all things that are perfect:
And because Laotan was one of their greatest and most learned Stages, they
invented the forementioned number, as if Nature had spent so many Years in
perfecting of him.

This Laotan was born in the Kingdom of Zu, (for China contained anciently many
and several Kingdoms) at this day the County Fungyangfu, of the Province of
Nanking, in the City Mao, Anno 603* about twenty four Years before Confut, the
Prime Philosopher amongst the Chinese.

The third Sect (says Martinius) is also like the Epicurean, they place
Happiness (...). Atl. p. ^.
in Pleasures, and make it their chief study to prolong their Life, expecting
nothing after Death. Amongst this are many Sorcerers, and such as use Magic,
and is indeed the vilest of all Sects; the followers thereof nevertheless
praise the Morality of our European Doctrine.

According to Trigaut, Laotan left not one Book of his Doctrine, nor as it
appears, would teach no new Opinion; but some of his followers called Tansu,
after his death, named him, The Head of Learning, and Collected several Books
in a handsome Style, from diverse other Opinions and Writings. These also live
unmarry'd in Cloisters, in which they make their Pupils, and are as lewd and
wicked, as the followers of the forementioned. They never cut the Hair of their
Heads, but are distinguished from others, by wearing a Hat or Bonnet of Wood
upon the knot which ties the Hair on the Crown of their Heads.

Other of this Sect that are Married, with great Zeal observe the Tenets of
their Fraternity at home in their own Houses: They Honor, as they say, amongst
many other Images, The Lord, or King of the Heavens, but one that is Bodily,
and as they say in their Books, has had many troubles: They also affirm, That
the King of the Heavens, which Reigns at this day, is called Ciam; but he who
Governed them formerly, was named Leu. This Leu, say they, on a certain time
sitting on a white Dragon, descended to the Earth, and invited Ciam (who they
affirm was a Magician) to a Dinner: But whilst Leu, making himself merry at the
Table, Ciam getting upon the White Dragon, ascended up to Heaven, and took
possession of the Celestial Realm.

Leu thus prevented from returning by Ciam, yet obtained a Grant from The new
King of Heaven, for the Dominion over certain Mountains in this Country, where
they suppose he still lives, bereaved of his old Dignity.

They Worship therefore according to their own confession, a foraign Robber and
Tyrant for their God.

Besides this their Supreme Power, they Worship another, which is a triple
Deity, one of which is Lauzu, the chief of their Sect.

These also hold forth Rewards after Death; and many of those which are most
Holy, and observe their Rules, enter Soul and Body into Paradise, being capable
of all Heavenly Joy; which to affirm, they show many Images of the Departed,
which were translated thither in the Flesh.

The peculiar Office of the Priests of this Sect is to clear Houses, which they
believe are haunted with Evil Spirits, which they do by setting up Papers
Painted with horrid Resemblances, and making a hideous cry and noise through
all the Rooms, as if they were Possessed themselves.

These Priests have their Residences in the Emperor's Temples, Consecrated to
Heaven and Earth, and in Person attend the Emperor's Sacrifices, either when he
Offers himself, or his forementioned Magistrates, by which means they are in
great esteem and request.

The Music which fills up the Ceremony, the Priests perform themselves,
Playing on several Instruments which may be pleasing to them, but seems very
harsh to us of Europe.

They are also sent for to Funerals of the Grandees, before which they walk in
costly Habits, Playing on Horns, Sagbuts, and other Instruments: They also
spend their time in warming new Houses, and conduct new Married People along
the Streets in State, which at certain times is done at the charge and
appointment of the Magistrates.

A Correct TIDE TABLE showing the tr^e Times of the High-Waters at
London-Fridge to every day in the Year, 1692. By JOHN FLAMS^EED, M. R. S. S.
1692. January Februar. March. April. May. June. July. August. September.
October. Novem. December. Days. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M.
H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. 1 M 7 18 8 55 8 40 10 18 10* 22 11 15 11 43 1 05 2 30 2
56 4 07 4 23 A 7 47 9 31 9 16 10 40 10 49 11 45 1 35 2 50 3 17 4 26 4 40 2 M 8
18 10 09 9 48 11 13 11 5 0 18 2 01 3 10 3 37 4 47 4 58 A 8 51 10 45 10 19 11 39
11 41 0 17 0 52 2 25 3 28 3 56 5 09 5 16 3 M 9 26 11 20 10 50 0 50 1 24 2 47 3
46 4 16 5 32 5 35 A 10 02 11 53 11 20 0 03 0 06 1 19 1 53 3 07 4 04 4 37 5 57 5
55 4 M 10 38 11 48 0 27 0 33 1 47 2 20 3 26 4 23 4 59 6 ^1 6 15 A 11 13 0 23 0
50 0 58 2 14 2 43 3 43 4 43 5 24 6 46 6 36 5 M 11 49 0 51 0 15 1 11 1 21 2 39 3
03 4 00 5 05 5 51 7 11 6 58 A ^ 16 0 42 1 33 1 44 3 01 3 22 4 18 5 29 6 19 7 35
7 20 6 M 0 ^3 1 39 1 05 1 54 2 07 3 21 3 41 4 36 5 58 6 48 8 01 7 43 A 0 52 2
00 1 26 2 14 2 30 3 41 3 59 4 53 6 27 7 18 8 29 8 07 7 M 1 19 2 18 1 45 2 32 2
53 3 59 4 16 5 14 6 57 7 48 8 55 8 33 A 1 45 2 34 2 04 2 50 3 14 4 18 4 33 5 37
7 31 8 18 9 20 8 59 8 M 2 08 2 50 2 21 3 07 3 34 4 36 4 5^ 6 03 8 05 8 49 9 45
9 27 A 2 29 3 04 2 37 3 24 3 53 4 56 5 11 6 30 8 42 9 20 10 12 9 55 9 M 2 48 3
17 2 53 3 42 4 12 5 17 5 33 7 00 9 15 9 48 10 39 10 26 A 3 04 3 30 3 08 3 59 4
32 5 38 5 56 7 34 9 48 10 17 11 07 10 57 10 M 3 19 3 42 3 24 4 18 4 53 6 03 6
21 8 11 10 20 10 45 11 33 11 28 A 3 34 3 55 3 38 4 37 5 15 6 27 6 47 8 47 10 51
11 1^ 11 59 11 59 11 M 3 48 4 08 3 53 4 58 5 38 6 51 7 15 9 23 11 21 11 36 A 4
01 4 22 4 08 5 20 6 04 7 18 7 47 9 59 11 49 0 26 0 30 12 M 4 14 4 37 4 25 5 46
6 30 7 47 8 21 10 35 0 00 0 51 0 59 A 4 28 4 54 4 43 6 14 6 57 8 17 8 57 11 11
0 16 0 25 1 15 1 29 13 M 4 42 5 14 5 02 6 43 7 26 8 50 9 35 11 44 0 41 0 48 1
38 1 56 A 4 56 5 35 5 24 7 15 7 57 9 24 1 14 1 03 1 10 2 01 2 20 14 M 5 11 5 59
5 50 7 48 8 28 9 59 10 51 0 15 1 24 1 31 2 23 2 42 A 5 27 6 25 6 18 8 22 8 59
10 35 11 28 0 43 1 44 1 51 2 44 3 03 15 M 5 45 6 54 6 48 8 56 9 31 11 12 1 09 2
04 2 11 3 04 3 22 A 6 06 7 26 7 21 9 31 10 03 11 48 0 03 1 33 2 21 2 30 3 24 3
39 16 M 6 28 8 01 7 57 10 06 10 36 0 35 1 54 2 37 2 47 3 42 3 57 A 6 52 8 39 8
34 10 39 11 10 0 23 1 05 2 13 2 53 3 04 4 00 4 14 17 M 7 19 9 19 9 12 11 12 11
43 0 56 1 32 2 30 3 07 3 20 4 18 4 32 A 7 49 9 59 9 51 11 44 1 27 1 55 2 46 3
22 3 37 4 37 4 50 18 M 8 23 10 39 10 28 0 15 1 55 2 18 3 01 3 37 3 54 4 57 5 09
A 8 59 11 19 11 05 0 16 0 47 2 20 2 37 3 15 3 51 4 12 5 19 5 29 19 M 9 37 11 57
11 38 0 46 1 17 2 41 2 55 3 29 4 07 4 32 5 41 5 51 A 10 18 1 14 1 46 3 00 3 11
3 41 4 24 4 49 6 05 6 14 20 M 10 58 0 32 0 10 1 40 2 13 3 18 3 25 3 54 4 42 5
12 6 31 6 38 A 11 38 1 03 0 40 2 06 2 37 3 34 3 39 4 07 5 00 5 36 6 58 7 04 21
M 1 32 1 09 2 29 2 59 3 50 3 52 4 21 5 21 6 03 7 25 7 33 A 0 16 1 57 1 36 2 50
3 18 4 06 4 05 4 36 5 45 6 30 7 52 8 05 22 M 0 52 2 20 2 00 3 11 3 39 4 22 4 19
4 52 6 11 6 59 8 22 8 39 A 1 24 2 41 2 23 3 31 3 56 4 37 4 33 5 11 6 40 7 30 8
54 9 15 23 M 1 54 3 01 2 45 3 51 4 14 4 52 4 47 5 32 7 11 8 02 9 27 9 51 A 2 20
3 19 3 05 4 11 4 32 5 08 5 02 5 55 7 45 8 34 10 10 10 28 24 M 2 43 3 36 3 24 4
32 4 50 5 24 5 19 6 20 8 22 9 07 10 35 11 07 A 3 03 3 54 3 42 4 52 5 09 5 41 5
36 6 48 8 57 9 40 11 11 11 46 25 M 3 21 4 11 4 01 5 14 5 28 5 59 5 56 7 19 9 34
10 14 11 46 A 3 38 4 29 4 21 5 36 5 48 6 19 6 17 7 53 10 10 10 47 0 22 26 M 3
55 4 48 4 41 6 00 6 08 6 39 6 40 8 30 10 46 11 20 0 20 0 56 A 4 12 5 10 5 03 6
25 6 30 7 01 7 07 9 08 11 21 11 53 0 53 1 28 27 M 4 29 5 35 5 26 6 50 6 51 7 25
7 37 9 47 11 54 1 25 1 55 A 4 46 6 02 5 52 7 16 7 13 7 50 8 11 10 26 0 23 1 54
2 20 28 M 5 06 6 29 6 20 7 44 7 36 8 18 8 46 11 05 0 26 0 53 2 21 2 42 A 5 27 6
58 6 48 8 16 8 00 8 50 9 23 11 41 0 55 1 21 2 46 3 03 29 M 5 51 7 30 7 18 8 36
8 26 9 22 10 01 1 22 1 49 3 08 3 21 A 6 16 8 05 7 48 9 00 8 52 9 56 10 39 0 16
1 47 2 15 4 28 3 37 30 M 6 43 8 20 9 28 9 19 10 31 11 18 0 48 2 12 2 39 3 47 3
52 A 7 13 8 51 9 55 9 47 11 08 11 56 1 17 2 34 3 04 4 06 4 06 31 M 7 45 9 21 10
15 1 43 3 26 4 20 A 8 20 9 51 10 45 0 32 2 07 3 47 4 34

M stands for Morning, A for Afternoon, for Sunday.

This Table may be made to serve the underwritten places by

Adding h. m. For Tinmouth-Haven, Hartlepool, and Amsterdam. 0 30 ^rest 1 00
Scilly 1 45 Mounts Bey 1 55 Bridlington Peer, and Humber 2 00 Fowey Looe and
Plymouth 3 13 Dartmouto, Harborow and Hull 3 30 Torbay and Tinmouth 3 40
Exmouth, To^sham and Lymt 3 50 Wey^outh 4 20 Bridgewater and Tex^l 4 45
Portland Harestew, and without the Ulit 5 40

Substracting. h. m For Leith, Ma^s, and Gourits Gut 0 15 Gravesend, Rochester,
Ramm^skins 1 00 For Bu^y of the Nort, and Fi^shing 1 20 Shoe Beacon, Portsmouth
Red-sand and Ostend 2 30 Spithead, Harwict, Dover, Calis 3 00 Orfo^dness,
Gunfleet, Hastings, Shortham, Diep 4 00 Needles, and ^armouth Peer 4 40 St.
Hellens and Haver de Grace ^ ^0

But Note, That in such of these places as lie open to the Sea, and where no
great Rivers are, the Quarter-Moon high-waters hold out longer than the times
showed by this Reduction, near half an hour.

As also that, When by reason of long Droughts in Summer, or continual hard
Frosts in Winter, the Fresh Waters are low; or when the Wind blows hard at N.
or N. W. the Tide^ may hold up longer in the River of Th^ts, than the times
showed in the Table. But when the Wind is strong at W. or W. by S. or there are
great Freshes, they hold not out so long, but the difference is seldom above
half hour.

London: Printed for William Co^t at the Mariner and Anchor on
Little-Tower-hill near the Mi^ories-End.

Im^* 30 Octobris 16^1. Robert Southwell. P. R. S.

Names. Longitude. Latitude. Metropolis D. M. D. M. Nanking 1 26 32 40 Chief
Cities Fungyang 0 30 34 48 Sucheu 3 30 31 52 Sunkiang 4 30 31 10 Changcheu 2 50
32 45 Chinkiang 2 28 32 49 Yangcheu 2 15 33 6 Hoaigan 2 12 34 17 Lucheu 0 8 33
4 Ganking 0 20 31 20 Taiping 1 10 32 20 Ningque 1 10 31 40 Chicheu 0 10 31 36
Hoeicheu 0 55 30 18 Great Cities Quangte 1 50 31 32 Hocheu 1 0 33 50 Chucheu 1
26 32 31 Siuchen 0 3 35 3

The tenth Province, Chikiang.
Names. Longitude. Latitude. Metropolis D. M. D. M. Hangcheu 3 10 30 27 Chief
Cities Kiating 4 0 31 15 Hucheu 3 3 30 57 Niencheu 2 24 29 33 Kinhoa 2 2 28 57
Kiucheu 1 37 28 42 Chucheu 3 5 28 12 Xaohing 3 30 30 16 Ningpo 4 46 29 40
Taicheu 4 25 28 38 Vencheu 4 4 27 38

The eleventh Province, Fokien.
Names. Longitude. Latitude. Metropolis D. M. D. M. Focheu 2 40 25 58 Chief
Cities Civencheu 2 9 25 0 Changcheu 1 10 24 42 Kienning 1 0 27 0 Ienning 0 57
26 34 Tingcheu 0 55 25 40 Hinghoa 2 35 25 27 Xaouu 0 2 27 10 The great City
Fouing 4 0 26 33 Garrisons Phumuen 4 25 27 0 Foning 4 8 26 15 Tinghai 3 22 26
10 Muihoa 3 21 25 52 Xe 3 28 25 50 Haikeu 3 50 25 29 Ganhai 2 3 24 45 Hiamuen 1
59 24 35 Chungxe 1 26 24 30 Tungxan 0 57 24 15 Hivenchung 0 46 24 0 Iungting 1
18 24 33

The twelfth Province, Quantung.
Names. Longitude. Latitude. Metropolis D. M. D. M. Quancheu 4 2 23 15 Chief
Cities Xacheu 3 42 24 42 Nanhiung 3 10 25 32 Hoeicheu 2 46 23 9 Caocheu 1 0 23
30 Chaoking 4 45 23 30 Caoheu 5 40 22 33 Liencheu 7 12 22 0 Liucheu 6 20 28 58
Kiuncheu 6 36 39 40 The Great City Loting 5 9 23 25 Garrisons Taching 1 5 24 20
Tung 1 22 24 17 Hanxan 1 10 23 25 Cinghai 1 14 23 25 Kiazu 1 29 23 12 Kiexo 1
49 22 50 Hiung 6 30 21 30 Iungching 5 49 23 45 Ciungling 8 10 19 30

The thirteenth Province, Quangsi.
Names. Longitude. Latitude. Metropolis D. M. D. M. Queilin 7 32 25 54 Chief
Cities Liucheu 8 42 25 0 Kingyven 9 46 25 2 Pinglo 7 0 25 26 Gucheu 6 33 24 2
Cincheu 8 0 24 2 Nanning 9 30 23 20 Taiping 12 20 23 20 Iunning 12 7 23 8
Chingan 11 55 24 0 Tiencheu 11 30 24 11 Garrison Cities Sungen 10 25 24 5
Vuyven 10 30 23 52 Funghoa 9 55 24 5 The great City Suching 12 25 24 6
Garrisons Xanglin 12 47 23 57 Ganlung 13 57 24 4

The fourteenth Province, Quoicheu.
Names. Longitude. Latitude. Metropolis D. M. D. M. Quoiyang 11 46 26 0 Chief
Cities Sucheu 9 2 27 53 Sunan 10 20 27 39 Chinyven 9 23 27 34 Xecien 9 42 27 55
Tungyn 8 45 28 20 Liping 8 35 26 42 Tuche 10 3 25 55 Great Cities Pugan 13 5 25
52 Iunning 12 20 25 2 Chinning 12 5 25 0 Garrison Cities Putting 12 7 26 4
Pingyve 10 32 27 0 Lungli 11 9 26 27

The fifteenth Province, Iunnan.
Names. Longitude. Latitude. Metropolis D. M. D. M. Iunnan 14 25 25 0 Chief
Cities Tali 16 56 25 27 Linyaw 14 19 24 6 Zuhiung 15 24 24 56 Chinkiang 14 4 24
29 Munghoa 16 38 25 23 Kinfung 16 30 25 52 Quangnan 13 25 24 0 Quangsi 13 35 24
14 Chinyven 16 26 24 37 Sungning 15 48 27 33 Xunning 17 18 24 46 Chief
Garrisons Kiocing 13 48 25 35 Yaogan 15 50 26 3 Cioking 16 40 26 28 Vutin 14 59
25 27 Cintien 13 52 26 4 Likiang 16 58 26 54 Iuenkiang 15 33 23 54 Iungchang 17
42 24 58 Great Cities Pexing 16 8 26 44 Lanking 15 55 27 3

The manner of the Building of the Cities in China.
MOst of the Cities in all China are of one Model and Fashion, and exceed each
other only in Bigness and Commerce; for most of them are square, with broad and
high Walls of Brick or Freestone, Fortified round about at an exact distance,
with high Watch-Towers, not unlike those of the ancient Romans; surrounded with
broad Moats; and within, with Pallasadoes.



The Entrances into the City have always double Gates, one before another, with
Portcullases, between those two Gates is a large Court, wherein the Soldiers
are Exercised that belong to the Guard: These Gates are not opposite but
oblique, so that they cannot see through them both at once: The first hangs on
a double Wall, which appears like our Bulwarks. Above the Gates, on the Arch
are high Towers, which the Chinese call Muen Leu, in which the Soldiers keep
Guard, and are Magazines where their Arms are kept.

Every Metropolis, and almost all the small Cities, have a little distance
Trigaut.
without the Walls in a pleasant and frequented place, or near the Road, a
Tower, by Peter Iarrik and others called Chimes, which the Chinese look upon
to be so auspicious, that no Man goes about any business of consequence, before
he has Saluted these Edifices, from thence expecting their better Fortune. One
of these Towers, by which we may judge all the rest, is before discrib'd in the
Province of Xantung: They have at least seven, nine, or ten Galleries of
Freestone, and very artificially built, in manner like a Pyramid; they are not
only Erected in or near the Cities, but some of them on the highest Mountains.

These Towers are not much unlike other Structures, from their quality Other
Towers called Cu^.
called Culeu (which here we should name Hourly Towers) which are built at the
Public Charge, one or two in every City, according to the bigness thereof: On
every one of these Towers is a Water-Glass, for in stead of Watches or
Hour-Glasses, the Chinese use Water Glasses, which show the Hour of the Day;
for the Water falling out of one Glass into the other, lifts up a Board, Carved
with the Figures of the Hours, and time of the Day: There is also one, who
constantly observes the Hand which points, and by the beating on a great Drum,
gives notice thereof to the People every Hour, what the Clock is; he also puts
forth another Board out of the Steeple, on which the Hour of the Day is Painted
with Golden Figures, of a Foot and a half long.

The same Person which Watches the Hours, has an Eye also (because he looks
over the whole City) if any Fire should accidentally happen in one House or
other, and by beating on his Drum, raises all the Citizens to the quenching of
it: He whose House is set a Fire through his own carelessness, suffers Death
without mercy, because of the danger which threatens the neighboring Houses,
all built of Wood.

On these Time-telling Towers, the Governors often meet to keep their Festivals.

Pagodes or Temples.
NOt far from these Turrets stands generally a Pagan Chapel, besides a Temple
Consecrated to the Spirit or good Genious of the City.

In these, all the Governors or Magistrates, on the entering into their Offices,
take their Oaths of Allegiance, and the like, as if before the God or Protector
of their City.

In former Ages, the Chinese in these Temples honored only the forementioned
Spirits; but at this day Worship other Idols.

Great numbers of these Pagodes are through all China, and are likewise built
in solitary places, on the tops and declinings of Mountains.

Most of these Pagodes are inhabited by Priests, who live there upon the
ancient Revenues granted them of the place: The Pagodes also afford good
Lodgings and Entertainment for Travelers, who there find plenty of all things.

The Pagodes or Temples are within furnished with Images, to the number in some
of above a thousand, and hung round about with black Lamps, which burn Night
and Day, in Commemoration of those, as they conceive, which lived Piously, and
died Happily.

Some Images sit on Tables, as if they lived and were consulting together.

At the entrance, or behind the other Images stand horrible shapes, Horned
Fiends, with open Mouths, and Hands with grievous Claws.

In the middle commonly appears an Altar, whereon sits an Image of some times
thirty, forty, fifty, nay a hundred Foot high, to which the Temple is
Consecrated, besides several lesser Idols on each side thereof; before the
Image stands generally a thick, but hollow Cane, full of little Reeds or Pens,
inscribed with Chinese Characters, which they believe foretell future events: On
each side are Perfuming-Pots, which are continually supplied, and in the middle
stands a Wooden Charger, in which the Priest puts his Offerings, when he
Invokes the God on some exigent, to grant him a favorable sign of good success:
The Altar is Colored Red, with which no common Houses may be Painted.

A Pagode or Temple, which was formerly the Hall of a Palace, belonging to a
grand Eunuch, near the City of Peking, and afterward on the Emperor's Command
given to the Jesuits for a Chapel, Trigaut says, was before set forth after
this manner:

In the chief Isle stood a great Altar of Baked and Hewn Stone, curiously
Wrought, and Painted Red, after the manner of their Temples: Upon the middle of
the Altar sat a great and horrible Monster, Baked of Clay, Gilt from top to
bottom.

The Chinese called this Image Tuan, and suppose it Commands over the Earth
and Riches thereof; wherefore we with the ancient Poets should call it Pluto:
It had a Scepter in one Hand, and a Crown on its Head, both not unlike the
Marks of our Kings. On each side of the Isle stood two great Tables, every one
Guarded by five Infernal Judges, which were also Painted on the Walls, sitting
on Seats of Justice, and Condemned (as they said) the Sinners to Everlasting
Torments, every one according to his Condition: Before them stood many Furies,
far more terrible (with tormenting Scourges) than those which we represent; and
in such manner those Devils seemed to punish the Criminals, that they struck a
Terror to the Living; for some lay broyl'd on Gridirons, others boiled in Oil,
others again rent to Pieces, some cut through in the middle, torn to Pieces by
Dogs, bruised in Mortars, and other such like cruel Punishments.

The first of the forementioned Infernal Judges seemed to examine the
Malefactors, which as the Chinese suppose, he re-views in a Looking-Glass;
this done, he sends them to the other Judges, according to the several
Punishments which they are to suffer: Amongst them was one, whose Office was to
Punish by Transmigration, sending the Souls of the Malefactor into worse Bodies
than formerly they possessed; transforming Tyrants to Tigers, debauched Persons
into Swine, others into such Beasts as best suit with their Inclination: But
for Petty Crimes, the Rich, they only became poor and despicable People.

There were also a great Pair of Scales, in one of which stood a Sinner, and in
the other a Prayer Book of the Doctrine of the Idols, which weighed down the
Sinner, and released him from Punishments.

In the middle, before the resemblance of Hell, flowed a River of a strange
Color, into which many were dragged; cross the River lay two Bridges, one of
Gold, and the other of Silver, over which passed those that had been true
Pagan-Worshippers, and wore several Badges of their Offices and Service shown
to the Idols; and had for their Guides the Servants of the Idols, under whose
Defense they past through the midst of all the Torments of Hell, and came at
last to pleasant Fields, Groves, and Valleys.

In another corner were drawn the Jaws of Hell, belching out Flames, Serpents
and Furies, toward the Gates of Hell, which were made of Copper; many other
more of that kind were also seen: In several places of the Temple was written
on Scrols, That whosoever calls a thousand times on this Image by Name, shall
be freed from all these Tortures.

It will not be unnecessary to give you here two Platforms of two several
Pagodes or Temples.

Directions for a little Temple or Pagode, covered all over.
1 THe Prime and only Gate of the Temple. 2 A Partition of Wood between two
Pillars of Stone or Wood, on which two Gygantick Figures are Painted; By this
means, the sight out of the Street into the Temple is prevented, though the
Doors are open. 3. An erected Stone, in form of a Consecrated Basin, in which
the Romans keep their Holy Water, in which lies Fire to burn the Perfumes that
are put in the same. 4. Body of the Temple. 5. A great Table before the Altar,
curiously Varnished, Painted, and Gilt, on which stand Tapers, and Perfumes
always burning. On the Table stand also two Cases, and a Cane full of little
Pipes or Straws, wherewith they Cast Lots. 6. A great Altar, on which some
Images stand. 7. Two lesser Altars, on each of which are other Representations.
8. Pedestals of Stone, on which the Pillars of Wood or Stone rest, which hold
up the Roof, and make three Divisions. 9. Two small Pools or Ponds, with Water
and Fish, open on the top, from whence the Light shines into the Temple, being
in stead of Windows, for no other Light comes into the Temple, but from those
places where they are, or through the chief Gate. 10. Two Chambers before the
Gate that leads into the Temple, in which stand two great shapes of Horses and
other Images. 11. Two Boards made fast to the Walls of the Temple, Engraven
with Superstitious Directions, to throw their Lots before the Images, with the
foresaid Straws, which stand on the Table. 12. A great Drum on a Wooden Bench,
on which they give several strokes, after having ended their Prayers to the
Images. 13. A great Bell hanging at the Wall of the Temple, made like ours, on
which they also strike twice or thrice with a Stick, after they have ended
their Devotions. 14. A Bench with holes, wherein they put their Umbrelloes, or
other Marks of Honor, which are carried before the Mandarins, and likewise
before their Images, when they go Processioning. 15. The place where those that
Kneel to Pray before their Images, and Cast Lots.
Directions or Draught of a Temple, one of the biggest and stateliest in all
China.
1 THe chief Gate in the first Wall that surrounds the Temple. 2 Two Gates on
each side of the forementioned. 3 First Court before the Temple, open on the
top. 4 A great Pool, with Water and Fish. 5 A Bridge to go over the Pool. 6 A
great covered Hall, which spreads it self before the whole Structure. 7 A
second open Court, much bigger, Paved with Freestone. 8 Little Chambers on
each side of the second Court. 9 The chief Hall or Chapel in the Temple,
covered with a handsome Roof. 10 Pillars of the two Halls, which in some Temples
are of Wood, and in others of one entire Stone. 11 Little Doors of the
Chambers, with a Gallery, through which they pass before they go into the
Chambers. 12 The place whither those repair to Kneel and show Reverence to
their Images, and draw Lots. 13 A very curious and well-made Table, Gilt and
Varnished, whereon in a Case stand Straws or little Canes, with which they draw
Lots; and likewise Perfuming Pans, and burning Tapers; over it also hangs a
lighted Lamp. 14 A great Altar with one, or several Images. 15 A Stone Pedestal
close by the Wall, on which stand many whole and half Images. 16 A Stone, cut
in manner of a Basin, in which stands a Chafindish with Coals, wherein Gilt and
Silvered Paper is burnt by those that come to Worship the Images: In some
Temples generally stand, in stead of the forementioned Stone, many Copper
Pans, large, and neatly made. 17 Two Boards made fast on the Walls of the
Temple, Engraven with their Superstitious Belief. 18 A great Bell, made like
those of Europe, but without a Clapper, on which they strike with a Staff three
or four times, after they have finished their Prayers. 19 A great Drum on a
Wooden Bench, on which they also strike, as on the Bell. 20 A Bench of Wood
with holes, in which they stick the Umbrelloes and other Badges of Honor that
are carried before the Mandarins, and likewise before the Images in time of
their Precessioning.
Triumphal Arches.
IN several Cities, to their no small Ornament, are diverse Triumphal Arches,
most of them of hewn Marble, with great Art and curious Imagery, richly
wrought, after the manner of the Goths; they are, as anciently amongst the
Romans, built in Commemoration of those which have done some great Service to
that City or Country; sometimes also for the Citizens, that have attained to
the height of their Learning.

They are chiefly built in the Eminentest Streets and most Populous places, and
consist in three Portals, the biggest in the middle, and the two lesser on each
side, through which they pass.

On both sides stand Marble Lions, and other fine Imagery; on the Ceilings are
Celestial Signs, Birds, Flowers, Snakes, Serpents, and the like, done very
Artificially.

Those places that are void of Statues are curiously Carved or adorned with
other Imagery, and are so Cut, that they seem Pendant in the Air. It deserves
no small admiration, how such vast Stones could be Wrought and Cut through,
that they seem rather like loose Chains of diverse Links, than singly Wrought.
The whole Arch rests on high Pillars, and both before and behind of one
fashion; The upper part of the Roof generally consists in three Stories or
Partitions, every one divided, with some things resembling our Architecture;
Upon the Summit of the Arch lies a blue Stone, covered with a small Gilded
Arch, on which the Emperor's Name in whose Reign the Arch was built is
Engraven; Beneath in the Front appears another broad Stone, whereon is an
Inscription, with the Name of the Person in honor of whom, and for what good
Service it was erected.

Buildings.
THe Artificers and Tradesmens Houses in the Cities are not built with any
great art, because the Chinese regard more their Ease and Convenience than
Ornaments; yet though they are not ver^ stately, they are convenient and
sufficiently comely: But the Houses of the Grandees are very magnificent and
large.

The Chinese, as Adam Schall witnesses, use no Stone for their high
Buildings, but only Timber joined and fastened to one another with Iron Rings,
after the same manner as our Masts in great Ships are; which thus conjoined is
colored over with Chinese Varnish, or Wax called Cie, and sometimes Gilded, to
the no small luster thereof.

They take no delight in many Stories, never raising them higher than two,
Martin. A^l. p. 6.
though generally but one, they counting it a hard labor to go up Stairs or
Ladders.

The lower part of their House is only inhabited, it being divided into
handsome Chambers and Halls: As to the out-part of the House, it is but mean
(except the great Gate and other lesser Wickets, which are stately built before
Noble-mens Houses) but the inner part is pleasant, and very curiously wrought,
all shining with the Varnish Cie. They are generally built of Wood, yea, the
Emperor's Palace it self, though the Walls which separate the Halls and
Anti-Chambers are commonly of Brick, but the Roof rests on wooden Pillars, and
not on Walls, as ours do, and not covered with Tyles of Clay. They look not
forwards through Windows, Persons of Quality accounting it ill Breeding to open
a Casement into the Street. Every House has several Yards or Halls one behind
another; the privatest or last of which is in habited by the Women, who are
kept so close, as if in Prison.

The Chinese, according to Trigaut, when they begin to Build, erect first the
Lib. 5. p. 6.
Pillars of their Houses, which are all of Wood, for Stone is of no esteem
amongst them; nay, the Pillars in the Emperors Courts and Governors Houses are
also of Wood: On the raised Columns they lay great pieces of Timber, and on
them the Roof: The Walls are made last of all of Clay or Mortar, which if they
should chance to fall, yet the Timber-work would stand, and the Roof-remains
firm and whole. The order in which the Pillars stand, is the same with all
other open places; for every Court of the Governors is divided into several
base Courts or Quadrangles paved with Freestone; the Floors of them being
somewhat lower than those of the Chambers, they ascend a few Steps up to them
and the Galleries.

And again in another place the same Trigaut says, That the Chinese are not
Lib. 1. cap. 4.
to be compared to us in Architecture, neither for beauty nor durance; for they
build according to Man's life, and (as they say) only for themselves and not
for others; whereas we on the contrary build for future Ages.

The Chinese dig no Foundations, but lay on the Ground which they design to
build on, very great Stones; or if they chance to dig Foundations, they are
never above two or three Yards deep, though for exceeding high Towers, so that
they seldom last one Age. Nor in like manner their Clay Walls, which give them
the trouble of a constant and daily repairing; from whence it happens also,
that their Houses are for the most part of Wood, or rest on wooden Posts; in
which there is no small convenience, because the Walls may be repaired without
meddling with the other parts of the Houses, for the Roofs rest not on the
Walls, but on Columns. Thus far Trigaut.

Palaces, or Governors Courts.
THe Palaces are all built at the Emperor's Charge for Residences for the
Governors, as well Civil as Martialist: And the Emperor does not only provide
Courts and Ships for his Governors, but also all manner of necessary Furniture,
Provisions and Servants; nay, when a Governor (which is most remarkable) either
goes to another Province, or served out the time of his Office (which sometimes
happens to be in half a year) he may take all the Furniture with him, and then
again new is provided for his Successor.

The Houses of the Magistrates exceed all other in beauty, bigness, and
Ornamentals, and may justly be called Courts or Palaces.

In every Metropolis are fifteen, twenty, or more such public Edifices, in the
chief Cities; at least eight, and four in the less, all after one Model,
except that the one is bigger than the other, according to the Quality of the
Governors.

The great Palaces have four or five Halls, with as many Porches that stand
before them.

At the Front of every Palace three Gates, the biggest in the middle, every one
adorned on each side with great Lions of Marble. Before the greatest Gate is a
large Court Railed in, which glitters exceedingly with the Chinese Varnish. In
the middle of this Court stand two Towers, or Musick-Rooms, ready provided with
Drums, and all sorts of Instruments to play on whene're the Governor goes in or
out to sit on the Bench of Justice. Beyond this Gate is a spacious Hall,
wherein those that Plead, or have any Business with the Governor, wait; on each
side thereof are small Apartments for the Judges of the lower Bench; beyond are
two Rooms, wherein Persons of Quality, that come to visit the Governors, are
received; in them are Stools and Benches, and all things necessary for
Entertainment. In these also the Right Hand is given to the Civilists, or
Citizens, and the left to the Martialist. Passing through these Chambers you
come to another Gate, which is seldom opened but when the Governor keeps a
Court-Day. The middlemost is of an extraordinary bigness, and none but Lords
and Noblemen are suffered to go through it, all other Persons walking through
the side-Gates. Beyond this Gate is another large Court, at the end whereof
stands a great Apartment resting on Columns, and is called Tang. In this
Chamber or Hall the Governor sits on the Bench; on each side thereof Servants,
Messengers, and other Officers, have little Houses for their Residences.

These Officers never remove with the Governor, but live there during their
lifetime, being maintained at the Emperors Charge, and serve one Lord after
another, without changing their Habitations.



Behind this Apartment is another inward Chamber, much statelier than the
first, which is called Sutang, that is, The Privy-Chamber; in which only the
greatest Friends to the Governor give their Visits, and pay Respects; about it
on the outside the Governors Household have their Dwellings; behind it opens
the greatest Gate, where also are the Governors own Lodgings, and a little
apart his Wives and Concubines, being all neatly built, and conveniently
contrived. There are also Warrens, Gardens, and all things fit for Country
Recreation.

A Palace belonging to an Eunuch, not far from the City Peking, is by Trigaut,
with the following Platform, thus described:

On each side before the Gates stand two Marble Stones, in a manner like Steps
to get on Horseback from; before the Entrance of the Palace runs a Wall about
six Foot high; behind which opens a small Entry or Alley, in the middle whereof
stands the prime Portico, or chief Stone Gate, to which they go mounted on
Steps, with two Chambers on the right, and three on the left hand, which have
their Entrances into the little Alley; beyond this Gate opens a great Court,
where on the Right Hand stand three, and on the Left Hand four Chambers; At the
end of this first Court is another Gate, which they first ascend on Steps, and
having passed through it, descend again on the other side into a second Court;
in the middle whereof on each side, a Gate or Door with Steps leads to the
Halls that are on both sides of this Court; behind which is also a great Hall,
and beyond that a third Court of the same form as the second; and at last
appears a stately Garden, surrounded with a Wall of twenty Hand high, and cut
through in the middle with a paved Way.

A Draught of the first Ground-plat of a House for Chinese of indifferent
Quality.
1 THe chief Door of the House under a small Gallery, which serves in stead of
a Penthouse, 2 Prime Courts paved with Freestone. 3 Chief Halls in the House.
4 A wooden Partition, with a little Room in the middle in manner like a
Chapel, in which stand Carved Images, and before them perfuming Vessels and
Lamps. 5 A narrow Entry behind the Partition, which hinders the sight into the
chief Hall. 6 Two inner Chambers. 7 Two Halls or Dining-Rooms. 8 A great House
for Poultrey, Cattle, and the like.
A Draught of the second Ground-plat of a House for a Rich Chinese, or Mandarin
of ordinary Quality.
1 A Portal before the Gate. 2 The chief and only Gate of the whole House. 3
The Entry or Gallery. 4 A Partition of Wood to prevent the sight from without
into the House. 5 An open Court paved neatly with Freestone. 6 Covered Halls.
7 The chiefest Hall. 8 A Wooden Partition with a Chapel in the middle, in
which the Images stand, as also Candles, Lamps, and Vessels to burn Perfume in
before them. 9 A narrow Entry behind the wooden Partition, which hinders the
Prospect into the Hall and open Court. 10 Chambers in which the Master of the
House Lodges. 11 Narrow Entries, through which they go into all the Chambers
and inner- 12 Apartments for Slavesses, and other Female-Servants. 13 Little
Chambers for Slaves and Menservants. 14 A Stable for Cattle.


A Draught of a third Ground-Plat of Royal Houses, and the Houses of very rich
Mandarins.
1 THe Front Gate. 2 The chief and only Door of the House. 3 The Entry or
Gallery. 4 A Partition of Wood, which prevents the sight from without into the
House. 5 Open Courts covered neatly with square Freestone. 6 7 Chief covered
Halls. 8 Little Entries, through which they go into all the Courts and Chambers
of the House. 9 A Partition of Wood in the last Hall, with a Chapel in the
middle, in which as before stand Carved Images, Candles, Lamps, and perfuming
Vessels. 10 Narrow Entries behind the great wooden Partition, which hinders
those from being seen that walk in the Hall. 11 A wooden Partition in the first
Hall between the first chief Court, which stops the prospect into the other
open places. 12 Pedestals of the Pillars, which support the Roof of the first
Hall, which stands at the end of the first Court. 13 Handsome Chambers, in which
the Lord of the House resides. 14 Lesser Rooms, in which his Concubines,
Slavesses, and other Women dwell. 15 Small Apartments for Servants and Slaves.
16 The Stable. Thus much concerning their Houses.
Of their Shipping.
FRom the building of their Houses we may conjecture what their Shipping may
be, notwithstanding they are used in another Element, and serve for other
occasions.

The Chinese Vessels are several, viz. Warlike, Imperial, Ships for the
Governors, others that carry the Fish sent to the Emperor's Court, Longzons,
Snake-Vessels, or rather Pleasure-Boats, and the like, besides floating
Villages on Canes, joined together with a tough Twig called Rotang.

An incredible number of Vessels are continually found in China, Sailing from
one place to another; for the Country is Navigable in most parts, by
convenience of the Rivers every where; for the Way from the City Makao to the
Metropolis Peking, (being a Tract of about three hundred German Miles) may all
be traveled by Water, along Rivers or artificial Channels, except one days
Journey, which is over the Mountain of Mintin, between the City Nanhang, of the
Province of Quantung, and the City Nanking in the Province of Quangsi.

In like manner, they can go from the Province of Chikiang in their Barges
along the Rivers through that of Suchuen; nay, there is scarce any City, either
little or great in all China, to which they cannot come by Water, because the
whole Country is not only naturally full of Rivers, but are also divided and
subdivided by industry into several Channels and Rivulets: But their Ships that
lie in several Bays and Harbors resemble Woods.

Such an innumerable and vast number of Shipping are in the Province of Fokien,
that the Inhabitants thereof proffered the Emperor of China, when on a time he
resolved to War against the Iapanners, to make him a Bridge or Cawsey of Ships,
that should reach from their Coast to Iapan, and well it might have been done,
if they could have endured the turbulency of the Sea.

Amongst all other, the Imperial Ships belonging to the Governors are the Ships
of the Governors.
best and stoutest, and indeed in curious Work and Ornamentals, exceed ours in
Europe: they show in the Water like Towers or Castles, and are on both sides
divided into several Apartments; in the middle is a stately Room provided with
all manner of Necessaries, and Hung with Tapestry, and furnished in State, with
whatever belongs to a Princes Palace; in stead of Glass Windows they have Silk
varnished and painted with Flowers, Birds, Trees, and the like, which is so
close that no Wind penetrates. Round about the Ship on the Deck are Galleries
and Rails, between which the Seamen or Mariners can do their Business without
any trouble or disturbance. The whole Ship is varnished with the Wax by the
Chinese called Cie, which gives a great luster, being also mixed with diverse
Colors; the inside is painted with Birds, Beasts, Cities, and the like, in
Golden Colors (the proper Livery of the Emperor,) which are worthy of
observation, and very delightful to the Eye. They use no Nails in all their
Ships, because the Timber and Planks are pegg'd together with wooden Pins.

The Chinese Vessels are in length equal with our Mediterranean Galleys, but
are not so high and broad; on a Ladder of Leather with twelve Steps they get
into them. The Prow, where the Drummers beat and Trumpeters sound their Levets,
is made like a Castle. Upon the sound of the Drums and Trumpets all the other
Vessels give them the way, unless it be a Mandarin of greater Quality, then the
inferior gives way to the superior, without any the least disturbance or
dispute, all which Cases being ordered by the Law, according to which every one
must govern himself; wherefore on the Head of every Ship stands written in
great Golden Letters of a Foot and a half long, the Quality of every Governor;
from both the sides fly diverse colored Silk Flags and Penons.

In calm Weather there are People, which in stead of Horses, Tow the Vessels by
a Line, or Row them: They also use their Oars just as the Fishes their Fins or
Tails, with very great dexterity and swiftness, to the no little manifestation
of their Ingenuity. They also Steer a Ship with a single Oar after the same
manner as we our Boats.

Exceeding stately are those Ships which every three Months to the number of
five, come with Silk-Stuffs and Garments from the Metropolis of Nanking to the
Court of Peking, and are by the Chinese called Lungchychuen, as if they would
say Ships of Dragons Clothes, because they are sent to the Emperor, whose Arms
and Marks are Dragons; they are Gilt all over, and colored Red. To these all
the Governors Vessels are inferior, and must give them the Way wheresoever they
meet them.

Swift Streams, which between the Hills and Valleys have great Falls, are Rowed
up by the Chinese with a sort of little Boats with two Oars or Steerers, one
before at the Head, and the other at the Stern; by means of which they guide
their Boats between the Rocks with great dexterity and ease, as if they had a
Horse by the Reins, though sometimes the Channel is so narrow, that the Vessels
can scarce pass through the same, but are forced to go round about the Stones,
which lie scattered and cumber the Channel every where.

This troublesome Rowing, though an ingenious Invention of the Chinese, has
raised this Proverb amongst them, That their Boats are Paper, and their
Watermen Iron, because they are made of very thin Boards, like our slit Deal,
which are not nailed, but fastened together with Withs, in the Chinese Tongue
called Rotang; by which means the Boats, though often beaten by the strong
Current against the Rocks, split not, but bend and give way.

In the third County Sucheufu, of the Province of Nanking, the Inhabitants keep
many Pleasure-Boats only for their Recreation, all of them being richly gilded
and painted with several colors to the Life, so that we may rather call them
stately Houses than Ships. Many oftentimes spend their whole Estates in these
Vessels, being too indulgent to Wine and Women.

In a delightful Lake called Si, near the chief City Hangcheu, in the Province
of Chekiang, are also very gallant Vessels, which Row up and down in the same
in fair Weather for their pleasure. All things about these Vessels are either
gilded or painted with various colors, where they always highly Treat, and are
presented with Stage Plays, and other such like Divertisements. The Ships in
the interim furnished with all manner of Necessaries, Sail without fear of
Shipwreck cross the Lake, notwithstanding many by sudden Storms or Tempests are
in the middle of their Mirth cast away.

They have also a kind of Gundelo's, in the Chinese Tongue called Lungschen,
that is, Serpent-Boats, from their resembling of Water-Snakes, and their being
Painted and Carved all over with various Serpents; some overgrown with Hair,
and hoop'd in with broad Iron Rings, are also joined together with Ribbons of
diverse colors, very neatly, and with great art interwoven together. The Masts,
which are generally three, and hung with Silk Penons and Flags, have an Idol
upon the top of them, as also one on the Prow of the Ship; on the Stern are
many Ensigns, hung full of Tufts of Hair, Silk Flags, and long Feathers; the
whole Vessel is hung round about with Gold and Silk Fringe; under the Deck sit
the Rowers, generally to the number of ten or twelve, richly Clothed in Silk,
and Gilded Crowns on their Heads; at the sound of a Drum they strike their Oars
(which are made like a Spoon) into the Water, and make such quick way, that
they seem to go as swift as Lightning; in a Gap in the Stern oftentimes hangs a
Boy, a Jugler, who leaping into the Water, makes pleasant sport for the
Passengers.

In the Yellow River are a kind of Carriages, or rather floating Villages,
consisting in great thick Reeds, by the Indians called Bambu, or Bambo's, which
are so closely tied together with Withs, by them named Rotang, that the least
drop of Water cannot get through them. On these Floats are Huts and little
Houses of Boards and other slight Materials, covered with Roofs made of Mats,
in which the Chinese dwell with their Wives and Children (in someto the number
of two hundred) as on the Main Land, and never inhabit on the Shore: They drive
along with the Stream down the Rivers, or else are Towed against the Current
with a Line, for Sails they use none.

Those that reside in these floating Villages drive a Trade with all sorts of
Merchandise, and carry them from one place to another on the River: at the
Towns before which they stop, they run Stakes into the Ground, to which they
make fast their floating Isle.

There are also some in China, which with their whole Families reside in
ordinary Vessels, and Sail in Fleets of four or five hundred together, Trading
through the whole Empire; so that from whence these Fleets remove, it seems as
if a Forest moved. They keep likewise all manner of tame Cattle in those
Vessels, especially Swine; and wheresoever they arrive, they generally stay
several Months.

Father Martin doubts not, but that the Chinese Merchants have anciently, as at
this day, furrowed the Seas as far as the Red Lake: for in these modern Times
they build great Ships called Pancum da China, which in the Chinese Tongue
signifies A Wooden Palace; neither have we small testimonies of it through all
India.

That the Chinese (says he) have anciently frequented the Seas, and Sailed
with their Ships to remote Countries, does not darkly appear by the Voyage of
one Luseng, sent out by the Emperor Ching or Xi, Anno 214. before the Nativity
of Christ, to discover the Northern Countries; for he, amongst others,
proffered the Emperor some Geographical Descriptions of several Countries in
the World, and especially of China, and the Islands lying in the East Sea,
otherwise called Mare Eoum; from whence some will conclude, that the Name
Cingala ( which signifies Sand-plats of the Chinese, on which a Fleet of Ships
suffered Shipwreck) has its original: From hence is also derived Ceilon, or
Sinlan, that is, Inhabitants of China, or Chinese: Moreover, that the Chinese
of the Island St. Laurence or Madagaskar, is affirmed by the Chinese that
reside on this Island, especially at the Bay of St. Clare, where Men of white
Complexions speak the Chinese Language.

This Negotiation of the Chinese extended it self to all the Islands in the
Oriental Sea, and to India it self, till the time of the Portuguese first
coming thither; but afterward it was neglected, partly for the remoteness of
the Places, and partly out of fear of the Portuguese: But Iapan, the Philippine
Isles, Macassar, Iava, Camboya, Sion, and Cochinchina, the Chinese frequent
with their Ships laden with Merchandise to this very day, especially those of
the Province of Fokien; for scarce any other Chinese frequent the Sea, or go
to foreign Countries against the Laws of the Empire.

The Emperor Hiaou, who Anno 140. before the Incarnation began his Reign, after
having by means of the General Chankieng subdued the Kingdoms of Ynpei, (at
this day Tungking and Laos) Tavon and Takia, lying near the West, sent a Fleet
of Ships to the East through the Chinese Sea, or Bay called Sang. But those
Places to which the forementioned Fleet Sailed, were not described by the
Chinese Geographers, which is no wonder; for as these People have a great and
high opinion of themselves, and account foreign things not worth their
knowledge or description; therefore we cannot say whether this Fleet went to
Iapan, or to the Isles Linson, Ceilon, Iava, Camboya, and the like Places.

The timely finding of the Magnet or Lodestone, and Compass, by the Chinese,
give also no small testimonies of their Navigation.

As Martinius says, the Properties of the Magnet, and its respecting the North
and South, or the Compass, was known to the Chinese many Ages before the
Incarnation, and before the People of Europe; for when in the Reign of Zing,
Anno 1115. before the Birth of Christ, the Cochinchineses, by the Chinese
called Kiaochi, had the first time sent an Agent to the Emperor, with a white
Hen or Pheasant for a Present, the Agent was by the Emperor's Tutor called
Cheucung, a great Astronomer, presented with a piece of Workmanship
artificially wrought, which of it self without ceasing pointed directly toward
the South, not only when it was carried by Land, but by Water also.

This Piece was with two Syllables called Zinan, which is like that wherewith
the Chinese at this day call the Lodestone; which serves for an infallible
testimony (as Martinius says) that the use thereof was found out only by the
Chinese at that time. It is not like our Compass divided into thirty two
Points, but only into four, which respect the four chief Winds, as East, West,
South, and North.

The Chinese are little experienced in the Mystery of Navigation, not being
able to take an Observation of what Latitude they are in with a Quadrant, but
govern themselves only by their Compass and Evening-Star: At the rising of a
Storm or Tempest they choose not Sea-room as our Mariners, but running with
their Ships ashore, leap overboard, and cry Sequa, Sequa.

I will here annex what I have received concerning the Chinese Ships, from the
Writings of David Wright, who resided a considerable time in the Island of
Formosa and China.

The Chinese (says he) call their great Ships Zoen, and not Jonks, or
Iovencheu, as most have written, but by that Name understand our Christian
Vessels; some of them carry a thousand one hundred Last, or twenty two hundred
Tun, some a thousand, others six hundred, others two, and many less.

Their Men of War have a Fore-Castle, and another along the Quarter Deck, which
are higher than the sides of the Ship; in which the Soldiers keep in the time
of a close Fight, and serve also for Gun-Rooms, wherein they keep their Arms
and Ammunition.

Their greatest Ships of War carry not above forty Guns, some thirty, and
others twenty, and ten; all the Guns which they carry in their Vessels being
smaller than ours, some carrying not above eight pound Ball, others scarce
four, three, two, or one; some are Cast of Copper, others of Brass.

Men of War with forty Guns carry eight hundred Men; those with ten, two
hundred, and generally more Soldiers than Seamen.

The Arms which they use are Muskets, Pikes, Darts, Bows, Shields and Swords,
with Fireballs, and the like, besides many Fireships.

Their Men of War are made after another manner than ours, with broad Sterns;
and also broad before, yet not above three Foot* and from the middle they run
narrower toward the Head; they have no Keel, but are flat at the bottom; the
biggest as well as the smallest carry two Masts, without Yards, Mizne, or
Boltsprit. The Sails are made of Rushes and Cane Leaves in this manner:

First they make Network of split Reeds, as big as the Sail they intend to
make, which spreading on the Ground, they lay five double Leaves of Canes all
over it, and on these another Network made just like the undermost, all which
is twined fast together round about and in the middle: which being thus made,
are fastened to the Yard with Ropes, like those of the Dutch Hoys; they loose
and fasten the Strings one by one, and the Sail when taken from the Yard, is
rolled up and laid along in the Ship; the Ropes wherewith they tie them are
made of Hair, but their Cables of Canes or Reeds; the Sails have neither Braces
nor Bowlings, but abundance of small Ropes, which are fastened from the top down
to the bottom of the Sail, and all knotted together about a Fathom distance
from it.

The Anchors are made of a sort of exceeding strong Wood, which sinks in the
Water like Iron, and fastens in the Ground, with Flooks like ours; but they
have no Anchor-stocks nor Rings, but through the end where our Anchorstock is
made fast, runs a Rope.

The Chinese carry no Flag-staffs, but in stead thereof a Mast, which stands
in that part of the Ship where our Mizne-Mast stands: their Flags hang at the
end of a long Stick on the top of the forementioned Mast; which Stick is drawn
up by a Rope that runs through the top, and is made fast about the middle
thereof; on the other end is a Rope, with which they pull down the end of the
Staff, and hoise up the other to which the Flag is fastened; they also carry
Flags and Penons on their Fore and Mainmast, according to the inserted
Sculpture.

The Men of War generally bear a round Circle in their Flags, and not (as
Linschot tells us) three Crescents with seven Stars, after the Mahumetan
manner, one half Red, and the other yellow: and the whole Circle is surrounded
with forty three Specks.

When any Ships come to an Anchor, then their Rudder, which is of another
fashion than ours, they hoise Aboard, and put on again when they set Sail.

They have another sort of Vessels, by those of the Province of Fokien called
Koeya, which are much lesser, the greatest carrying not above fifty, and the
smallest twenty Tun, bearing only one Mast.

A third sort called Sampan, or Champan, have also one Mast, but six Oars.

A fourth named Lantya, have neither Sails nor Masts, but are like Barges, and
carried with sixteen Oars, eight on each side, and to every one eight Men.
These Vessels are not only long, but bear a breadth, and serve against the
Pirates, which much molest the Rivers.

The Emperor keeps great numbers of these Vessels for the safeguard of
Travelers and Merchants, and likewise keeps great Fleets of them upon the
Sea-bordering Provinces, for defense of his Havens and Harbors.

All the Emperor's Ships and Lantayes carry in chief, the Imperial Arms in
their Flags, being a Dragon with five Claws on each Foot.

When any of their Ships coming from a foraign Country, stands in for the
Shore, they can immediately know from whence it comes, and what her Loading,
never asking from whence, or what their Freight, for they give notice thereof
in this manner: The Pilot at the beating on Drums and Kettles, standing on the
Stern, begins to make signs with the Staff in his Hands, and sometimes waves it
over his Head, then behind his Back, then up in the Air, and annon down to his
Feet; then laying the Staff down, he makes as many strange signs with his Hands
and Arms, as he did before; which done, he takes the Staff up again, and begins
a new, whilst the Pilots of those Ships that Ride at an Anchor in the Harbors,
exactly observe his motions, and thereby know all what they desire concerning
the Vessel; which strange kind of signs and tokens the Netherlanders believe
are not to be done by Humane Reason, but by Necromancy and Arts of the Devil.

Common Roads, or Highways.
ALl strangers may justly wonder at the Roads and common Highways that are so
many, and withal, strangely and artificially contrived by Humane Industry, for
the convenience of the Traveller; especially in all the Southern Provinces, the
Ways are first Levelled and Paved with Stones, because they use not many Horses
nor Wains: The highest Mountains are also turned into good Roads, by cutting
and making Passages through the Cliffs on each side: Hills and tops of
Mountains are Levelled, and Valleys filled up therewith, to the great ease of
Travelers.

There are also on certain places, as at every Stone, (lying ten Chinese
Furlongs from one another) Messengers or Posts, which speedily convey all
Letters, the Emperor's and Governor's Edicts from one place to another, by
which means, nothing that is strange or News happens, but in few days, it is
spread through the whole Empire.

At every eighth Stone, being a Tract of a days Journey, are public Houses or
Inns, for Entertainment, called Cungyuon and Yhi, which entertain all
Governors, Magistrates, and other Imperial Officers, of what Degree soever,
with their several Trains, at the Emperor's Charge; but they must by a
Harbenger pre-acquaint the Host or Master of their coming, with the quality
and number of their Attendance, so that when they come, they find all things in
a readiness, not only Provisions, but also Horses, Sedans, Porters, and
Vessels, if there be occasion for them; for whatsoever he desires to have, he
gives notice thereof to the Innkeeper, by a Letter, in the Chinese Tongue
called Pai.

In like manner, the Shores and Banks of Rivers are like the Highways,
handsomely made up, without any Trees or other hindrances, within eight Foot
from the Water, that those which Tow the Vessels by Land, may have a clear
Passage.

And also the Walls of several places are raised from the ground with great
square Stones, and over-laid with Stone Bridges of diverse Arches, where
occasion requires it; so that the Chinese in this Point, not only exceed the
ancient Romans, but may also with all other People strive for the Palm, for
though the Chinese are not comparable to the Europeans, in the Building of
stately and strong Houses; yet in the erecting of Stone Bridges of exceeding
bigness, and many Arches, they far exceed them, as may appear by the
Description of several beforementioned.

Rivers, Streams, and Channels.
AMongst the Rivers which moisten the Country of China, the Kiang and Hoang,
or Yellow River, deserve the first place, partly for their long course through
almost the whole Empire, and partly for their greatness and abundance of Water.

The greatest Rivers are in the Chinese Tongue called Kiang, but the less, Ho.

The Yangzu-Kiang, or for its excellency, by the Chinese called Kiang, as if
they would say, The Son of the Sea, divides all China into a North and South
part.

The River Kiang gliding from the West to the East, takes its Original out of
the Mountain Min, which runs in a ledge of Hills, from the utmost Western
Borders of the Province of Suchuen, into the Kingdom of Sifan, and extends
Northward to the City Guei.

It has several Names from the several Countries through and by which it
passes; its first Name is Min, from the Mountain Min, its Spring and Original,
from whence it rushes with great force of Water, by the chief City Chingtu, in
the Province of Suchuen, and divides it self by the spreading into several
Branches, and Incloses great part of the County Chintingfu, especially at and
near the Metropolis Chingtu, in such a manner, with his Meandring Reaches and
crooked Windings, that it lies like an Island, and at the City Sincin, it
changes its Name into that of Takiang, and passes from thence, enriched with
the Waters of other Rivulets; as the Lunghoa, from the East Side, and Chocang,
Cin, and Tatu, from the West Side, by the City Sui, into the Stream of Mahu;
from thence going on Eastward to the City Liucheu, where it is called Linkiang,
and gliding to the City Chunking, receives the great River Pa with this Name;
then passes North, through the County of Chunkingfu and Queicheufu, Southward
of the City Queicheu or Patung, in one and thirty Degrees Northern Latitude,
out of the Province of Suchuen, into that of Huquang, and then takes again the
Name of Takiang, not far from the City of Queicheu.

To this place it tumbles with many Gulfs, and great force of Water through
crooked Valleys, amidst dangerous Rocks and amazing Precepices, which the
Chinese in their Sailing, with great dexterity and nimbleness, know how to
shun: But afterward begins to glide more gentler, where on the North it falls
in the Lake Tungting; and passing thence, this Lake and the chief City Vuchang
enters the Province of Kiangsi, and there receives out of the Lake Poyang, by
which it passes on the North, great abundance of Water, and the name of Iang^u
Kiang.

From thence falling into the Province of Nanking, a little after makes an Isle
can Sango, Eastward from the City Sosing, where expatiating it self two
Leagues, goes Northward through the whole Province of Nanking; and to the West
and North by the City Nanking it self.

In the County Taipingfu, Southward from the City Nanking, the Kiang divides it
self into two Arms, and makes the Island on which the little City Vuhu stands
situate, which afterward against Nanking unite themselves again: On the
South-West side of the City Taiping, the Kiang is pressed between two Hills
belonging to the Mountain Tienmuen, through which it passes like a Gate; for
which reason the Mountain is called Tienmuen, that is, Heaven Gate; then
running by Chinkiang, at last disembogues it self through a great Bay into the
Ocean; wherein lies in a small Isle the City Cinkiang, Garrisoned with
Soldiers, and Fortified with Ships; on both sides the Shores, are for the most
part built with great and small Cities, Villages and Hamlets.

Before its fall from the City Kieukiam into the Sea, a Tract of above a
hundred Leagues, the Kiang glides so gently, that the Ships may Sail up the
same, with or against the Wind, and some Tides, especially Spring-Tides, (a
strange thing to relate,) the Water running up so far in the Country, that
Seafish are there taken.

In this Stream lie several Isles, as Pequey, that is, of the white Tortel, in
the third County Hoangcheufu, of the Province of Huquang.

In this County Kincheufu, of the Province of Huquang, a little Island called
Peli, which signifies, An hundred Furlongs, lies near the City Chikiang, in the
River Kiang: In ancient times, as the Chinese write, it was nine small Isles,
which afterward by the falling of the Waters and increase of Sands, became one
entire Island.

On the South Side of the City Kiangning, lies an Island called Pelu, famous,
because not far from it, the Armies of the Southern Provinces were in the time
of the Family Sung, beaten and utterly routed.

Near the City Kiang, lies the Isle Chancung, and on the South-West side
another, called Tengxu.

The Yellow River, the second in Magnitude, and most famous in all China, and
by them named Hoang, is so called from the color of the Water, occasioned by
the Yellow Mud or Clay Earth, which from the Spring to the Sea it glides over:
It is always disturbed and made thick by a Yellow Soil, which it carries along;
because this Mud, which gives the denomination, and does not as in other clear
Waters, shine from the Ground, but discolours, being raised by the swift and
strong Current of the Water (after the manner of Rivulets which swell by Rains)
the whole River, as has often been found by experience; for when its Water is
for a little while put into a Vessel, or Glass, the sediment sinks so fast down
to the bottom, that it makes almost a third part; and indeed, this River at the
first sight seems to be a Pool or flowing Mud, but the swift Current of its
Waters manifests the contrary: Those that frequent this River, make the Water
clear by casting in Allom, which drives the Lees to the Ground, and fills the
fourth part of the Vessel. It is a great wonder, from whence such abundance of
Clay or Mud proceeds, considering it has never been seen clear or bright; nay,
the Chinese say, That its Water cannot be clear in the time of a thousand
Years, insomuch that they have a Proverb from thence amongst them, viz. when
they speak of things that are never like to happen, as altogether impossible,
they say, When the Yellow River shall be bright. Moreover, the Hoang, as a
Foraigner, entering from without into China, takes Original out of the Southern
Amasian Mountains, otherwise called Quonlun, and by the Inhabitants, Otunlao,
which lie not far from the great Mogul's second Court, named Laor, or from the
Kingdom of Tibet; Nay, the situation of the places show, that the River Ganges
in Bengale, the Meson in Laor, and other famous Rivers which moisten the
Countries of Siam and Pegu, have their Originals from these Mountains
beforementioned; for the Chinese also manifest, that many great Rivers, have
their head Springs and Fountains there; leaving these Mountains, it runs by
Sifan and Tanyu, a Tract of above 300 Leagues, with abundance of Water to the
North-East, from whence descending to the East, it approaches China, near the
County of Linyaofu, in the Province of Xensi, at the West end of the Great
Wall, along which it rushes, and passes on through a part of the Kingdom of
Tanyu, between the Desert Karacatay, otherwise Samo; afterward through the
Desert it self, with a swift Course, and several Branches to the East and
North, a Tract of two thousand Furlongs; from whence it turns South-West to
China, and in forty Degrees and eighteen Minutes Northern-Latitude, runs
through the Gate Se in the Great Wall of China, and shoots along between the
Province of Xansi and that of Xensi, and in the Latitude of thirty six Degrees
enters into the Province of Honan, and out of that into the Province of
Xantung, near the City Cao; from whence it runs toward the South-East, and
passes on through the Northern part of the Province of Nanking, and discharges
it self at last with great violence into the Sea, in thirty two Degrees and a
half Northern-Latitude.

The Hoang generally falls with such an incredible swiftness, that no Boats can
Row against it, but are forced up with a far greater number of Toers than in
the River Kiang. In some places it is above half a League, and others more, and
extending it self in length above eight hundred Leagues, oftentimes rises above
its Banks, and covers all the neighboring Countries with Water and Mud. The
Chinese describe the Hoang in these, or the like words:

The original of the River Hoang is between the Southern Mountains of Quonlun
or Amasian Hills, by the Inhabitants called Otunlao. The Water which makes this
River springs from above a hundred Fountains, which makes the Lake called
Singcieu, which is forty Furlongs wide; the Water running out of it along a
Channel makes another lesser Lake, from whence the Hoang runs Northward,
through a little toward the East, and soon after washes the Province of Xensi,
and runs direct East, then passing on Northward by the Sandy Fields or
Wildernesses, from whence it streams Southward into China, and through the
Province of Xantung discharges it self into the Sea. Thus far the Chinese
Writer. In former times this River used also to run through the Province of
Peking and Xantung, but its Course is since by the art and labor of the
Chinese led another way, thereby to prevent the overflowing the forementioned
Countries, which by reason of their Champain Lands that extend themselves a
great way in breadth and length, should not be subject to its often inundating
Streams; yet nevertheless the Chinese have left a little Branch thereof, as a
testimony of its ancient Course thither.

After having given you an account of the two famous Rivers, the Kiang and
Hoang, take a brief Relation of all the particular Streams, both small and
great, which distinctly water every Province in the Empire of China.

THe River Io takes its original out of the Lake Si, lying Westward of the
Mountain Iociven in the County of Pekingfu, from whence it passes through the
Emperor's Palace, and gliding through it with many artificial Trenches, and
meandring Inlets, waters the Gardens, and also makes several Lakes.

The Stream Lukeu, which is called Sangean, takes its beginning in the County
of Taitungfu, in the Province of Xansi, out of the Mountain Iueny; from whence
it runs North-East, and at the City Hoaigin receives the River He, which makes
the Lake Kiuncun; and thence proceeding on its Course enters Northward of the
Fort Guei, into the Province of Peking, where enlarged by the Stream Guei,
which has its original in the same County Taitingfu* out of the Mountains near
the City Quangchang, it divides the whole Territory Pekingfu, and gliding
Southward by the City Paogan with a broader Channel, passes under a large Stone
Bridge, and receives the Stream Caoleang, which out of the Yellow Kiver through
the Great Wall falls into the Province of Peking; from thence passing toward
the South-East, rowls along South-West by the Metropolis Peking, where a Stone
Bridge with many Arches lies over the same, then bending Southerly passes East
by the Cities of Fungan and Iungein, where after having received the Rivers Yo
and Pe, disembogues it self at last in the Bay of Sang.

The River Kiuto has its original in the Province of Xansi, out of the
Mountain Cinhi, from whence it glides Eastward by the Cities Tai and Kicchi,
and aftewards Southerly receives by the way the Stream Linsui, with which to
the Northward of the City Henping, it enters into the Province of Peking, which
it almost cuts through, the Counties Chintingfu, Paotungfu, and Pekingfu, and
at last near the Garrison of Tiencin discharges its Waters, being joined with
the River Guei, into the Sea: It receives by the way several Brooks and
Rivulets, as in the County Chinting, near the City Lingxui, that of Quei; more
Eastward, the Stream Fi; near the City Tuilo, the Ta; in the County Paoting by
the City Poye, the Kinguen; afterward the Channel called In, which out of the
Mountain Yekon stretching from the North to the West, glides round about within
the City, and with its winding Arms makes the Island Pehoa, and at last the
Streams Ye and Fan.

The River Ye divides Northward the County Paotingfu, beginning Westward in the
Mountain Culeang, reaches toward the South by the City Ye, and receives by the
way in the County Xuntienfu, the Fan; glides Eastward between the Mountain Non,
and Southward by the City Paoting, where it unites its Waters with the River
Kiuto.

The Chokiang has its beginning in the Province of Xansi, out of the Mountain
Kieu, lying near the City Sin, from whence it runs Eastward through the utmost
Northern Point of the Province of Honan; to the North, by the City Xe; and
passing through the Counties Xuntefu and Quangpingfu, enters the Province of
Peking; from whence it glides through the Lake Talo into the County Chintingfu,
and at last poures its Waters into the River Guei, in the Territory of
Hokienfu, near the Mountain Si and the City Sing. This Stream Chekiang receives
several Rivulets by the way.

The River Guei, which rises in the Province of Honan in the County
Gueichoeifu, on the West side of the City runs along to the North by the same;
from thence entering the Province of Peking, glides to the North-East between
the Borders of the Province of Peking and that of Xantung; receives near the
City Lincing in the Province of Xantung, the Water of the Channel Iun; and in
the County of Hokienfu, the River Chaohang; and at last with the Kiuto,
disembogues it self near the Garrison Tieucin, into the Bay of Sang.

The Water of this River has a peculiar property at the place where it
receives the artificial Channel Iun, as the Netherlanders in their Embassies to
the Emperor of China have twice observed, that is, Throw nine Sticks of an
equal length into the River, and six of them, after a little lying still, will
move to the South, and three to the North.

This River in its Course receives several Rivulets, as the Si, Chang, Ki,
Ming, and Fu: The Si takes its beginning in the Mountain Cu, Northward of the
same City, in the County Chungtefu and Province of Honan, and passes through
the County Quangpingfu; Southward, to the City Quangping; and Eastward, to the
Guei.

The Chang, which has its original near the City Lugan in the neighboring
Mountain Sin, in the Province of Xansi, runs from thence through the Province
of Honan, Northward of the City Changte, and accordingly into the Guei, and in
the way thither by the City Luching, receives a small Rivulet, which has its
original in the Mountain called Lin.

The Ming, a Stream whose Fountain Head is Northward of the City Quangping,
takes its Course South-East toward the Guei.

The Fu, which begins in the Province of Honan, in the County of Luganfu,
Northward from the City Liching, runs through the Province of Honan into the
Guei.

The River Ki takes original with several Branches in the County Guehoei of the
Province of Honan, especially in the Mountains Sumei and Choayang, from whence
one Branch runs by the City Ki, and then glides North-East into the Guei.

The Hoei belongs properly to the Province of Pingyangfu, and springs from the
Mountain Vanquo, near the City Ieching; from whence passing Westward, glides by
the South Side of the Cities Hia, Vanciven, Lincin and Pu, where it falls into
the Yellow River, and by the way Northward receives the Kiang.

The Sin, which waters the Ce, a City in the Province of Xansi, almost
surrounding the same, has his Fountain in the County of Pingyangfu, Northward
from the Mountain Mien; from whence it passes Southward into the County of
Hoaikingfu, Eastward from the City Vucheu, and joins with the Yellow River.

The River Tan, which cuts through a part of the little County Ce, in the
Province of Xansi, beings to the Northward from the City Caoping, and runs
Eastward in the Province of Honan, where it unites with the River Ki.

Tan signifies Red, for the Water thereof is of a bloody color;
notwithstanding (as the Chinese relate) it has been clear formerly, but has
received that color from the Blood of a Loyal Governor called Pe, who was his
own Executioner on the Banks of the forementioned River.

The Streams Iang and Io begin Northward in the Mountains of the County of
Ienping, and pass through the same to the South, but at the City Vunning unite
themselves into one Body, which Eastward of the Garrison You discharges its
Waters into the Bay of Cang.

Through the same County run also two other Rivers, viz. the Y and Cie; the
first begins above the County Pekingfu, from the Mountain Petam; the other out
of the East-Tartary without the Great Wall, where it divides it self into two
Arms, the one called Hing, and the other Hoang. The Rivers Y and Cie make one
Channel near the City Lo, and disembogue themselves in the Bay of Cang.

The Guei, a pleasant River in the Province of Peking in the Western part of
the Province of Xensi, in the County Linyaofu, near the City Gueiyven, and runs
from thence winding to the South-East through the Counties of Cungchangfu,
Fungciangfu, and Siganfu; to the North by the chief City Sigan, where it
receives the River King, and poures at last its clear Waters into the Yellow
River, near the City Puching in the County of Siganfa.

The River King spreads it self with several Branches, as the Streams Kin and
Haoting through the County Pingleangfu; from whence it goes on Eastward,
leaving the City King to the West, afterward Southerly poures its Waters East
from the chief City Sigan, into the River Guei.

The Stream Yao, which takes original out of Sifan, otherwise called
Prester-Iohns Country, or Tibet, descends Southward through the County of
Linyaofu, and with great abundance of Water, roaring like Thunder, rowls along
Northerly by the City Linyao, and at last enlarged with the Stream Tahia, falls
into the Yellow River near the Mountain Ciexe.

The Stream Hoan (another besides the forementioned great River Hoang) springs
up in the Mountains Taise or Ulum, in the County of Kingyangfu; from whence
gliding toward the South by the City Hoang, and near the City Fungiven, in the
County Siganfu, unites it self with the River Kiang.

The Yung, Guei, Puon, Ring, and U. are Rivers, which glides through the County
Fungyangfu, all of them contributing their Waters into the River Guei.

The Han, or Tungchan, a Stream which begins in the County of Cungchangfu, in
the Mountains Cheuchi, through which falling Eastward, afterward winds
Southward, then enters the County of Hanchungfu; through which it cuts
especially with two Branches, one Eastern, which begins about the City Fung;
the other Western, which comes out of the Mountains about the City Mincheu;
then both these Branches uniting, glides (enriched with Water Navigable for
Ships, by the Name of Tan) South-East, and pass through the County of
Cingyangfu into the Province of Huquang: From thence the Han runs through the
Counties of Siangyanfu and Chintienfu, and at last, after a long Course, poures
its Waters into the Lake Yeuchi, and the River Kiang near the City Hanyang.

Several Rivulets discharge their Waters into this Stream, into which the River
Guei glides out of the Mountains Io through the Counties of Siganfu and
Hanchungfu.

The River Vuting runs out of the Mountains near the City Ganting through the
County of Ienganfu, Southward by the City Cingkien, and poures its Waters
united with the Stream Kiemo, into the Yellow River: It is generally by the
Chinese called The Unconstant, because in its Course amongst the Sands it is
sometimes shallow, and sometimes deep.

The Stream Kiemo passes through the same County from the South to the North,
and begins in the Mountains Kicinu; and gliding Westward by the Cities Paogan
and Iengan, and with the Vuting falls into the Yellow River.

The Water of this Stream is said to be so thin and aerial, that no pieces of
Timber nor wooden Vessels can swim upon it, but sink like Iron.

The River Io runs to the South by the Garrison Xaucheu, toward the East, and
unites it self Southward of the Fort Culang with the River Hoanting, which
comes out of Tibet, and running both through one Mouth, fall into the Yellow
River. How far this River Io glides Westward, is not mentioned by the Chinese.

THe Stream Yo runs by the City Chaoykieu in the County of Cinanfu, and Rivers
in the Provin^ of Xantung.
takes its original out of the neighboring Mountain Hosien.

The River Ci takes its beginning in the Stream Sun in the County of Yencheufu,
and passes North-Eastward through the County of Cinanfu; beyond which it
divides it self into two Branches, the one called The Northern, and the other
The Southern Cing, and both discharge their Waters in the Xangen Bay; at the
dividing it receives the River Mingto, which glides Westward out of the
Mountain Minxe.

The Stream Ven, which passes through the County Vencheufu, begins near the
City Taigan; from whence gliding by the Cities Ningyang and Vengang,
disembogues near the City Cinning, Westward of the Lake Nanuang in the Channel
Iun.

The River Si begins near the City Suxui; from whence running Westward, divides
its self into two Arms, (the Eastern whereof is called Tang) between which the
City Kooheu lies like an Island: both these Arms uniting themselves again, and
enriched with the Water of the River Io, fall through one Mouth into the same
Channel Iun.

The Pelang, a River which springs out of the Mountains near the City Sintai,
in the County of Cinanfu, passes Northward through the Territory of Cincheufu,
and gliding by the Cities Changlo and Xeuquan, discharges its Waters into the
Bay of Xang: on the way the Rivers Hoaoquei and Chi flow into the same (...)
the West side, and on the East the River Si.

The Stream Kiao runs from the South to the North through the middle of the
County of Lucheufu, beyond the City Pinghtie, and poures its Waters Westward of
the Fort Haicolang into the Cangang Bay: Kiao signifies Mudstream, because of
the thickness of the Water.

The River Vi begins in the County Cincheufu, Northward of the City Mung, in
the Mountain Tapico; from whence it descends Northward through the County of
Laichenfu, beyond the City Camie, and disembogues into the Bay of Xang. This
River being stopped in its Course by one Zansin, when his Country was invaded,
with Bags filled with Sand, which drowning the Champain defeated his Enemies.

The Y or Su begins in the Mountains, Westward of the City Kiu, belonging to
the County of Cincheufu, and Southward from the City Mungin; from whence
gliding South by the East Side of the City Y, it enters the Province of
Nanking, and then falls into the Channel Nun, Northward from the Yellow River.

The Stream Hucu springs in the West from the Mountain Lie, Northward from the
City Po in the County of Tungchanfu; from whence gliding Eastward it unites
with the Channel Iun, Southward from the City Iangco in the County of Iencheufu.

Eastward from the City Kao, the Si flows out of the Lake Lui, and runs toward
the South into the Yellow River.

THe Streams Kinxui, Iu, Xeleang, Pien, Cu, Quei, and the Yellow River, cut
Streams in the Province of Honan.
through the County of Caifungfu.

The River Kinxui, which comes out of the Mountain Xeyang, in the County of
Honanfu, goes Eastward through Caifungfu into the River Pien, which takes its
beginning out of the Yellow River in the County of Caifungfu, Westward of the
City Hoin, and glides East by the South side of the Kity Caifung; from whence
running on to the South-East through the County of Queitefu, it passes by the
West side of the City Ningling, then passes on through the County of Fungyangfu
in the Province of Nanking, and by the City Lingpi unites it self again with
the Yellow River.

The Stream Quei divides the County of Caifungfu with several Branches, and
seems to take its original out of the Lake Si, Westward from the City Hiu; from
whence it passes East, and afterward South through the same County, and by the
West side of the Cities Hiangching and Xinkian, then passing through the County
of Fungyangfu in the Province of Nanking, where changing its Name, and taking
up that of Ing, at last falls Southerly into the Hoai.

The River Cin, which begins in the County of Caifungfu and the Mountains
Iuling, North from the City Iu, runs East to the City Ienling, then gliding
Southward, unites with the Stream Quei.

The River Iu, takes Original out of the Lake Quanching, lies West from the
City Iu, where it joins it self with the River Scenal, and from thence flows
through the County Iu; afterward East, through the North part of the County
Nanyangfu; and at last turning its course through the County Iunningfu, toward
the South, it falls into the River Hoai, near the City Quang.

The Xoleang, whose Head is in the County Honanfu, Southward from the Mountains
Xeyang, flows from thence Southerly, to the West side of the County Caifungfu,
and unites its self at the entrance into the County Iuningfu, with the River Iu.

Through the County Queitefu flows the Streams Pien; described before the Cin
and Hoang, or Yellow River.

The River Ciu begins in the County Caifungfu, Westward from the City
Chinglieu, and runs Southward through the County Queitefu, by the South Side of
the City Queite; afterward East, and again South, by the Mountain Tang, and
enters near the City Tangxan into the Province of Nanking, and soon after into
the Yellow River.

The Rivers Lo and Ganyang, otherwise called Von, pass by the City Liu, where
they loose themselves underground several Furlongs, but soon after appear
again.

The Ki, which divides the County Hoaikingfu, comes out of the Mountain Vanno,
where falling underground, soon after makes the Lake Taye; from whence gliding
Eastward into the Yellow River, is called, the Ci.

Through the County Honanfu, the Rivers Chan, Kien, Ko, or Lo, and Y: The River
Y begins near the City Luxi, in the Mountain Lu; and gliding Eastward, unites
with the Co or Lo, near the City Honan.

The Lo or Co, an excellent River, comes out of the County Siganfu, from the
Mountain Lo, in the Province of Xensi; from whence it passes North, North-East,
by the East side of the City Iunning, where it receives the River Hivenhu, and
unites it self at last near the City Hanan with the River Y; with which it
glides from thence into the Yellow River.

The Stream Kien, which begins in Mount Pexe, to the Southward of the Yellow
River, runs Eastward into the River Y; and Eastward from the City Honan, the
River Chan glides to the North.

The Rivers Yo or Pe, Tan, Pie, and Hoai, through the Territory Nanyangfu.

The Pe or Yo, beginning in the North of this County in the Mountain You; from
whence it runs South, and passes through the Territory Cingyangfu into the
Province of Huquang, gliding Eastward by the City Quanghoa, and immediately
after into the River Tunghan.

The Pie, which begins Westward from the City You, runs Southward, and unites
with the Stream Pe, on the Borders of the Province of Huquang.

The Tan begins at the West side of the City Nuihiang, and shoots from thence
South-East by the South part of the Towns Checheuen and Sinye, and at last
falls into the Pe.

The Palu, which begins on the Northern Borders of the Province of Huquang,
glides North-East into the River Hoai, East from the City Quang.

The Sienul springs out of the Mountain Ri, near the City Tenfung, in the
County Honangfu, from whence it glides South-West into the Territory Iu,
Eastward from the Lake Quangching.

The Chu, which begins in the County Chintufu, Southward from the City Ginxeu,
passes South through the same, and toward the West by the City Ninkiang,
unites with the Stream Yoyung, which coming out of the County Tungchuen,
receives another River near the Mountain Loking, which has its Original in the
Territory Chintufu.

The Chu, thus enriched with Water, glides to the South, and takes the Name of
Chung, and so passes on through the County Sincheufu, and at last toward the
East, through the County of the City Lincheu, and disembogues Southward of the
City Hokiang, into the River Kiang.

The Kiang, which from North to South runs through the whole County of
Chingtufu, under the Name of Takiang, runs Southward by the West side of the
City Muen, and receives on the East the River Yolung; after which it divides
near the City Sinfung into several Branches, which about and near the City
Chingtu, join together, and surrounding the City and adjacent Country, make it
an Isle: One of these Branches which run to the Southward of the City, is
called Kin, and generally also Damask River, because its Water gives a great
Gloss to Silk, if it be washed therein: Another, more toward the West, is
called Chia or Hoanglang, that is, Yellow Dragon, for it is said, that in the
time of the Family Han, a Yellow Dragon was seen in the same; but glides
toward the South, through the County of the City Muicheu and Kiating, and
falls at last near the City Muicheu, into Kiang or Taking.

The Lungchoa running out of the County of the City Muicheu; to the South-West
and North, by the City Gueiyven, discharges its Water in the Che or Cin.

The Cin, which begins in the Mountains Cinsing, in the Territory Yacheufu,
falls Southward through the same County, by the East side of the City Yacheu;
afterward through that of Kiating; and at last Westward, by the City Kiating,
where it unites with the River To or Tatu.

The River Chocung, which has its Original in the Territory of Kiungchoa, in
the Mountain Gomui, passes through the Southern parts thereof, and through the
County of Kiating, into the Stream Takiang or Kiang: This River is eminent
amongst the Chinese, for a wonderful accident that happened to a Woman, who
walking along its Bank, saw a great Cane standing on the Water, from which
hearing a noise, and pulling up the Cane, found a Child enclosed therein, which
she carried home with her, who breeding it up, not long after became a great
Conqueror, and was called Yelang, and first on the West side of this River,
Planted the Kingdom of Yeleang.

The To or Tatu which runs toward the Kingdom of Sifan, is a Branch led from
the River Kiang, cut by Command of the Emperor You, to prevent the overflowing
of the River Kiang.

The Chexu washes the South-West side of the Province Suchuen; from whence it
glides North-East, and falls on the West side into the Lake Mahu: Somewhat
Northerly, the River Lu takes the same course and so ends.

The Pa, taking Original in the Northern Mountains of the County Paoningfu,
moistens the same, and runs Eastward by the City Pa, to which it gives
denomination; and afterward passes Southward through the County Xunkingfu, and
near the Mountain Iohoan, receives the River Chai; near the City Tacho, the
River Lin; near the City Riu, the Stream You, and unites it self in the County
Chungkingfu; near the Mountain Tu, with the River Sihan or Sung, and Feu, which
all of them with their conjoined Streams fall into the River Kiang, Southward
from the City Chungking.

The Pa, a River which is so called, because with its Meandring Reaches it
represents the Chinese Character called Pa, which signifies Enough.

The Feu, begins in the North part of the Province of Suchuen, in the County
Lungganfu, on the South-West side of the City Lunggan; passing from thence
South, through this and the Territory Chingtufu; and Eastward, by the City
Tungchuen; from whence it bends East, and glides through the County Chunkingfu,
where, near the Mountain Pu, it mingles with the Ta.

The Chuen, which springs in the Mountains Northward from the City Quanggan, in
the County Xankingfu, and gliding South by the West side of the City Quanggan;
more Southerly by the West side also of the City Gochi, at the end of the
County, falls into the River Sung or Sihan: In it are thirty six deep
Waterfalls, where it descends violently with great noise.

The Sung, by some called Sihan, begins in the Province of Xensi, in thirty
Degrees and fifty Minutes Northern-Latitude, at the East side of the Garrison
Mincheu, from whence it passes Southward, and in thirty three Degrees and forty
Minutes North-Latitude, enters the Province of Suchuen; then running through
the County Paoningfu, by the West side of the City Zangki, receives the Tung,
falling out of the Mountain Xeyen; so gliding by the City Paoning, enters at
last into the Territory of Chungkingfu, and near the Mountain Fu, joins with
the Rivers Pa and Feu, which all loose themselves near the City Chungking in
the River Kiang.

The Xe, which rises in the Mountains, Westward from the City Kien, passes
Southward through the Mountain Tapa, and with several Windings, glides Eastward
by the City Lenting and Xehung; then passing on South-East, makes way through
the County of Xunkingfu, and mixes at the South-end thereof with the River
Sihan or Sung.

The Xemuen or Heng, runs through the South part of the Territory Siucheufu, by
the South-West side of the City Siucheu, with great force and Precipices,
called the Bell, because it makes a noise like a Bell, re-sounding with Echoes.

Lastly, the River Xemuen falls in the Kiang: The Stream Cingy, also passing on
the East side of the same Territory, fills the River Kiang.

The Cing and Tosiang, cut through the Territory Queicheufu; the first which
takes Original in the Lake Cingyven, and falls joined with the Tosiang, which
glides out of the Lake Cienking into the Kiang, Eastward from the City
Queicheu: Cing signifies Clear, because its water is clearer than any other
Rivers in this Province.

The Tahoa, which passes through the South side of the County Chunkingfu,
glides Northward by the West side of the City Vulung, and falls on the West
side also of the City Changxu, into the River Kiang.

The Kiu or Kiukiang, begins with two Branches, the one called Piniao, in the
South part of the Province of Queicheu, Westward from the City Luken; and with
the other, in the Province of Suchuen, Southward of the Mountain Fuyung, from
whence it glides North-East along the South-East side of the Province of
Suchuen; afterward running Northerly into the County Chunkingfu, falls
Eastward of the City Changxeu into the River Kiang: By the way, the Ciu
receives on the North side of the Garrison Pingchai the Nanyang; and in the
County Vunkingfu, the Stream U, Northward from the City Pengxui.

THe Han, which runs through the North part of the Country Vuchanfu, Rivers of
the Province of Huquang.
falls Westward of the little City Vuchan, into the Kiang: The water of the Han
is exceeding cold, insomuch, that it makes the Air about the same temperate in
the Dog Days; for which cause, the Kings in times past built a Palace over the
same, to reside in the Summer.

The Io springs in the Mountains, Southward from the City Vuchan, and runs
Northerly through the middle of the City into the Kiang.

The Sui takes Original in the Mountains, Eastward from the City Tangzan, and
glides North-West into the Kiang; through the South part of this County passes
another Branch, which also discharges in the Kiang.

The Cha divides the whole County Teganfu, and takes Original in the Mountain
Tahaung, from whence it passes Southward by the East side of the City Sui, and
enlarged with the Stream Tuen, on the West side, and with others on the East
side, out of the Lake Tuigmung, by the West part of the City Tegan; at last,
mixed near the City Iungmuug with the River Hoan, which comes out of the Lake
Tungmung, it falls by the Name of Hoan into the River Han.

The Ki, which glides through the County of Hoangcheufu, out of the Lake Uheu,
Westward by the City Ki, falls into the River Kiang: The same Territory is also
cut through by two other Streams, viz. Hi and Lungsiang, which both coming out
of the North, mingles with the Kiang.

The Mie, which glides through the County Yocheufu, springs from the Mountain
Tienho, from whence it shoots North-West into the River Siang, and with that
into the Kiang.

The Lieu, begins in the Lake Pexa, which produces four Rivers, and gliding
North-West through the Territory Chanxafu, empties it self into the County
Iocheufu in the River Siang.

The Mielo proceeds from the joining of two Streams, viz. Lieu and Chao,
originally springing out of the County Paokingfu, and passing Westward by the
City Siangiin, at last falls into the River Taohao, or Siang: The Mielo
receives by the way another Stream called Can, which comes out of the Lake
Pexa: This River is eminent, because it was the occasion of a great Feast, by
the Chinese called Tuonu, which with all Solemnity, is kept on the fifth day
of the fifth Moon, through all parts of China, in Commemoration of a Loyal
Governor, who not able to serve his Master the Emperor any longer, Drowned
himself in this River.

The Siang rises at the conjoyning Borders of the Province Huquang, and that of
Quangsi, in the Mountain Siung; from whence it passes North, through the County
Iungcheufu, where on the West it receives the River You; and out of this
Territory, entering into that of Hengcheufu, glides afterward through that of
Changxafu, where it also receives the Names of Mielo, by the West part of the
City Siangyan, where it unites with the River Tahoa, but retains the Name of
Siang; and at last, falls through the Territory Yocheufu into the Kiang: Its
water may compare with Crystal for clearness, and though it be very deep, yet
the Stones that lie in the bottom may plainly be discerned.

The Siao, which begins in the Mountain Kieny, at the South-West side of the
City Ningyven, passes from thence close by the East side of the City Iungcheu;
and toward the North, mixes with the Siang; receives by the way Northward,
from the City Ningyven; on the West, the River Cin, and Rivulet Xu; on the
East, the Hoang.

The Chinghiang and Ciencieu, glide from the South to the North through the
County Ciencheufu, afterward mixing their Waves together, pass along one
Channel North-West, through the Territory Hengcheufu, thence pour their waters
into the Siang.

The Lofeu, which comes out of the Northern Mountains in the County of
Changxafu, runs to the South by the City Xeu, and to the Southward of the City
Siatang falls into the River Siang.

This River is called Lofeu because of its excellency, and for the abundance of
Lampreys that breed in the same.

The Gu, which begins in the Mountains near the City Vucang, glides from the
South to the North through the County Paokinfu, and passes over many Rocky
Falls, and receives on its West side, Southward from the City Paoking, the
River Tuleang; and in the Territory Xincheufu, near the City Xopu, another
Rivulet called Xo; from whence it passes along the West side of the County of
Changxafu, where it is named Taohoa, and winding toward the East, joins at
last near the City Siangyn, with the River Siang.

This River in the County of Paotingfu has forty eight very troublesome and
difficult places for Vessels to pass, and most of all on the North side of the
City Paoting, where there are so many headstrong Falls from broken Rocks, that
the Chinese have set up a Copper Pillar there, to make fast their Vessels to,
till such time as they have furnished themselves with all manner of Necessaries
for their Voyage, for it would be impossible else to get up their Boats by so
many Rocks against the Stream.

The Ching, which passes from the Mountains Eastward from the City Paoking,
glides to the North by the City Hencheu, where soon after it falls into the
Siang.

The U begins in the Mountain near the City Iung, and runs by the City
Changning.

The Lang, otherwise called Yvon and Kiu, takes original in the Province of
Queicheu, Southward from the Garrison Taping, where it is called Tiechung, and
passes from thence Northward through the County Sintienfu, then Eastward
through the Territories Chinyvenfu and Sucheufu, and enters into the Province
of Huquang, near the City Yveni; from whence gliding North-East through the
Counties Xincheufu and Chatefu, it falls at last into the Lake Tungting.

The Xin, passing by the East side of the City Xincheu, falls into the Iuen.

On the South side of the City Lui are five Rivulets, viz. Hiung, Yeu, Yuen,
Xin, and Muon; besides one of the same denomination, which runs by the City
Cienkiang, and disembogues in the Tan.

By the City Kingling glides the River Y, which falls also into the
forementioned Tan.

The Lungmuen passes by the East side of the City Chingyang, having its
original in a Mountain of the like Name.

Westward from the City Choxan begins the River C^ngyang, and runs Northward by
the City Fang; then by the Name of Tanghia bends Eastward, and discharges its
Waters also in the Tan.

The Water of this River suddenly takes all Spots out of Garments, and hardens
the Edge of Iron and Steel.

By the City Choxan rushes also the Xangyang, which has a very great
Waterfall; If any one throw a Stone into it, there immediately (as they say)
arises a Thunder Shower.

The Hiung grows from the conjunction of nine Rivulets in the little County
Cincheufu, viz. Lang, Vry, Hiung, Xin, Lung, Sui, Quei, Vu, and Hiung; from
whence it glides along one Channel through the County of Xincheufu, to increase
the River Yven.

The Y or Cing, which begins Westward of the Garrisoned City Xi, passes
Northward, and going through the County of Kingcheufu falls into the Kiang.

The Can runs Westward by the City Nanchang into the Lake Poyang, as the River
Licufan to the East.

THe Cau or Chan, which runs through the middle of the Province of in the
Province (...).
Kiangfu from the South to the North, takes its original in the County
Cancheufu, Eastward from the City Xuiking; from whence it glides South ward by
the City Hoeichang, and afterward takes its Course Northerly; where, not far
from the City Cancheu, to which it gives denomination, it receives the River
Chang.

This River begins in the County of Nanganfu, Westward from the City Nangan, on
the joint Borders of the Provinces of Kiangsi and Huquang. Both these Rivers
commixing their Waters, make a great Channel on the North side of the City, and
divide almost the whole Province of Kiangsi; then gliding Northward first
through the County Cancheufu, afterward through that of Kiegan, Eastward from
the City Kiegan it self; lastly, passing through Linkiangfu and Nanchangfu,
fall Westward from the City Nanchang into the Lake Poyang.

By the way the Can receives several Streams and Rivers, which all have their
original in the Province of Kiangsi, viz. To the East in the Territory
Cancheufu, the River U has its beginning; near the City Utu, the Kien and
Cang; near the City Cancheu, as in Kieganfu, the Stream Lu; near the City
Kiexui toward the West, the Rivers Tao, Sui, Xoin, and Sengting; in the County
of Linkiangfu Westward, the River Yven; in Nanchangfu, the Hoayang and Xo; by
the City Kiegan, in the Stream Can, begins the dangerous Rock called Xotapan:
for from this City the going down this River is very Craggy, and dreaded also
for the many Vessels that have perished there on its Sands and Shelves, over
which the Water hastes with great swiftness.

There are eighteen Places where they say the most danger is, from whence the
Name Xopatan, which signifies Eighteen Water-falls, is derived.

Most Vessels take an experienced Pilot with them from the City Kiegan, to
carry them through the forementioned Places: The greatest danger is at the
City Hoangcung.

The River Yven, or You, springs in the Mountain Yangchi, Northward from the
City Iuencheu, and in the County of Linkiangfu falls into the Chan.

The Lu, which begins in the Mountain near the City Iungfung, runs not far from
the City Kiexui, and receives near the Walls of the City two Rivers, viz. the
Xanglu and Hialu; then gliding toward the West, bends afterward a little to
the North-West, and alters its Name, first into that of Luyuen, then into that
of Lap, and disembogues into that of Chan.

The River Kie or Ven passes through the Jurisdiction of the City Kiexui, and
with its winding Course makes almost the Chinese Letter Kie, that is,
Happiness, from whence also the City has the Name Kiexui, which is, Happy in
Waters.

Out of the Mountains near the City Iungsin, springs the Rivulet Senting, which
signifies Whistle, because its Waters gliding swiftly through the Rocks and
Stones, make a pleasant noise like that of a Flajulet.

The River Xo, otherwise called Kin, springs near the City Vanca, in the County
of Iuencheusu; from whence it glides Westward by the City Xancao, and unites
with the River Hoayang near the City Kuicheu, which both run into the Can. Its
Water (according to the common Relation of the Chinese) is good against many
Distempers.

The Lungki, which springs out of the Mountain Pochang in the County of
Nanchangfu, glides North-East by the West Side of the City Fungsin, afterward
through the Territory Nankangfu, and poures its Waters at last near the City
Gang into the Lake Poyang.

The River Sieu, which running out of the County Iuencheufu, Northward from the
Mountain Kinki, glides Eastward into the Territory Nanchangfu, by the South
side of the City Ning; then gliding North-East, enters the County Nankangfu,
and at last falls into the Lake Poyang.

THe Po, which springs out of the Mountains in the Territory Hoeicheufu Rivers
in the Province of Kiangsi.
in the Province of Nanking, and glides South-West through the same, passes
through the County Iaocheufu into the Province of Kiangsi; then Westward, and
enlarged with the Waters of the Stream Poyven, glides to the South by the City
Iaocheu, and in the Territory Iaocheufu falls into the Lake Poyang.

Along this River the Earth is carried out of the forementioned County
Iaocheufu, of which the best Porcelane in all China is made.

The Kiencie, which begins Northward of the Mountain Suihan, runs West by the
North-side of the City Yukan, where it falls into the Lake Poyang.

The Xangjao springs in the Mountains near the City Ioxan, and glides Northward
by the City Quangsin, afterward to the South through the same County, and
disembogues, having washed several places in the County Iaocheufu, in the Lake
Poyang, and by the way receives on its Northern Shore the Water of the Rivulets
Se and Ko.

Almost out of the same place, though more Southerly, ^uns the Yo, and through
this County takes the same Course toward the North by the City Iungfung, and
to the South by the City Queiki. The Rivulet C^, coming out of the South, falls
into the same.

The Hiui, which begins in the Mountains Southward from the Quangchang in the
County Kienchangfu, passes North-West by the North s^e of the City Kienchan;
from whence it enters into the County Vucheufu, and falls into the River
Lienfan. Near the City Kienchang the Rivulets Lung an^ Kieukio, through one
only Channel, run into the same, both originally out of the Eastern Mountains
of this Territory.

Two other Rivers, viz. the Lu and Cing, gliding from the South to the North
through the County Vucheufu; by the City Vucheu, into the River Hiui, with
which they fall into the Stream Lienfan.

The Lienfan runs by the North-West side of the City Veuche^, and afterward
cutting through the County of Nanchangfu, disembogues on the East side of the
Nanchang into the Lake Poyang.

This River is remarkable for the use which the Chinese man of its Water, for
that not being subject to the alteration of the Weather, is properly made use
of in their Hour-glasses, which run there with Water as ours with Sand.

The Hoai beginning in the Province of Honan, out of the Mountains near the
City Funge, passes from thence into the Province of Nanking* by the City
Hokieu, through the Territory Fungyangfu, and crosses the same from the East to
the West, then falls at last, near the City Hoiang, into the Yello^ River, and
with that into the Sea.

By the way this River receives several others, viz. in the County Ienningfu of
the Province of Honan, the Su; in this County of Fungangfu Southward, another
called Hoai, Peca and Fi* to the North, the River Ing, Co, and Vi; which three
last have their original out of the Province of Honan.

The Fu rises in the County Fungyangfu near the City So, on the East side of a
Lake which lies at the Foot of the Mountain.

Three Rivers surround the County Sucheufu, like an Isle, making it Navigable
in several places; the first is called Leu; the second, Sung, which glides
toward the City Ukiang; the third, Ulang, runs toward the East: all of them
have their original out of the Lake Tai, and discharge themselves into the Sea.

Leang, a little River, proceeds from the Fountain Hoci, lying on the Hill
Hoei, in the County of Sucheufu, and near the City Vucie falls into the Lake
Ta: The Water thereof is by the Chinese accounted the best, excepting one, in
the whole Empire, and is in great esteem amongst Persons of Quality. Not a
Vessel which passes this way but buys of it, being ready Bottled, for a small
Price, though any one that will stay, may freely take as much as he pleases for
nothing. It is Transported to remote Provinces, nay, to the Imperial Court at
Peking; for they account it the best to make their Drink Cha withal, by boiling
it with the Herb Tee, and therefore it is much in request.

The Singan begins in the County Hoeicheufu, Westward of the City Hoeicheu; by
which passing, it is afterward increased with the Waters of several Rivolets;
the first of which comes out of the City Hoeicheu; the second, out of those
near the City Hieuning; the third, from those about Vuyen; and the fourth, out
of those near* Cieki. The Singan runs straight along through Rocks and Valleys
to Sungan, a City in the Province of Chekiang, and has by the way three
hundred and sixty Water-falls, of which the most troublesome to pass lies near
the City Hoeicheu, and is called Liucung; then entering into the County
Niencheufu in the Province of Chekiang, passes Southward by the City Sungan,
and from thence toward the South-East, and to the South by the City Nieucheu,
where bending Northward, it changes its Name into that of Che or Chekiang,
(from whence the whole Territory, which it almost cuts through the middle from
South to North, receives denomination) and accordingly through the County of
Hangcheufu; toward the East, by the City Hangcheu; where taking the Name of
Cientung, it runs East, and at last in thirty Degrees North-Latitude falls into
the Sea.

The Che receive^ several Streams out of the Territories Kinhoafu and Kiucheufu
from the South and East, as Ven, Chanyo, Kin, Tingyang, Co, Puyang, and Ho,
which all through one Channel fall into the same near the City of Tunglin.

The Min begins on the Boundaries of the Provinces of Fokien and Chekiang, by
the City ^gciveu of the County of Chuchenfu; from whence it passes Southerly
through the County of Kienningfu; Westward, by the City Puching and Kienning,
as accordingly East by the City Yenping (where it receives the River Siki)
through the Territory Yenpingfu; from whence bending Eastward, it enters the
County Focheu, and glides by the South side of the Garrison Xuikeu, where the
M^ falls into the same; then Northward by the chief City Focheu, and at last on
the North side of the Garrison Xeching disembogues into the Sea in twenty six
Degrees Northern-Latitude. From the City Puching to the Garrison Xuiken* the
same River falls with great force of Water through Valleys, Rocks and Cliffs,
but from thence glides on but slowly: With how much swiftness the Water runs
between the forementioned two Places appears by this, that they can go from
Puching to the Metropolis Tiocheu with the Stream in three days, whereas they
are fifteen days Toeing up against it: The Channel winding up and down is very
dangerous, and dreadful by reason of the swift Current, abundance of Rocks, and
narrowness of the Channel, which in many places between the Rocks is no wider
than to permit a small Chinese Vessel to pass through, from whence it
oftentimes happens that several suffer Wreck. From the place where this River
has its original, to that where it terminates, it receives many Rivolets and
Streams, as on the East, the Tung; on the West, the Kiao, Kieukio, Cu, and
Siki; on the South, the Rivers Ionki, Min, and Tachang or Nantai.

The Tung, which comes out of the Mountain Vanche in the County of Kienningfu,
falls Southward of the City Kienning into the Min.

The Kiao, which passes through the Territory of Focheufu, rises out of the
Mountain Siuefung, shoots from thence Eastward to the North of the River Min,
by the South side of the City Lienkiang, and at last discharges its Waters into
the Ocean.

The Brook Kieukio, which begins in the Mountain Vuy, in the County of
Kienningfu, runs from thence South-West, and unites with the Brook Hochung,
which has its original in the Hill Ukiun in the Territory of Xaounfu; from
whence it passes South by the City Kienyang, and at last falls with its Waters
into the River Min, near the City Kienning.

The Cu, which begins in the Mountain Ukiun in the County of Xaounfu, glides
from thence first Southward, then Eastward by the East side of the City Xaonu,
then bending to the South in the County Ienpingfu, it fa^s into the River Si,
near the City Sianglo; from whence both these Strea^ run through one Mouth
Easterly, then Southward, and pour their Wate^ united with the River Situ,
Westward from the City Ienping, into the Min.

The Siki springs Northward in the Territory of Tingcheufu, out of the Lake
Kiao, then runs Southward, so East, and enters into the County ^enpingfu, and
to the North by the City Lunggan, and by the City Xu, when it receives the
Brook Taisu, and unites it self at last with the River Cu.

In the Siki, along which they Sail down to the City Ienping, ^e many
Waterfalls and dangerous Shoals, two especially near the City Cing^ namely
Kieulung and Chancung; in the passing by, the Seamen to preven^ the danger of
Shipwreck therein, tie Trusses or Bundles of Straw before the Bow of the Ship,
which bear off the violence of the blow and keep her back.

The River Yeuki, which rises in the County of Ienpingfu* out of the Mountain
Yucuang, takes its Course Eastward by the North side of the City Yeuki, and
turning to the North, falls into the Min.

The Rivolet Tachang begins West from the City Iungfo, and r^ning East by the
City Focheu, finishes Northward by the Name of Nantai into ^e Min.

The Chang, which has its original Northward from the Ci^ Lungnien, in the
County of Changcheufu, runs East by the North side of the ^es Changping and
Changtui, then from the East part of the City Chancheu, (which is also in the
South) it falls at last Southward into the Sea with two Arms.

More to the South in the same County glides the Xeching, from the West to the
East, and loses it self Northward of the Garrison Tungxan into the Sea.

The Kieu, directing its Course from North to South through the County of
Civencheu, discharges its Waters Southward into the Sea.

The Brook Lan and River Si, which run from North to South through the
Territory of Foningfu, fall both into the Sea; the first toward the West
breaks forth in the Mountain beyond the City Fogan, the other comes out of the
Mountain Lan.

The Ting has its beginning in the Territory of Tingcheufu, Northward from the
City Tingcheu, and receiving Southward of the same the Brook Ven, proceeds by
the City Xanghang; then entering the County of Chaocheufu in the Province of
Quantung, receives near the City Chingiang, the River Ching, with which at last
it loses it self Southward in the Sea.

THe Brook Iokio begins with a Branch in the Mountain Ho, in the County Rivers
in the Province Quantung.
of Hoeicheufu, and with another out of the Territory of Chaocheufu, Northward
from the City Pingquen; both joining near the City Kieyang, run Southward by
the East part of the City Chaocheu, and at last dividing into two Arms, fall
into the Sea, which on the East side of the City is called Go.

The River Ly rises in the Mountain Northward from the City Changlo, and
Westward of the City Haifung shoots it self into the Sea, opposite to the
Island of Ciexing.

The Tung takes its original in the Mountains in the County Cancheu, in the
Province of Kiangsi, tends on Southward into the Province of Quantung, through
the County of Hoeicheufu, and at last terminates in the Sea.

Another River called Ceng, shoots out of the forementioned Tung above the
City Hoeicheu, and runs Southward through this and the County of Quangcheufu,
and gliding through the Lake Go, discharges it self Northward from the City of
S^an into the Sea.

The Siang* also called Kio, springs from the Rivers Chin and Vu, Southward of
the City ^ocheu, and bends its Course into the County of Quangcheufu, where
near the City Cingyven it receives the River Talo coming out of the Lake Quen,
and falls at last Westward from the City Quancheu or Ranton, into the River Ta.

The Chin springs out of the Mountain Muilin, beyond the City Nanhiung; the Vu
out of the Mountain Chang, in the County Haocheufu. The Rivers Chin and Siang
run ^oth quite through whole Province of Quantung.

The Tao flows out of the Lake Quen, Southward through the County of
Quancheufu, and falls near the City Cingyven into the River Siang. Tao
signifies a Peach, from the abundance of that sort of Fruit growing on its
Banks. By the way the Tao takes in the River Hoang.

The Brook Yu^* which has its source beyond the City Cunhoa in the County
Quancheufu, runs South-West, and thence Eastward from the City Canton.

The River Xangu passing through the County of Lotingfu, is received by the
River Ta.

The River Mekiang glides through the Territory of Nanhiungfu. Mekiang
signifies A River of Ink, because its Water is as black as Ink; notwithstanding
which the ^sh is not the worse esteemed.

The River King appearing first on the Boundaries of the Provinces of Quangsi
and Quantung, passes on from the North to the South, but through the last
Eastward by the City King, to which it gives that Name, and opens a wide Mouth
into the Sea.

The River Lungmuen takes its source in the Western Mountains about the City
King in the County of Liencheufu, and from thence passing through the Kingdom
of Tungching loses its self in the Sea

The River Lien springs out of the Mountains, near the City Linkan, and
Southward by the East side of the City Liencheu, descends into the Sea, through
the same County the Sanya, which has its Original in the Mountains, Northward
of the City Suiki, in the County Liucheufu, resigns to the Sea.

The River Tunglui, shoots from the North to the South through the County
Caocheufu; the Xo likewise, though more Eastward, glides to the West by the
City Xaocheu, where it receives the Stream Hencang.

THe River Ly, otherwise called Quei, takes its Original on the Boundaries
Rivers belonging to the Province of Quangsi.
of the Provinces of Huquang* from whence it passes through the County
Queilingfu, Westward in the Province of Quangsi, by the way taking in the Brook
Quon, (which comes out of the East, Southward from the City Quonyang,) and
falling down with a great force and noise through Mountains and Valleys, half
invirons the City Quelin; whence gliding Southward, it entertains the River
Yang, which comes Northward out of the Mountain Sumo, West from the Mountain
Ly; then turns with a Branch Eastward, to the City Yangeo (where out of the
Northern Mountains, in the County Pinglofu, the River Pinghuen falls into the
same) then turns again Southward, and runs again through the County Pinglofu,
Westward by the City Pinglo; and at last unites its self with the River Ta, in
the Territory Gucheufu.

The River Lieu, otherwise called Xo or Xokiang, and Kung, begins in the
Province of Queicheu, near the Garrison Cinping; from whence it passes
Southward through the County Tuchefu; thence Eastward, by the City Tucho,
through the Territory Kingyven, Northward by the City Kingyven, and so turning
and winding into the Province of Kiangsi; thence Eastward, into that of
Lieucheu; at last, it unites with the River Talo, otherwise called Lieucheu,
near the chief City Lieucheu.

The River Tolo, otherwise called Lieu, rising in the County Lipingfu, of the
Province of Queicheu, near the Garrison Cheki, runs Southward through the same,
by the West side of the City Lungeung, where a little more Southerly it meets
with the River Yung, and enters Westward of the City Hoaiyven, into the County
Lieuchefu, of the Province of Quangsi; at last, joining with the River Lieu or
Xo, near the City Lieucheu, it keeps on Eastward of the City Laiping, where it
receives the Lui; then from the City Siang, it glides Southward, and at last
augmented with the Water of several Rivers, it pours through the County
Cincheufu, and Eastward of the City Cinchen into the River Ta.

The Streams Lie, Teng, Quei, Feu, and Lin, flow through the County Pinglofu,
from the North (where, except the Quei, they all have their Original) to the
South, and accordingly, through a part of Gucheufu, where they all discharge
their Water into the River Takiang.

The River Yung extends through the whole County Gucheufu, rising on the East
side of the City Hingye, out of the Mountains Ho; from whence it runs
Southward, and soon after East, and returns from thence Northward, by the West
side of the City Yung, to which it gives denomination; then passes Eastward
again to the West of the City Gucheu, into the River Taikiang, or Ta.

The Stream Ly, Springs out of the Lake Xan, in the County Quangsifu, of the
Province of Iunnan; from whence it marches Southward, and enters next into the
Province of Quangsi, by the City Lung; then proceeds on its Course East, with
many Inlets through the County Taipingfu, where it receives the Rivers Leung
and Tungly; from the North afterward through that of Nanningfu; and at last,
near the City Nanning, unites it self with the Southern Puon.

The Mosale, or Moxale, or Xale, springs out of the Lake Siul, in the County
Tulifu, of the Province of Iunnan; from whence it runs Eastward through the
same County, and first South-East, afterward South, through that of Zuhiungfu,
by the East side of the City Zuhiung, where it receives the River Lungchuen;
then proceeding on its Course through the County Iuenkiangfu, Linganfu, and the
Kingdom of Tungking, falls at last with the River Canlang into the Sea; In the
Kingdom of Tunking it inlargeth it self, and becomes Navigable to the
Metropolis Tungking.

The Mosale takes in by the way several Rivers and Brooks; as from the North,
the Kio; from the West, Lungchuen, Polo, Tunghoa, Taolieu, Ta, Xanno, Iuen; and
from the East, Singsien.

The River Kio, gushing out of the Mountain Suki, in the County Yaoganfu,
passes Southward through the same into the Masole: The Polo which comes out of
the Lake Zinglung in the Territory Zuhiungfu, (joining on the way by the River
Tunghoa, out of the County Kiutungfu,) and with the River Ta, falls into the
Mosale.

The Ta, which rises in the County Kintungfu, Southward from the City Kintung,
stretches from thence Eastward through the County Chinyvenfu, and mixes first
with the Polo, afterward with the Moxale.

The River Xanno springs on the South side of the City Chinyven, and running
South-East, discharges its Waves in the Confines of the Counties, Iuenkiungfu,
Zuhiungfu, and Nanganfu into the Moxale.

The Iuen, takes its way from the West through the County Iuenkiangfu,
Southward from the City Iuenkiang, and unites with the Moxale.

The River Singsieu, has its scource out of the Mountain Yolung, in the County
Iunnanfu; and somewhat more Southerly, the River Xanno unites with the Mosale.

To the Northward, near the City Fu, in the County Quanguan, runs a Brook or
Rivulet, called Nanmo, into the River Ly; its Water is said to be continually
warm, and good for many Distempers.

Westward from the Garrison Usa, in the Province of Suchuen, appears the River
Ven, Puon, or Northern Puon, properly called Pepuon, that is, Northern Puon;
and passing from thence Southward into the Province Queicheu, is enlarged by
the River Ciesing, which begins beyond the Mountain Cingping, in the Province
of Iunnan.

Another Northern Branch, also named Pepuon, or Northern Puon, issues out of
the Lakes Che and Ven, and unites with the Northern Branch beforementioned,
below the Fort Ganchang.

The River Pexe, which breaks forth in the County Kiocingfu, of the Province of
Iunnan, Northward from the City Kiocing, in the Mountain Fuking loses it self
in the Pepuon.

The Northern Puon thus united, passes through the South part of the Province
of Queicheu, and joins with the Southern Puon, which rises in several Branches
or Brooks out of the Province of Iunnan; besides which there are the Pepuon,
which comes out of the County Iunnanfu, Southward from the Mountain Cocing; the
River Hikien, the Stream Von out of the Lake Fusien, and the River Lu, out of
the Pool Ylung.

The Southern Puon thus augmented, runs on toward the East, and unites with
the Northern Puon, in the little County of the City Iunning, of the Province of
Queicheu, by the City Tinging, in twenty five Degrees and twenty Minutes
Northern Latitude.

The Southern Puon being thus united with the Northern, casts forth one Channel
Southward into the Province of Quangsi, but retains the Name of the Southern
Puon; after having run a considerable course, it entertains the River Mungung
and Chiugpi, the one from the North, and the other from the South; then
proceeds on its way Eastward, through the County Tiencheufu, Singenfu,
Nanningfu, and by the South side of the City Nanning, where Eastward it takes
in the River Lis, which comes out of the Lake Xan, in the Province of Iunnan;
and somewhat farther two other Rivers, namely, the Go and Cieu, out of which it
passes through the County Cincheufu, and near the City Cincheu unites with the
River Lieu and Ta; for here the Puon looses its Name, and is called Ta, which
holds the same Course through the County Gucheufu, where on the South it
receives the River Iung, and runs through the Territory Chaokingfu* into the
Province of Quantung, glides Southward by the City Chaoting and Loting; and
Southward from the City Quancheu or Canton, loses it self.

The River Kinxa, takes its Original in the Province of Iunnan, out of the
South side of the Lake Tien or Quienning, bends its Course Northward through
the County Iunnanfu; in like manner through Vutingfu, and in twenty seven
Degrees and thirty Minutes North-Latitude, enters on the South into the
Province of Suchuen, Westward from the Garrison Le; and at last falls East from
the Lake Mahu, into the River Mahu.

Another Branch also called Kinxa, runs by the City Tinghuen, of the Province
of Suchuen; and Westward from the Mountain Ulang, finisheth its Course.

Another River likewise called Kinxa, issues out of the Kingdom of Sifan, and
enters the Province of Iunnan, through the Territory Likiangfu, on the East
side of the City Linsi; proceeds Northward by the City Likiang, then through
the River Ciokingfu; from thence Eastward by the North side of the City Pexing,
where it sends forth a Branch toward the South, through the North part of the
County Yagon, having its Channel enlarged from the several Rivers which it
receives in the Province of Suchuen, near the Confines of the Province of
Queicheu, and joins with the River Kinxa, which comes out of the Province
Iunnan.

Another River passes more Northward out of the Kingdom of Sifan, also called
Kinxa, and sometimes Lekie; it passes by the Mountain Luyni, into the Province
Iunnan, thence through the County Iungningfu; from West to East by the North
part of the City Iungning, and through the Lake Lacu, where it receives the
Stream Loye, which comes out of the South; and falling last into the Province
of Suchuen, mixes with that Kinxa which flows out of the Province of Iunnan,
Southward from the Mountain Ulung: Kingxa signifies Gold-Dust, so called from
its plenty of Gold.

Thus far of the Rivers and Brooks, which Water the Empire of China in several
places, to its great fertility, and make it Navigable almost through the whole
Empire; nay, in such manner, that several Counties and Provinces divided and
surrounded by them, lie like Islands separated from one another, by the Streams
that flow between them.

There are also many deep-cut Channels, besides Lakes, Pools, and Springs,
abounding in Fish.

Standing -- waters, or Channels.
THe Country of China is cut through in many places with Moats or Artificial
Channels, for the convenience of Navigation from one City to another.

Among many others, one of these Channels called Iun, deserves no small
admiration, being with an incredible Charge dug from the Province of
Nanking, through that of Xantung to the Metropolis of Peking; by means of
which, from most places in the Empire, all sorts of Goods are brought in Ships
to Peking.

It begins on the Northern Borders of the Province of Nanking in the County
Hoaiganfu, Northward from the City Socien; near the Northern Shore of the
Yellow River, out of which Ships from all parts of the Empire are brought into
it; from thence it extends North-West through the second Territory Iencheufu of
the Province of Xantung, to the City Cining, Southward from the Lake Nanyang;
then through that of Tungchangfu, and the Lake Nanyang; from whence at last, at
the end of the County, near the City Lincing, beyond the Lake Cang, it falls
into the River Guei.

But because the Water in this Channel is too shallow in many places for great
Ships, therefore there are above twenty Sluices or Water-gates in the same, in
the Chinese Tongue called Tungpa, very strong and firm, of square Stone. Every
Sluice has a Gate or opening, locked with great Planks to keep out the Water,
being by means of a Wheel and an Engine drawn up with little trouble, to give
way for the Water and Ships, till you come to the second Gate, where they do
the like, and so likewise at all the rest: But half way, before you come to the
City Cining, they tap as much Water through a great Watergate out of the Lake
Cang, as they need; then Locking up the Gates again, keep the Water from
running out too much, and so leaving the Ground bare, for the Water in the Lake
is higher than the adjacent Country; so that in a small Tract of Land, they
reckon above eight Water-gates, which resist the force and power of the Water.

When the Ships are come to the Lake Cang it self, they cross not the same, but
with much more ease, pass along a Channel made by the sides of the Lake, with
brave Banks on each side: At every Watergate are People which Toe the Ships by
a Line through the Sluices, for a small reward.

In this manner the Ships go out of the Yellow River to Peking.

Certainly, should the best Builders or Surveyors of Europe come and behold the
length of this Channel, or thickness and height of the Banks on each side, and
the ornament of the Sluices, which are all of hewn Stone, they would justly
wonder at the wisdom of the Chinese, and their Industry, in undergoing that
labor, which scarce any other People would be able to perform.

In the Province of Peking, in the County of Pekingfu, near the City Cho, there
is also a very long Channel called Tocang; another in the eighth County
Xaohingfu, in the Province of Chekiang, described before; besides many more,
which would be too tedious to mention.

Lakes and Pools.
IN the County of Pekingfu, Westward from the Metropolis, lies on the Lakes in
the Province of Peking.
Mountain Iociven, a Lake called Lis, which is ten Furlongs in Circumference.

On the South side of the Mountain Tienxu, Northward from the chief City, is a
Lake, made by the confluence of several Springs, wherefore it is called,
Kienlung, that is, Of nine Springs, which number, because the Chinese account
it Fortunate, has much increased their Superstitious Belief concerning the
Emperor's Tombs that are there.

On the South-West side of the City Paoting, close by the City Moat, is a
small, but very pleasant Lake, called Lienhoa, that is, Lien-Flower, whereon
the Citizens and Neighboring People make great Feasts and Entertainments in
Pleasure-Boats, built for that purpose.

In the County Hokienfu, near the City Hie, is a very deep Lake, named Vo, the
Water of which, at the throwing of a Stone therein, becomes of the Color of
Blood: If the Leaves of the adjacent Trees chance to fall into it, in a short
time Swallows fly out of it, insomuch, that the Leaves seem to turn into
Birds, as is related of the Scotch Barnacles, or Soland Geese.

In the Territory Sintivyfu, Northward of the City Nangsin, begins a great
Lake, called Talo, and extends as far as the City Kiulo, in the County Xuntefu.

Nor far from the little City Hanping, is another lesser Lake made by two
Springs; the one with very hot, and the other very cold Water, though they lie
both close together.

In the County Tamingfu, near the City Niuhoang, lies a Lake called Luece,
eighty Furlongs in compass; near the City Taming, the Pool Caoki, and another
bigger, called Chanfung or Moma, both brackish.

Westward from the Mountain Feukieu, is a Lake that proceeded there, from the
sinking of a City, called Siun.

In the County Iungpingfu, near the City Changlei, lies a Lake of thirty
Furlongs, called In; it is Oval, and extends almost to the Sea.

IN the Territory Pingyangfu, at the Foot of the Mountain Xevyang, is a Lake
Lakes in the Province of Xansi.
of a considerable bigness, on which the ancient Emperor Xun, as the Chinese
write, used to Fish.

Near the City Kiang, begins the Lake Iu, that is, Brackish, (for all the Water
thereof is as Salt as that of the Sea) and stretches from thence to the
Jurisdiction of the City Ganye; it is in Circumference a hundred and forty
Furlongs.

In the County Taitungfu, Westward from the City Taitung, lies the small Lake
Kiuncu, that is, Honest Man, because hereabouts lived one that would never
accept Gold when offered; it is made by the River He.

On the Mountain Yenking, near the City So, is a deep Lake, of a Furlong in
Circumference.

In the Territory Taiyvenfu, Westward from the City Che, lies the Lake Tien.

IN the County Siganfu, on the South side of the chief City, is a considerable
Lakes in the Province of Xensi.
large Lake, called Fan, which is made by the uniting of two Rivers; another on
the North-East side, not natural, but cut by Command of the Emperor Hiaou,
serves for a place of Recreation: It is moreover, adorned with a stately
Palace, to which belong pleasant Woods, and Flowery Meadows, whereon, the
Emperor also, to Recreate himself, caused Plays and other Pastimes to be
Presented to him: The same Emperor also Commanded a Lake to be dug on the
South-West side of the same City, calling it Queming; on which, he oftentimes
caused his Soldiers in Vessels to make Sea Fights, thereby, to make them
experienced therein; for intending to invade the Southern Provinces, which
abounded with Ships, he instructed them by this Jesting Exercise, how to behave
themselves in real Engagements.

On the South side, the Emperor made a third Lake, and near it a pleasant
Court, called Silen, to solace himself in, after the end of those pretended
Fights: He placed also in this Lake a great Stone* Fish, raised, and fastened
in the bottom of the Water like a Rock, that the Sea men Sailing by the same,
might learn to shun Rocks and Shelves: Against Rainy weather (as the Chinese
say) this Fish makes a hideous noise, the force whereof is imagined to be much
advantaged by a Neighboring Echo. Moreover, the Chinese relate, that this
Emperor on a certain time Dreamt, That this Fish being gotten with a Hook in
his Presence, craved his Aid; and that he the next day, really taking a Fish in
the Lake, remembered his Dream, and freed the Fish; whereupon, throwing his Net
in again, he found two inestimable Pearls, which the Chinese call Mingyven,
that is, Stones of a clear Moon, because on the Increase and Decrease of the
Moon, they grow dimmer or brighter, as is generally reported of the Moon-Stones.

Moreover, there are some that affirm, that such like Stones are yet in China,
and being kept in the Emperor's Palace, are accounted unvaluable; and that when
the Emperor took up the forementioned Pearls, he said, Certainly, this is the
Gift of that grateful Fish which I set at liberty.

WIthin the City Cinan, in the County Cinanfu, on the West side, is the Lake
Lakes in the Province of Xantung.
Taiming, out of which runs a Channel to the Lake Coyng, which is also within
the Walls of the said City; Out of both which Lakes, there run through the
whole City convenient Navigable Moats: This Lake Taiming also extends toward
the Lake Cioxan, which is on the North-side, without the City.

Near the City Changkieu, is the great Lake called Peyun, which abounds in
Fish, and inricheth the adjacent Grounds with excellent Fruit, Linko and
Lien-Flowers.

In the County Yencheufu are five Lakes, namely, Nanuang, South from the City
Ven; Toxan and Fauly, near the City Tingtao; Leangxan, near the City Tungping;
and Lui, which in the Chinese Language signifies Thunder, because in the middle
thereof is a Stone, whose Body resembles that of a Dragon, and the Head, a
Man's, and is by the Chinese called, The Spirit of Thunder; they affirming,
that by striking on its Belly, they hear a noise or voice: There are likewise
in this County many other Lakes, but of less note.

In the County Tengcheufu, near the City Laiyang, is the Lake Hiyang; and in
Tungchanfu, the Lake Ho.

IN the County Kaifungfu, lies Westward from the little City Hiu, the small
Lakes in the Province of Honan*
Lake Si, and another near Iengling; two other Lakes, called Lieu, from the
abundance of Willows which grow on their Banks, lie one near the City Chin, and
the other by Sincheu.

On the West side of the City stands the Lake Kiuming, made by the Imperial
Family Sung, for a place wherein to Exercise the Naval Militia, and represent
Sea Fights: This Lake is exceeding pleasant, being built round about with many
stately Palaces and Pagods, and also Marble Columns Inscribed with Verses
extolling the Lake.

There are also other lesser Lakes, amongst which is one, called Tungmuen, near
the City Chin, which is exceeding clear, and without any Weeds.

In the County Queitefu, on the South side of the City Queite, is the Lake Nan,
over which lies a Stone Bridge with many Arches; Westward from the City Ciu, is
the Lake Si; and in the same County, a very small Lake called Chokin, about
which many Silk-Weavers have their Habitations, invited thither by the goodness
of the Water, from which the Silk receives an excellent Gloss; and thereupon,
the Lake takes its Name: The word Chokin signifying, A Washing place for Silk
Damask.

Eastward from the City Iuching, stands the Lake Menchu.

In the County Hoakingfu, Northward from the City Ciyven, is the Lake Tay,
which is made by the River Ki.

In the Territory Iunningfu, Westward from the City Iunning, is the Lake Si,
yielding a very pleasant Prospect, as being surrounded with many Buildings, for
the Entertainment and Recreation of the Citizens.

Westward from the small City Iu, lies a Lake of a hundred Furlongs; in the
City of Iu, to the North, stands the Lake Quanching.

ON the Mountain Tienchi, near the City Mien, in the County Chingtufu, in the
Lakes in the Province of Suchuen*
Province of Suchien, there is a Lake, which by Rain is not observed to
increase, nor in dry Seasons to decrease.

On the South-East side of the City Chingtu, is a Pool called Yolung, which the
Emperor Sui caused to be made for the exercising his Mariners and Soldiers in
Ships of War, when he resolved to invade King Chin.

Vansui is a Lake of four hundred Furlongs, dug like a Moat round about the
City Chingtu, but broadest on the North side; of the Earth which was dug out
of the same, the Walls of the City were made.

Southward from the City Cai, in the County Queicheufu, stands the Lake
Cingyven, a hundred Furlongs square, being the source of the River Cin.

Westerly of which, and East from the City Ta, is the great Lake Vanking, whose
Shore is all set with stately Trees, and environed with Flowery Meadows,
Fruit Trees, and Populous Villages.

In the County Mahufu, Southward from the City Mahu, is a Lake also called
Mahu, that is, Horse Lake; for the Chinese say, that in this Lake a Horse
appeared, Winged like a Dragon, from which the Family Tang gave the City, Lake
and River that denomination.

In the little County Muicheu, whose chief City is of the same Name, stands a
great Lake called Hoang, that is to say, Circular, because it surrounds the
whole City, yet it is broadest toward the West: The Shore is built all along
with handsome Houses, which standing round like a Ring, the City may justly be
called, The Stone thereof; near it is a long Bridge called Sive.

On the East side of the City Kiating, is a small Lake called Ningyve: By the
City Pukiang is another Lake named Yotan, on which they say the Emperor Hoangti
Anno 2500. before the Incarnation, studied Chemistry.

THere are two Lakes in the County Vuchangfu, one near the City Kiayn, Lakes in
the Province of Huquang.
and the other near that of Puki.

In the Territory Hanyangsu, part within and part without the Walls of the City
Hanyang, is the Lake called Langquon.

On the West side, at the Foot of the Mountain Kieuchin is the Lake Taipe, two
hundred Furlongs in bigness.

In the County Sianyangfu, near the City Nanchang, within a Temple, is a Pool
called Chinchu, that is, Lake of Pearls; for if any Person walk apace round the
sides thereof, the Water arises out of the Ground like Pearls, whether
naturally or artificially cannot easily be resolved.

In the Territory Teganfu, Eastward from the City Tegan, is a great Lake of
nine hundred Furlongs, called Iunmung.

In the Province Hoangcheufu, near the City Hoangpi, stands a Lake called Vu,
that is War: for in the time of the Kings it was a Place ordained for the
Exercise of Ships.

Near the City Hoangmui is another bigger Lake called Vihu, and not far from it
the Lake Taipe; and Eastward from the City Ki, the Lake Kinxa.

In the Territory Kingcheufu, on the East side of the City Kongcheu, is the
Lake Tung, forty Furlongs in bigness, pleasant and full of Fish, with which the
Citizens often Feast and make Merry in Vessels on the same.

In the County Yocheufu, at the South-West side of the City Yocheu, is a great
Lake called Tungting, which (as the Chinese say) had its original from a
Deluge; and this seems to be confirmed by the many Isles that lie in the same,
namely Kiun, Kinxa (signifying Sand of Gold,) Kiue, and Pecio, built full of
Pagodes and Cloisters, which are inhabited by some poor Religious Order.

Amongst others is a floating Isle, on which is also a Cloister built, for the
Roots of Trees and large Canes knitted and joined together keep up the Earth by
their continual growing to one another, without the least danger of ever
breaking.

In the County Changxafu, on the middle of the Mountain Taihu, near the City
Lieuyang, lies a great fathomless Lake: On the Mountain Xepi another of thirty
Furlongs called Pexa, out of which run four Brooks, of which one is the Rivolet
Lieus; the rest fall into the River Iuping.

On the North side of the City Siangyn, lies the Cingcao; which moistning the
County Iocheufu, unites it self with the Lake Tunting.

In the County Hengcheufu, Eastward from the chief Kity Hengcheu, is a very
deep Lake; the Water whereof being of a green color the Chinese highly esteem
for the making of their Drink, or Wine called Sampsou.

In the Territory Chantefu, near the Cities Luugyang and Iuenkiang, lies the
Lake Chexa, and unites it self with the Lake Tungting.

In the County Iengcheufu near the City Tan, is a great Water-fall, which
immediately turns to a Pool, in which grow yellow Lien-Flowers, which are
seldom found of that color in any other place.

In the little Territory Cingcheufu, near the City Hoeitung, stands the Lake
Cingpo, full of great Rocks and Stones, on which the Chinese often make Merry.

In the small County Chincheufu, not far from the City Hingping on the Mountain
Xemeue, is a small Lake called Yen, whose Water continues warm all the Winter.
Twice a year great numbers of wild Geese fly thither out of the North and
South; wherefore this Lake is called Ien, that is, A Goose.

IN the Territory Nanchangfu, in the Province of Kiangsi, on the South-East
Lakes in the Province of Kiangsi.
side of the City, stands the Lake Tung, very much noted for the clearness of
its Water, and the abundance of Fish which is in the same.

The great Lake Poyang, otherwise called Pengli, near the City Nankang,
North-East, is three hundred Furlongs long, and forty broad, borders Westward
on the County Nankangfu; Eastward on Iaocheufu: part of it, which respects the
City Yukan, is called Kanglang: It contains several Isles, as to the South,
Langma, Xuihung, and Pipa, lying near the City Yukan; more Northward, Ingcu,
Chuki, Checien, and the Mountain Ki, lying on an Island Eastward of the chief
City Pehoa, and Westward of the little Isle Teuxu. It receives in the South,
the River Kan; in the East, the Logan; and in the North, the River Kiang.

In the County of Kienchangfu, without and within the chief City, lies a Lake,
the one part called Kinquei, and the other Kao.

Near the City Nangfung is also the little Lake Vansui.

In the Territory Linkiangfu, near the City Iuencheu, is the Lake Funghoang,
which not being very big, neither increases by abundance of Rain, nor decreased
by excessive Drought.

In the County Kieganfu, near the City Kiexui, lies the Lake Kien, and near
Ganfo the Pool Mie, signifying Honey, so called from the exceeding sweet Fish
which it produces.

In the Territory Xuicheufu, near the City Sinchang, there is a Lake, whose
Water is never muddy, but always very clear.

In the County Iuencheufu, on the East side of the City Iuencheu, the Lake Tung
spreads it self, and is called The Pleasure of the County, for the Chinese
often make Feasts on the same, and have built several Retreats and
Banquettinghouses on its Banks.

The Lake Mingyo affords the City a Moat, through which it is brought with
convenient and Navigable Channels, which on the East side run into the Lake
Tung.

THe Lake Cienli is situate in the Territory Kiangningfu, Eastward near the
Lakes in the Province of Nanking.
City Lieyang, containing a thousand Furlongs, which to the South is united
with the Lake Tai, in the County Sucheufu.

Without the Gate of the City Taiping, a small Lake called Hiuenuu lies on the
South-West side, not far from the City Liexui, Westward from the Lake Tanyang,
and extends from thence to the Borders of the City Taiping.

In the County Sucheufu, on the West and South-West side of the City Sucheu, is
the great Lake Tai, which according to the Description of the Chinese, takes
up the space of thirty six thousand Paces.

Near the City Changxo is the Lake Xang, united on the North with the Lake
Cienli.

In the Territory Yangcheufu stands the Lake Piexe, Northward from the City
Kaoyeu, where a dug Channel runs into it.

In the County Hoaiganfu, on the East side of the City Hoaigan, lies the Lake,
or rather a great Pool, called Hing, full of Canes.

In the Territory Luchenfu is the great Lake Cao, and another less, named Pe,
which join near the City Lukiang: In the first lies the Mountain Ci, that is to
say, Orphan, because it stands alone.

In the County Taipingfu, on the South-East side of the City Taiping, begins
the Lake Tanyang, by the Chinese reckoned to be three hundred Furlongs large,
and extends from thence to the City Liexui.

In the little Territory wherein is the City Cheucheu, near the City Civenciao,
begins the Lake U, and reaches to the City Laigan.

The little County Siucheu boasts of the Lake Ta; near which (they say) a
Country Maid, afterward Mother to the Emperor Lieupang, Conceived by a
Spirit, and brought forth the chief of the Family of Han.

In the County Hancheufu, near the City Changhoa, on the Mountain Cienking, is
a Lake of two hundred Paces in bigness, famous for its Golden-colour'd Fishes,
which the Chinese from thence call Kinyu.

In the Territory Hangcheu, Westward from the City of the same Name, is the
famous Lake Si, between which and the Wall is only a Stone Street of seven
Furlongs for a convenient Walking-place. The Lake, whose Water for its
pleasantness is much esteemed both by Natives and Strangers, contains forty
Furlongs in circumference, and is surrounded with Hills in manner like a
Theater; round about the Hills (out of which flow many Brooks and Rivolets,
distinguished by several Channels) are Pagodes, Palaces, Cloisters, Colleges,
Groves, Tombs, and very delightful Gardens. On its Shore are broad Ways Paved
with Freestone; and across the Lake lie Bridges of Ships, over which they pass
from one side to another, and in the passage take a view of the whole Lake. The
Ways are all along shaded with Willow Trees, planted direct in a Line, and ever
now and then Seats or Arbors, with Benches for Passengers to rest on; insomuch
that it is a question, which of the two are here most to be admired, the
workmanship of Nature, or the artificial Adornments of the Place? The Water is
clear as Crystal, the least Stone being seen in the bottom; but near the Shores
the Water, being low, is overgrown with the Flower Lien.

This Lake has no way for the Ships to go out or in at, for the Water is only
let out in time of great Rains, through little Rivolets, or through a Sluice
which is Northward from the City; yet nevertheless there are many Ships built
on its Banks, which may justly be called Golden Palaces, for their being so
richly Gilded and Painted with various Colors. In these Pleasure-Boats they
make Feasts, Plays, and other Entertainments; wherein the Chinese have all
things that can be invented to recreat the Mind. The Vessels thus stored with
all manner of Necessaries for delight, Sail to and again in the Lake without
fear or danger of Shipwreck; so that it is no wonder why they call this Place
and City A delightful Garden, or Earthly Paradise.

In the County Kiucheu, near the City Kaihoa, lies the little Lake Pehiai, so
called from the white Crabs which it produces, for Pehiai signifies a White
Crab.

In the Territory Ningpofu, near the City Tunghoa, is a little Pool, but very
deep, called Yapoi, whose Water (as the Chinese say) grows exceeding clear,
when the City has a pious and good Governor, but when a bad one, muddy and
thick.

In the County Tingcheufu, near the City Vuping, lies the Lake Loxui, that is,
Green Water, so called from its green color, with which this Water is so
deeply Died, that it makes all things green which are washed in the same.

On the East side of the City Tingcheu, is a Pool called Cingcao, of one
Furlong, but very deep; near which grow Trees, whose Leaves are continually
green.

In the County Hoeicheufu, Westward from the City Hoeicheu, is the Lake Fung,
ten Furlongs in circumference; in the middle of it are two Isles, built with
Banquetting-houses, wherein the Citizens Caress one another.

This Lake is surrounded with a Stone Wall, and a Bridge also, which not only
leads from one side to the other, but also from one Island to another. The
Shore is planted with shading Trees, and built with Colleges.

In the County Liencheufu, five little Lakes called U, surround the City King.

In the Territory Tincheufu lies the Lake Kiao.

THe Lake So lies in the County Queilingfu, in the Province of Kiangsi, on
Lakes in the Province of Kiangsi.
the West side of the City Queiling, being seventy Furlongs in compass, and in
it a Hill called In, makes a little Island.

In the Territory Gucheufu, on the East side of the City Gucheu, is a small
Lake called Go, in which King Pegao is reported of old to have fed ten tame
Crocodiles, feasting them only with Criminals and Malefactors.

Within the Wall of the Garrison Cinping is a Lake called Ciseng, out of which
the Inhabitants fetch their Water, the hard and stony Ground thereabouts not
yielding them any Pits or Wells.

In the County Tuchufu, on the West side of the City Pingcheu, is a Lake which
bears the same Name with the City.

In the Territory Iunnanfu, on the South side of the chief City Iunnan, is the
Lake Tien, otherwise called Quinming, which extends Westward, and is five
hundred Furlongs in circumference: It receives increase of Water out of the
Puon, which descends out of the Mountain Kaoming into this Lake; and on the
South side makes the River Kinxa, which runs Northward.

In the County Talifu, Eastward from the City Tali, is a very long Lake called
Siul, which abounds in Fish, it begins Southward near the City Tali, and ends
Northward at the City Leankiang.

This Lake makes nine Creeks or Inlets, and has three Isles which rise up into
Hills, besides four others very low and fruitful.

The Mosale also takes its original out of this Lake, which after having run
through this whole Country, falls into the Province of Tungking, where
augmenting its Stream, it makes the Channel which carries Ships of great
Burden to the Court of Tunking.

In the County Linganfu, near the City Xeping, lies the Lake Ylung, above a
hundred and fifty Furlongs in circumference, and has three Isles in the midst
of it.

Another called Tungha appears Westward from the City Tunghai, eighty Furlongs
about; its beginning is near the City Hosi.

In the Territory Chinkiangfu, Southward from the City Chinkiang, is a great
Lake called Fusien, a hundred thousand Paces over; and another lesser named
Ming, lies near the City Yangcung.

In the County Iungningfu, on the East side of the City Iungning, is a great
Lake with three Isles of equal bigness, each having a rising Mount about two
hundred Rods high.

In the County Kioungfu, near the City Koleang, at the Foot of the Mountain
Kiechiung, is a Lake or Pool called Changyen.

In the Territory Kioungfu, near the City Kienchuen, lies the Lake Kien, which
is sixty Furlongs in circumference. Out of it flow three Brooks called Chuen,
which represented by these Chinese Characters (...), signify Water; from
whence the City has also received its denomination.

In the County Vutingfu, on the North-West side of the City Vuting, is the Lake
Hoeineao, which word signifies Breeding Birds; because the Leaves of a certain
Tree which fall into it, turn into a sort of Birds, so black, that the
Inhabitants look upon them as little Devils or Spirits.

In the County Cintienfu, between two Mountains, Westward from the City, is a
great Lake called Che, otherwise The Sea Cingxui, into which certain little
Rivolets descend out of the Mountains.

In the County Iunchangfu, on the East side of the City Iungchang, is the Lake
Chinghoa, wholly covered with Lien-Flowers.

On the South side of the City Pexing lies the Lake called Chin, which broke
out from the Ruins of a great City, which (as they say) through the wickedness
of the Inhabitants was swallowed up in the Earth with all the People, only one
Child, by sitting on a piece of Timber in the Water, escaped that general
Destruction. Its chiefest Inhabitants were said to be of the House of Chin;
from whence the Lake has its denomination. It is also called The Starry Sea,
from the Weeds, which, shaped like Stars, drive upon the Water.

Springs.
IN the County Fuencheufu, in the Province of Peking, near the City Hiaoy, are
many hot and boiling Springs, almost like the sulphurous Waters in Italy. If
the Chinese observed and minded these things sufficiently, they might perhaps
easily discover the same, if not greater Operations in them, than are found in
any of ours in Europe; for having peculiar Tastes and Colors, they may
probably also have in them no less Virtue and Efficacy in Medicine.

Near the City Lo, in the County Chungpingfu, is a very pleasant Spring,
remarkable only for the clearness of its Water.

Another like this in the Territory Kingyangfu, is called Xingxui.

In the County Cinanfu, in the Province of Xuntung, they reckon above seventy
two Springs on the South side of the City Cinan; amongst which one called Kiuti
exceeds all the other in excellency of Water.

In the County Yoncheufu of the same Province, near the City Ningyang, is the
the Spring Tao; of which, because the word signifies Robber, the famous
Philosopher Confut, though he was exceeding thirsty, refused to drink, so much
he abhorred the very Name of Vice.

In the Territory Tencheufu, in the same Province, near the City Chaoyiven, is
a Spring called Hanuen, a Monster of Nature, out of which at the same time
flows Water both cold and hot; wherefore it has that Name, for Hanuen
signifies Cold and Hot.

THere is a delightful Spring named Ping in the Province of Honan, at the
Springs in the Province of Honan.
South side of the City of the same Name, near which stands an Ascent of Stone
for those that please to stand upon, and behold the Fountain.

In the Territory Nanyangfu, in the Province beforementioned, near the City
Nuihan, is a Spring whose Water is highly esteemed of by the Chinese, who
believe it to have an Operation effectual to the prolongation of humane Life.

On the South-West side of the City Iu, is a Fountain, which for the hotness of
its Water is called Ven, that is to say, Hot.

In the Territory Chintufu, in the Province of Suchuen, near the City Nuikiang,
is a Spring, whose Water is observed to ebb and flow at the same time with the
Sea, though very remote from thence.

On the West side of the City Xunking rises a Spring called Tieyu, that is to
say, Milky, from the sweetness of its Water.

NEar the City Kixui, in the County Hoangcheufu, in the Province of Huquang,
Springs in the Province of Huquang.
is the Spring Loyu, whose Water is particularly famous for making of good Tee.

On the Mountain Kingmuen appears the Fountain Sinlo, whose Water is esteemed
of great Virtue.

WEstward from the City Nankang, in the Province of Kiangsi, is the Springs in
the Province of Kiangsi.
Spring Lien, whose Water in its fall glitters like Cloth of Silver, producing
thirty Rivolets.

In the County Vucheufu in the same Province, near the City Kinki, is another
pleasant Fountain; and another called Puensin, within the Walls of the City
Xuicheu.

IN the County Sinkiangfu, in the Province of Nanking, within the City Xanghiu,
Springs in the Province of Nanking.
is a Fountain of pure Water called Iung, in the midst of a Temple.

Out of the Mountain Kin, lying in the River Kiang, in the County Chinkiangfu,
issues a Fountain called Chungleang.

IN the Territory Choking, in the Province of Quantung, near the City Singing,
Springs in the Province of Quantung.
on the Mountain Tienlu, is a Spring or Pool, from which upon the throwing of a
Stone into the same a noise is heard like Thunder; soon after which the Sky
overcasting pours down Rain, wherefore it is called The Dragons Pool.

THe County Pinglofu in the Province of Quangsi, has two Springs, one Springs
in the Province of Quangsi.
Northward from the City Pinglo, called Caning, and the other near the City Xo,
called Yoxan.

On the South-East side of the City Queiyang, a Fountain of very sweet and
clear Water falls into a Pool, which is never perceived either to increase or
decrease, how much Water soever is drawn out of, or let into it.

Near the City Pingtin, in the County Tungginfu, is a strange Spring called
Cankeng, out of which through one only Mouth flows two several sorts of Water,
the one clear, and bright, and the other thick and muddy, which after having
forsaken their Spring, go each a contrary way, as if at enmity one against
another.

On the East side of the City Chinning, is a Fountain of exceeding cold Water,
notwithstanding the adjacent Earth is heated by a Fire which continually burns
under Ground.

Near the Garrison Picie is a Fountain of very pleasant Water, called Tro.

NOrthward from the chief City Iunnan, on the Mountain Xang, is a cold Springs
in the Province of Iunnan.
Spring, counted good to strengthen the Joints or Limbs.

On the South-East side of the City Cioking, in the County Ciokingfu, rises a
Fountain of warm Water, which cures by Bath those that are troubled with
Swellings, proceeding from redundant Humors.

There is yet another Spring in this County called Hiangxui, that is to say,
Sweet Smelling Water, because of its fragrancy, especially in Lent; at which
time the Inhabitants make Offerings to this Fountain, and drink the Water mixed
with their Liquor made of Rice.

Mountains, Hills, and Valleys.
THe Empire of China is in many places flanked with rows of Mountains to a vast
length; not far from which are situate some or other of their chief Cities.

The Chinese hold all great Mountains in such high veneration, that there is
nothing which they adore with a more superstitious zeal; and as our Astrologers
make their Prognostications from the observation of the Course of the Heavens,
so they from the Mountains; first from their situation and shape, then from the
Gardens, Rivers, Springs and Lakes that are in and about them.

In the observation and choosing of Mountains they are no less curious than
superstitious, imagining that in them all their happiness and prosperity
consists, because the Dragon, whom they account the chief Instrument of their
felicity, resides in a Mountain. But of this their Mountainous Superstition, a
more particular account may be seen in Father Martin's Preface to the History
of China.

FIve Leagues Northward from the Metropolis Peking, is a Mountain called
Mountains in the Province of Peking,
Thienxen, wherein the Tombs of diverse Chinese Emperors are very richly and
magnificently built.

On the South-West side of the City is a Mountain called Iociven, crowned with
most stately Palaces belonging to the Tartarian Family of Iven.

Here the Tartar Emperors used to retire, to shelter themselves from the
excessive heat of the Sun in the Summer.

In the same County, near the City Changpling, is the Mountain Pefeu, out of
which run two Rivers, which meet at the Village Feu.

In the same County, not far from the City Pa, is a Mountain named Nan,
overgrown with a Wood of Canes twelve Furlongs in circumference, in the midst
of which is a noble Palace: and not far from thence is that high and steep
Mountain named Puon, having upon one of its tops a Stone, which though of a
huge bulk, totters and shakes at the least touch; the like whereof we have in a
certain Cave in Derby-shire.

Near the City Iungjung is the Mountain Chinquon, forty Furlongs about, and on
its South side a Hill called The Flower, from the various colored Stones
thereon.

Not far from the City Cunhoo is the Mountain Mingque, so called from a Fire
burning within it, which seems to pierce it through in such a manner, that
looking in at a Hole on the right side, there appears the form of a bright
Half Moon.

By the City Phingco are the Mountains Kie and Siuvu, out of which they dig a
sort of Coals, that serve the Inhabitants for Fuel.

In the County wherein is the City Paoting, near the City Huon, is the Mountain
Yki, on which they say the Emperor Yau's Mother resided.

Hard by the City Hiung lies the Mountain Tahiung, out of a Rocky part whereof
springs a clear Fountain.

Near the City Ie is the Mountain Lungcie, on which appears the footsteps of a
Dragon.

Not far from thence is a Valley called Tunglo, which being surrounded with
high Mountains, only one narrow Passage left, is much resorted to, as a very
secure place in time of War.

The County wherein is the City Hokien has few and little Mountains; the only
remarkable one called Si, is near the City Ching; on the top whereof, spreading
it self into a large and fruitful Plain, is built a pleasant Village.

In the County wherein is the City Chingting, and near the City Cinking, is a
very high Mountain called Changuen; upon whose top, reaching above the Clouds,
is a very sovereign Spring, and a stately Cloister for Priests, built by Queen
Xayang, in memory of a great Cure she received by drinking the Water of the
forementioned Spring.

Near the City Kioyang is another Hill, out of which gusheth also a healing
Fountain, and whereon grow diverse kinds of Physical Herbs.

By the City Ki are the Mountains Curi and Tiaopuon, eminent for the Defeat
which Hansini of Chinya received there.

Not far from the City Chanhoang is the Mountain Ulna, so called from the
Statues of five Horses Cut in yellow Stone, over which the Family of Sung built
a rich Chapel.

In the County of Xantefu, near the City Xaho, is a Mountain, famous for its
many Caverns; it is called Tang, that is, Bath, from a Fountain of warm Water
thereon, exceeding good against all kind of Scurf.

Near the City Nuikeu is the Mountain Pungcio, producing diverse Physical Drugs.

There is likewise the Mountain Cu, that is, Orphan, because it rises only
with one top, and stands distant from all others.

In the County Tamingfu, near the City Chinfung, lies the Mountain Cieu, famous
for the Emperor Kau's Tomb.

Near the City Siun is the Mountain Feukieu, having a Lake on the Westside,
which proceeded from the sinking of another City, called also Siun.

Nor far from hence is likewise the steep and high Mountain Cukin.

In Iungpingfu, on the South-East side of the City Iungping, is the Mountain
Sang, of a dreadful height; out of which spring many Brooks.

Near the City Hiengan, is a Mountain called Lungciven, and upon it a Spring,
whither the Chinese repair in dry Weather to Pray to the Dragon for Rain.

Eastward from the same City is that high Mountain named Tu, surrounded with
pleasant Woods.

Near the Garrison Iungcheu is one named Lungmuen, that is to say Dragons Gate,
so called, because the River Linhoang flows out of Tartary between those
Mountains through the Great Wall into China.

Near the Garrison Xanghai are Mountains of a great height.

IN the County Taiyvenfu, are many Mountains, but none remarkable, except
Mountains in the Province of Xansi*
the Mountain Kiecheu, North-East from the City Taiyven: Kiecheu signifies
Tying of a Ship, for it is Recorded, that the Emperor You tied his Ship to this
Mountain, when he Sailed up the Stream Fuen.

By the City Kioching is the Mountain Hukive, out of which they dig abundance
of the best sort of Iron to make Working-Tools of.

Near the City Pingting is the Mountain Cio, eminent for a Chapel or Cloister
of Priests.

By the City Kafau, is the Mountain Sieve, that is, Mountain of Snow, because it
is always covered with Snow.

The Mountain Xeleu, lying in the Jurisdiction of the City Chin, is notable for
its height, in which some say, it exceeds all besides.

In the County Pingyangfu, near the City Siangling, lies the great Mountain
Golung, which extends Northward by the Cities Fuensi and Fuensan, and runs
South, to the Towns Kioyao and Yeching, where it unites with the Mountain Ulao,
and stretches in a continued Ridge to the Province of Xensi, and further
Westward.

In the Mountain Kiao, near the City Kioyao, they say the Crown and other
Imperial Ensigns of the ancient Emperor Hiangti lie buried.

Near the City Pu is the Mountain Xeuyang, eminent for the Residence of two
Philosophers of the Royal Extraction, who chose rather to quit the Pomp of
Empire, and retire from the World, than to attend upon the wicked Emperor Cheu.

Near it stands the Mountain Lie, where the Emperor Xun, extolled amongst the
Chinese for his Pious Life, followed Husbandry, before he was advanced to the
Crown. This Mountain to this day, produces neither Thorn nor Bramble, nor any
hurtful Plant; and this they imagine to be an effect of the said Emperors Piety.

In the County Taitingfu, near the City Henyven, is a part of the Mountain
Heng, much resorted to for its rare Flowers and Physical Herbs; but there is
one Tree thought to be of great Virtue, to which their Superstition will not
suffer them to lay an Ax.

Near the City So, lies the Mountain Iueney, so called from a beloved Female,
Singer to King Guei, who is buried there.

By the City Quangchang, stands the Mountain Hiang, eminent for a great and old
Wood of Pine-Trees; in the middle of which stands a Pagod Temple, and Cloister
for Priests.

Near the City Lingkieu, is the Mountain Tape, out of which they dig a sort of
Vermillion, of which they make a kind of Red Ink to Print with.

Near the City So, is the Mountain Yenking.

In the County of Luganfu, near the City Changeu, is the Mountain Fakieu, so
called from the abundance of Turtle-Doves that breed thereon; it is very Woody,
and has a strong Fort built upon it, which is the safeguard of the County.

By the City Tunlieu is the Mountain Lin, on which one Heavy, a famous Archer,
shot with seven Arrows seven Birds flying one after another.

Near the City Lucing is the Mountain Funieu, that is, Cow Rider, from an old
Cow, which is reported to have there destroyed several Men, till at last, by an
unknown Man, it was dragged into a hole of the Mountain, neither of them being
ever after heard of.

In the County Fuencheufu, on the West side of the chief City Fuencheu, is the
Mountain Vanhu, remarkable for its height; it is so called from Ten thousand
Men, which, they say, getting upon the same, escaped the violence of a great
Deluge.

Near the City Hiaoy is the Mountain Kaotang, in which are diverse boiling
Springs and Pits, by reason of Fire which burns within the Earth.

IN the County Siganfu, near the City Linchang, is the Mountain Limon, on
Mountains in the Province of Xensi.
which is a Spring of Water, clear as Crystal, and of a strange quality, for
though it has not above five Foot Water in depth, yet it is extreme cold
above, and at the bottom, so hot, that it is not to be endured.

Near the City Lantien, is the Mountain Io, out of which they dig a kind of
Earth, which is used in the Dying of Clothes: Hard by, on a steep Mountain
called Ciepuon, stands a Fort, for the securing of the Highway.

Not far from the City Nucung, is the Mountain Taipe, which, by the Chinese
Astrologers, is accounted The eleventh Mansion of Happiness. They say, that
beating on a Drum on this Mountain, causes Thunder, Lightning, and Tempestuous
Weather; wherefore all Persons are strictly Commanded not to touch a Drum near
the same.

Near the City Xunghoa, is the Mountain Kanciven, so called from a Brook of
exceeding sweet Water, which springs on the top thereof; where there is also a
stately Garden and Banqueting House.

In the County Fungciangfu, near the City Khi, is a very high Mountain, called
Nan, which extends from thence into the County Siganfu, to the Cities Lantien
and Hu.

On the North-East of the City Paoki, is the Mountain Chincang, whose top seems
to represent a Turky-Cock: They said, that Thunder or turbulent Weather is
foretold by a great noise, which is heard above thirty Furlongs off in the
Valleys adjoining to it.

At the same place is the Mountain Xecu, so called from ten Stone Drums, placed
there by King Siven, that his Hunters might give a signal of Chase one to
another.

On the East side the City Mui, is the Mountain Taipe, whose exceeding high
tops are in the midst of Summer covered with Snow.

Not far from thence lies a Mountain called Quan, Fortified with a brave
Castle, for a safeguard of the County: Here Faulcons, and other such like Birds
for the Game, are frequently caught.

In the County Hangcheufu, near the City Sihiang, begins the Mountain Tapa; and
runs from thence into the Province of Suchuen, to the City Pa.

By the City Loyang, is the Mountain Yoniu; so called from the Effigies of a
most Beautiful Maiden of Stone said to have grown Naturally in that place.

Near the City Siyang, is a very scraggy and steep Mountain, called Cuking.

By the City Fung, is also a Mountain named Cuye, having in it seventy two
Caverns; near which stands the Mountain Nanki which has a great Lake upon it:
Not far from thence is the Mountain Vutu, out of which they dig a Plant called
Hiunghoang, good to expel Poison and all Pestilential Virulency.

In the County Pingleangfu, on the East side of the City Cingyven, is the
Mountain Yo; on which are found Pebbles emulating Diamonds for clearness.

Near the City Hiating is a Valley of thirty Furlongs in length, but so deep
and narrow, that it has little Light; yet nevertheless, a Highway paved with
Freestone leads through it.

In the County Cungchangfu, on the North-West side of the City Hoeicin, is a
very great and high Mountain, named Sivi, from the Snow with which it is
continually covered.

Northward from the City Fokiang, is the Mountain called Xecu, that is,
Stone-Drum, because (as the Chinese write) this Mountain by making of a noise,
foretells War.

By the City Ching, is the Mountain Loyo; at the top whereof stands a great
Image of a Lion, out of whose Mouth runs a Spring.

There is also the Mountain Cheuchi, which extends to the Jurisdiction of the
City Siho, and on its top has a Plain of about twenty Furlongs.

In the South-East from the City Cin, is the Mountain Pochung, on which grows
an Herb called Hoako, which eaten causes Barrenness: There are many other
Mountains in this County which are not remarkable.

IN the Territory Linyaofu, near the City Lan, Northward, is the Mountain
Mountains in the Territory Linyafu.
Kaolan, which makes an Arch about the City like a Stage, and gives a pleasant
Prospect over all the adjacent Countries: Near it is the Mountain Pexe,
whereon, they say, the Valiant General Leanghoei, Besieged by the Tartars, made
Offerings to obtain Water for his Forces; whereupon, immediately a Spring
appeared.

Near the City Ho is the Mountain Ciexie, with two spiring tops, between which,
as through a Gate, runs the Yellow River.

Beyond the City Lan, is a pleasant Valley named You, which being Watered by the
Yao, a Branch of the Yellow River, inricheth the Grounds and Meadows thereabout.

In the County Kingyangfu, Northward from the chief City Kingyang, is the
Mountain Taipe; in the middle of which is the Spring of the Stream He.

By the City Hoan, is the Mountain Ulum, Fortified with a Castle for defense of
the County.

Near the City Chinning is the Mountain Lo, whereon stood twenty seven Images,
which, the Chinese affirm, grew there naturally, and were not made by Art.

In the County Ienganfu, North-East from the City Iengan, is the Mountain
called Chingleang.

IN the Territory Cinanfu, near the City Changkieu, lies the Mountain Hoang,
Mountains in the Province of Xantung.
which spreads from thence to the City Cichuen, and runs through the
Jurisdiction of the City Ceuping.

By the City Changxan, begins the Mountain Changpe, and extends to the City
Cenping; on the top whereof stands a very noted Chapel.

Near the City Taigan, is a great Mountain called Tai, accounted forty Furlongs
high; it is full of Caverns and very deep Precipices; there are built upon it
many Pagod Temples, and endowed Cloisters of Priests.

Near the City Laiu, is a Mountain named Tax; out of which they dig Iron.

In the County Yencheufu, near the City Kioheu, is the Mountain Fang, famous
for the Tombs of the Ancient Philosopher Kungfuti's Parents.

Hing, is a Hill near the City Nungyang; so called, from the abundance of
Armenian Plums which grow on the same.

By the City Cou, is the Mountain Chaugping; on which, some say, Kungni was
Born, in a City of the same name; whereof, the Ruins are yet to be seen.

By the City Ie, is the Mountain Ie, Crowned with diverse Villages.

Near the City Tunping, a Mountain named Fung is so interlac'd with Woods and
Fields, that it makes a most delightful Landscape: The Chinese compare it to
Damask Silk.

In the County Tungchangfu, not far from the City Kaotang, lies a Mountain
called Minxe, which signifies A Sounding Stone; for that on the top of this
Mountain stands a very high Pillar, which, on the least touch with the Finger,
makes a noise like a Drum.

In the County Chingcheufu, near the City Choosing, lies a great Mountain called
Langsie, which extends East from thence to the Sea: On it are many Villages
built, the first when the Emperor Xi Encamped thereabout with thirty thousand
Men.

By the City Yxui is the Mountain Tapien, having a flat top of ninety Furlongs.

In the Territory Tencheufu, Northward from the chief City Tengcheu, lies the
Mountain Tengheng; noted for the Defeat which Hansiu gave to King Si.

By the City Foxan is the Mountain Chifeu, which with a Promontory runs into
the Sea: There is also another Mountain called Cheuy, from whence a round Stone
runs into the Sea; which by the Chinese is called Cheu, that signifies Pearls.

In the County Laicheufu lies the Mountain Hoang, so called from a certain
Virgin who had here a Temple Consecrated to Her: On the Shore, near the City
Siene, is the Mountain Lao.

WIthin the Walls of the City Kaifung, is a Hill called Y, full of Gardens and
Mountains in the Province of Honan.
stately Palaces.

Near the City Siangching, is the Mountain Xeu, being in great Veneration among
the Chinese, for its Fortunate shape and position, and is the first mentioned
in the Books of Tiungxu, which Treats of that kind of Divination which they
deduce from the observation of the Mountains.

By the City Siuching, is the Mountain Kicu, in which is a stately Grotto, made
by the Emperor Hoangti, for his Summers Recess.

North-West from the City Cu, is the Mountain Cu, on which King Si, having hid
much Treasure, afterward put to Death all those that were privy to the burying
thereof, that so he might keep it secret: Nevertheless, his Son, though then
very young, taking notice of the Action, when he came to the Crown, caused all
the Gold to be taken up.

In the County Gueichoeifu, near the City Ki, lies the Mountain Cinivien, out
of which runs a Brook, whose Water both washes and shaves at once, that is,
when applied, makes bare all Hairy parts of the Body.

In the Territory Hoaikingfu, Northward from the chief City Hoaiking is the
Mountain Tai, which in former Ages Vomiting Fire, rent asunder, making a Gap of
thirty Rods, from whence flows now a slimy unctious Water, serving for many
uses in stead of Oil, and being not unpleasing to the Taste.

Toward the South-West is a double Mountain, called Iquan; between which, as
through a Gate, the River In has its Course.

About the City Hiang, toward the South, lies the Mountain King, out of which
the Emperor Hoangti is Recorded to have all the Copper which he used, both for
his Weapons of War, and his Household Utensils.

In the County Nanyangfu, on the North side of the chief City Nanyang, is the
Mountain You, on which thirty six Pearls are constantly found, never either more
or less.

About the City Niuhang, toward the North-East, begins the Mountain Taipe, and
extends South-East to the City Chechuen: There lies also the Mountain Tienchi,
and upon it a Lake, whose Water is held for a great Cordial.

In the County Iunningfu, is the Mountain Tienchung, which they call, The
Center of the World.

By the City Simang, is a very high and pleasant Mountain, whose top, if
covered with a Cloud, the Chinese immediately after expect Rain; like the
Table-Mountain at the Cape of Good Hope, and the Wrekin in Shropshire.

The other Mountains of this Province are in the County of Changtifu; by
Tangin, the Hill Simeu, out of which runs the River Tang: West of the City Lin,
the steep Mountain Yang.

In the Territory Hoaikinfu, North of the City Liyven, the Woody Mountain
Voangae.

In the County Hananfu, near the City Hanan, the great Mountain Pemang.

In the County Nanyangfu, South of the City Quanxan, the Mountain Huy.

In the County of In, near the City Luxa, a Mountain of the same name.

IN the Province of Suchuen, Westward from the City Quan, begins the Mountain
Mountains in the Province of Suchuen.
Cinching, spreading above a thousand Furlongs, and has the fifth place of
Esteem among the Chinese, who hold, that those which they call Xensiens, or
Immortal People, meet often there.

By the City Began, toward the East, lies the Mountain Lunggan, Crowned with
pleasant Woods and Fountains: There are also the Ruins of a Palace, built by
the Kings of Cho.

Near the City Chungking, is the Mountain called Toyung, swarming with Apes and
Monkies.

Not far from the City Xefang, toward the North, is a Mountain called Tafung,
whose Head pierces the Clouds, and sends forth from the top a River, which
running down very steep, makes a great noise in the fall; from the top of this
being reckoned sixty Furlongs Perpendicular, you may take a Prospect over all
the other Mountains, and see the City Chingtu; it extends from the utmost
Western Borders of the Province of Suchuen, to Prester John's Country, or
Sifan; and in a continued Ridge, reaches to the City Guei: Out of these
Mountains the great River Kiang takes its first Original.

By the City Cangki, toward the North, is the Mountain Iuntai, which for its
height, is called The Throne of Clouds.

Near the City Pa, lies to the North-East the Mountain Iu, out of which,
(though craggy and difficult to ascend) Precious Stones are dug.

Not far from thence* toward the West, lies the Mountain Pingleang, on whose
top is a delightful Plain, surrounded with other higher Mountains of the County.

By the City Sike, lies the great Mountain Nannim, which rises aloft with
twelve high Spiring Heads, upon nine whereof are Salt Pits.

In the County Chungkingfu, Northward from the chief City Chungking, on the
Shore of the River Feu, is a Mountain, which for its shape is much Idolized by
the Chinese, by reason it represents (at least they imagine so) the Idol
called Fe, who is Figured sitting with his Legs a cross, and his Hands on his
Bosom a cross: This Mountain-Image, which whether Natural or made by Art, the
Chinese themselves have not under Record, may be judged by his Eyes, Nose,
Mouth, and Ears, which are seen at half a Mile distance: A more particular
Description is given by Athanasius Kircher, in his Atlas Chinensis.

Near the City Ho, toward the South, lies the Mountain Lungmuen, on which
stood formerly a Pagod Chapel, with a Library of thirty thousand Books, called
Siyali; first built by a Nobleman of that name.

By the City Fungtu, is the Mountain Pungtu, accounted amongst the seventy two
Mountains; so highly extolled in the Book of Taosu.

Near the City Penxui, is the Mountain Fonien; on which are many Salt Pits.

In the County Queicheufu, Northward from the chief City Queicheu, is a
Mountain named Chekia, on which are seen the Ruins of a Palace, once the
Residence of the Kings of Sufo.

Northward, beyond the City Van, lies the Mountain Tulie, which reaches so high
into the Clouds, that no Bird can fly over it.

On the Mountain Si, which lies Westward from the City Van, is yet a pleasant
Garden of the Family Sung, with a Lake, pleasant Groves, and many Fruit Trees.

On the Mountain Tunghoa, lies the City Ta.

Near the City Leangxan, is the Mountain Kaoleang, which extends a thousand
Furlongs East and West.

The Mountain Xehiang, in the same County, is so called from its abundance of
Musk.

In the Territory Lungganfu, Northward from the chief City Lunggan, lies the
Mountain Cungtung; which from thence in a continued Ridge runs toward the
Countries of Sifan, or Prester John's Country, and to the Damasian Mountains.
Toward the South-East, lies the Mountain Xemuen, a Boundary between Sifan and
China.

In the County Mahufu, Westward from the City Mahu, is the Mountain King, which
signifies A Looking-Glass, so called from the Crystal Fountain which springs
from its Foot.

South-East of the City Liucheu, is the Mountain Pao, on which the Air is of
such a Nature, that those that have Agues upon them, going thither, are
immediately cured thereof.

In the little County of Yacheu, near the City Mingxan, lies a Mountain named
Mung, which rises with five Spires; on the highest of which is much Manna, by
the Chinese called Pinglu, that is, Frozen Dew.

By the City Pinchai, is the Mountain Pecui, on which, if Snow melts in the
Winter, the Chinese have observed, a fruitful Year will follow, if not, the
contrary.

Not far from the Garrison'd-City Kienchung, lies the Mountain Tiexe, so called
from its abundance of Iron Oar.

The other Mountains of less note in the Province of Suchien are; In the
Territory Kingtufu, South of the City Kingtu, the Mountain Seking: By the City
Mien, the Mountain Tienchi: In the County Paoningfu, East of the City Paoning,
the Woody Mountains Paon and Menyping: In the County Xungkingfu, West of the
City Xungking, the Mountain Co: In the County Sieucheufu, South from the City
Sieucheu, the Mountain Xeching: By the City Kingfu, the Mountain Hanyang: South
of the City Tiucum, upon the River Kiang, the Mountain Lingyuen: About the City
Riexan, the far-stretching Mountain Chungpoe: West of the City Han, in the
County Queicheufu, a high and steep Mountain: On the Shore of the River Kiang,
the Mountain Co: West of the City Chuniking, the Woody Mountain Cyuyun: In the
County Lungganfu, the Mountain Talo: In the County of Ziencheues, North of the
City Chungkiang, the Mountain Tunquon, wherein are Copper Mines: Near the City
Lochi, the pleasant Mountain Ciepion: In the County of Muichen, the Mountain
Gomui, and part of the Mountain Min: West of the City Muichen, the Mountain
Peping, shining like a Torch in the Night: North of the City Kiatung, the
Mountain Mienkiang: Near the City Iung, a high Mountain of the same name:
South-West of the City Liuchen, the double-pointed Mountain Fiang: By the City
Iunking, the Mountain Cunglai, on which Ice is found in midst of Summer: On the
shore of the River Kinxa, a Mountain of a hundred Furlongs: By the City Ufa,
the Mountains Tain and Umueu: Near the City Chinchiun, the Mountain Utung: Near
the City Ly, the Woody Mountain Iuliang.

IN the Province of Huquang, in the County Vuchangfu, South-East from the
Mountains in the Province of Huquang.
chief City Vuchang, is the Mountain Tayuon, which has Golden colored Stones
and Earth.

Southward from the little City Vuchang, is a Mountain of the same
denomination, on which they say, in the time of the Family of Cin, a Man
appeared all Hairy, and ten Cubits high.

North-East, near the City Kiayu, on the shore of the River Kiang, a Mountain
named Chepie, is remarkable for the overthrow which Caocao gave to Cheuyu.

Southward by the City Kungyang, a Ridge of Hills extends two hundred Furlongs
over a great Cave.

Southward from the City Hinque, lies the Mountain Chung, having on it a Lake
with Water as black as Ink.

Southward from the City Tungxan, is the Mountain Kienyvon, that is, Of nine
Palaces, so called from the nine Apartments, built on the same by the Sons of
King Cyngan, for places of Retirement to Study in.

In the County Hanyangfu, South West of the City Hanyang, lies the Mountain
Kieuchin, or, Of nine Maids; so called from nine Sisters that lived and died
Virgins there, and studied Chemistry.

In the County Siangyangfu, Southward from the City Kiun, is a great Mountain
called Vutang, which with a great number of Spring-heads, rises up to the Sky;
upon it are twenty four Lakes or Pools; there are also many stately Temples
with Cloisters, the Residences of Priests.

Eastward from the City Ingxan, is the Mountain Tungting, with a great Cave of
incredible depth: Not far from it, to the South, is a Mountain named Kie, on
which the Ruins of the ancient City Kieyang are to be seen.

Westward from the City Hoangmui, is the Mountain Sucu, Crowned with a Chapel
which is Consecrated to four Chinese, who were in high Veneration for their
skill in Physic, and also a stately Tower with nine Galleries.

In the County Kincheufu, Southward from the City Changyang, is the Mountain
Fang, which is said to be of such a Nature, that in Spring and Harvest not the
least breath of Wind can be perceived thereon, but in the Summer continual
Blasts blow strongly out of its Caverns, as in Winter they blow into them.

Westward near the City Sungki, begins the Mountain Kieucang, which extends to
the River Kiang, and with a double row of continued Rocks, incloses the same,
and makes the way between to be long and dangerous.

Southward from the City Quei, lies the Mountain Cutai, which is Crowned with a
Palace of the old Emperors.

In the County Yocheufu, on the South side of the chief City Yocheu, is the
Mountain Pauo, famous for a stately Temple and Cloister, situate between two
Lakes.

In the Lake Tungting, at the South-West part of the City Yucheu, the Mountain
Kiun makes an Island; at the South-East end of the City the Mountain Uxe
produces littles Stones, which by the Physicians, amongst other Medicines, are
given for sore Throats.

By the City Linsiang the great Mountain Tayang shoots up with seventy Spiry
Heads; and another Westward from the City Hoayang named Tung, that is a hundred
Furlongs, full of Pine-Trees: There is likewise the Mountain Fangtai.

Eastward from the City Pingkiang lies the Mountain Tiengo, five hundred
Furlongs in circumference, and is in the Book of Tausu accounted the twenty
fifth amongst the famousest Mountains; and is likewise famous amongst the
Chinese Physicians for the producing of many Physical Herbs.

By the City Gaukiang, toward the South, is the Mountain Hoang, that is,
Yellow, for the Earth and Stones about it are of a yellow color; wherefore it
is called also Kinhoa, that is, Golden Flower.

In the County Changxafu, Westward from the City Changxa, lies the Mountain
Iamo, so called from the Muscovy Glass which is dug out of it in great
abundance.

Westward from the City Ninghiang, toward the South-West, lies the biggest
Mountain Taihiu, which rises with three Spires; the middlemost whereof has on
the top of it a great and fathomless Lake.

There is likewise the Mountain Xepi, and upon it a Lake of forty Furlongs
called Pexa; out of which flow four Rivolets, the one named Lieu; the rest
glide toward the Stream Iuping.

At the same place is the Mountain Tungyang, the third in order amongst the
famous Mountains, described in the Book of Tausu.

By the City Xeu lies the Mountain Sucung, which has a Spring of hot Water,
and thirty six rising Piques, besides many other large Mountains.

In the County Paokingfu, East from the chief City Paoking, the Mountain Lung
rises with four Spires, which are of such an equal height, that they seem
every where to be one entire Head; in the middle of them is a Lake, out of
which run two Rivolets, the one named Lien, which glides to the City
Siangkiang, and the other the Chao.

In the Jurisdiction of the City Vuchang, Easterly, lies the Mountain Changmo;
which extending a great way, and having very inaccessible Ways, is inhabited by
wild People, which are not under the Dominion of the Chinese, but live safe
and secure amongst themselves.

In the County Hengcheufu, Westward from the chif City Hengcheu, appears the
Mountain Taceu, where (according to the Chinese Writers) Silver Mines have been
opened in former Ages.

By the City Hengcan begins the Mountain Heng, which extends eighty Furlongs,
with seventy two Spiry Hillocks, ten great Valleys, thirty eight Springs, and
twenty five Brooks.

By the City Queiyang is the Mountain Xejen, sometime called The Stone-Swallow,
because after Rain Stones are found upon it, exactly resembling Swallows, which
Physicians by their several colors distinguish into Males and Females, and use
them in Physic.

The Mountain Hoayn, pleasant to the Eye, and for its fair Prospect called The
Flower, rises up in the Jurisdiction of the Cities Linuu and Lanxan.

By the City Taoyven, toward the West, lies the Mountain Lolo, the forty seond
in order in the Book of Tausu.

On the North-West side of the City Changte, over a great Valley called
Lungmuen, a Bridge leads from one Hill to another; under which is a Rivulet.

In the County Xincheufu, North-West from the City Xincheu, is the Mountain
Tayeu, the twenty sixth in order in the Books of Tansu.

There is also the Mountain Siaoye, whereon a thousand Books were found, which
they say were hid there in the time when the Emperor Xi commanded all the Books
in China to be burnt.

By the City Kiuyang is the Mountain Locung, on which, they say, breeds a Bird
that never Sings but before Rain; upon it is a Lake which takes up the compass
of about a thousand Acres.

In the County Iungcheufu, Westward from the City Iungcheu, is the Mountain
Kiungyo, observable for the abundance of brave Cypress*Trees which grow on it.

In the Territory Chingtien, near the City Kingmuen, is a Mountain of the same
Name, which formerly served for a Wall and Boundary between the Northern
Provinces and the Kingdom of Cu.

By the City Tangyung lies the Mountain Cucai, the thirtieth in order in the
Book of Tansu; upon it are Trees and Stones of a red color, and a Rivulet of
sweet smelling Water.

In the County Chingyangfu, North-West from the City Chingyang, is the Mountain
Tiensin, which has a plain of a hundred Furlongs on its top, which is
surrounded with other rising Hillocks in stead of Walls. The Physicians highly
esteem this Mountain for the abundance of sovereign Herbs which they have from
it.

By the City Chinxan is the Mountain Canglo; on which (they say) a Countryman
for several years gathering Chestnuts against an approaching Famine which he
foresaw, thereby preserved himself and his Neighbors from perishing with Hunger.

Not far from thence is the Mountain Nuiqua, so called from a Woman so Named,
whom the Chinese adore as a Goddess, for some great and public Action done by
her in her Lifetime.

Southward from the City Tungtao begins the Mountain Fecu, and serves for a
Boundary between the Province of Huquang and that of Queicheu.

To these may be added in the Territory Hangcheufu, North of the City
Hoangcheu, the Mountain Pui; North of the City Machin, the woody Mountain
Molin; near the City Ling, the large spreading Mountain Vanyang; in the
Territory Changtefu, West of the City Changte, the Mountain Lo; by the City
Tang, the high Mountain Suvang; in the County Chincheufu, South of the City
Chincheu, the Mountain Hoanycung; by the City Iunghing, the high and steep
Mountain Pipa; North of the City Songing, the high and cold Mountain Kelyng;
South of the City Nanquei, the fruitful and pleasant high Mountain Tuting; and
some others.

EAstward by the City Funghing lies the Mountain Xifung, the thirty ninth
Mountains in the Province of Kiangsi*
in the Books of Tansu.

In the County Iaocheufu, Eastward from the City Iaocheu, is the Mountain
Macie, the fifty second in the Book of Tansu.

By the City Yukan lies the Mountain Xehung, that is, Stone Rain-bowe, because
the Water falling from the same represents a Rain-bowe.

In the County Quangsinfu, Northward from the City* Quangsin, the woody
Mountain Ling, the thirty second in order in the Book of Tausu, produces great
variety of Flowers and Herbs, and also excellent Crystal.

By the City Yeyang the Mountain Paofung has on its Summitie a Stone-House
built, which pierces into the Clouds.

Southward from the City Queili the Siang, a high and broad Mountain,
distinguished by the many Meadows, Woods and Villages which are upon it,
affords a delightful Prospect.

Westward lies the Mountain Lunghu, the thirty second in order in the Book of
Tausu; it rises with two Spiry Tops, which because they seem to oppress one
another, the uppermost of them is called Lung, that is, Dragon; and the unmost
Hu, that is, Tiger.

In the County Nankanfu, North-West from the City Nankan, the Mountain
Quangliu, the ninth in order in the Book of Tausu, spreads it self five hundred
Furlongs, and is inhabited by many Orders of Religious Persons in their Way.

By the City Tuchang lies the Mountain Iuenxin, the fifty second in order
amongst the famous Mountains described in the Books of Tausu; and more
Northerly the Hill Xepie.

Northward from the City Tegan is the Mountain Quenlun, on which is a Stone of
that bigness, that a hundred Men may with ease lie on the same, without
touching one another.

Northward from the City Hukeu lies the Mountain Yechung, that is, Stone-Clock;
for the Water of the Lake being driven by the Wind against this Mountain, makes
a noise like a Bell.

On the Shore of the River Kiang, by the same City, the Mountain Matang is
noted for the many Ships that have been lost on the same; for if any Vessel
chance to go never so little from the Shore, the Current being so exceeding
strong, drives them against the Rocks, and splits them in pieces.

In the County Kienchangfu, Westward from the chief City Kienchang, the
Mountain Masu, the thirty sixth in order in the Books of Tausu, extends four
hundred Furlongs.

By the City Quanchang the Mountain Chunghoa divides it self at the top into
several Hillocks, whereof all are barren, except one, which being green, and
full of Trees, is crowned with a Temple.

In the County Vucheufu, Northward from the City Vucheu, is the Mountain
Sangkiu; on which (they say) is a strange Image, in the shape of a Man, which
according to the several variations of the Air changes its color; so that the
neighboring People know certainly by it what Weather they shall have.

In the County Linkiangfu, on the North side of the City Linkiang, is the
Mountain Comao, the thirty third in order in the Books of Tausu. Many Omens of
good fortune the Chinese fancy to themselves in this Mountain.

By the City Sinkin is the Mountain Iosu, the seventeenth in order in the Books
of Tausu.

In the Teritory Xuicheufu, on the East side of the City Xuicheu, is the
Mountain Tayu; in the midst of which is a pleasant Grove and a stately Chapel.

By the City Xangcau lies the Mountain Lungfung; on which, a day after Rain,
there appears a great Flame of Fire in the Night, but never in dry Seasons. The
People thereabouts, being much inclined to Superstition, say that this Flame is
the Spirit of the Mountains, and for that reason have built a fair Chapel on
the South side of the City Sinchang, and Consecrated it to Fire.

In the County Iuencheufu, on the South side of the City Iuencheu, lies the
Mountain Niang, so called because it is only visible, but not accessible, by
reason of its dangerous Cliffs, which seem to fall every Minute; it is three
hundred Furlongs in circumference, and produces a Spring, whose Water is so
exceeding cold all the whole year, that it cannot be drunk till it has stood a
considerable time in the Sun.

In the County of Kancheusu, on the East side of the City Kancheu, is the
Mountain Tiencho, on which, in the Night, appears a Light like that of kindled
Coals. There are some which suppose it to be Serpents, which (as they say)
vomit forth Precious Stones, (whereof they wear one on their Heads) and swallow
up the rest again.

Near the City Ningtu lies the Mountain Kincing, the thirty third in order in
the Books of Tausu.

The Chinese fancy that the neighboring Hills are peopled with Satyrs, and
other strange Monsters in the shape of Men.

In the County Nanganfu, on the West side of the City Nangan, is the Mountain
Sihoa, that is, Western Flower; for Si signifies Western, and Hoa, Flower.

There are also in this Province, by the City Iaoicheu, on the Lake Poyang, the
Mountain Cienfo; by the City Yukaw, the Mountain Hungyai; in the County
Kieukiangfu, South-East of the City Kieukiang, the Mountain Taku; on an Isle of
the same Name, in the Lake Poyang, East of the City Tegan, the Mountain Poye;
by the City Pengie, in the Lake Poyang, the inaccessible Mountain Siaofu; near
the City Kinki, the far-stretch'd Mountain Iunglin, having thirty six Tops; in
the County Kieganfu, by the City Ganfo, the Mountain Uncung, in circuit eight
hundred Furlongs; by the City Sinfung, the large Mountain Hiang, producing
Medicinal Drugs, and several others, of which there is nothing remarkable to
mention.

IN the County Kiangningfu, South West from the City Kiuyung, lies the
Mountains ^in the Province of Nanking.
Mountain Mao, which in the Books of Tausu is accounted the first for Pleasure
and Happiness.

North-East from the chief City Nanking, the Mountain No bears on its Head a
Temple, wherein are placed a thousand Images.

Toward the South-East from the City Nanking is the Fang, a Mountain only
remarkable, because on the Commands of the Emperor Xi it was by five thousand
Men dug through, to prevent (as he thought) the Prediction which the
Mountain-gazers gave out from their observation of this Mountain, concerning
the subversion of his Empire.

On the South-West side of the City Nanking, the Mountain San juts into the
River Kiang, and toward the River side has diverse Iron Chains fastened to it,
not (as the Chinese ridiculously affirm) because it should not run away, but
that the Ships may take the better hold with their Hooks; otherwise this
Mountain being of very hard Stone, the Vessels must needs strike against it.

In the County Fungyangfu, near the City Linhoa, lies the Mountain Iunonu, so
called from the abundance of a sort of Mineral, which we commonly call Muscovy
Glass, dug out of the same.

Near the City Xeu lies the Mountain Cukin, whereon in former Ages a great
piece of Gold being found, and proving good against many Distempers, the
Chinese say that it was made by the art of Chemistry.

By the City Hutai lies the Mountain Moyang, or Shepherds-Hill, so called from
a fair Virgin who kept Sheep on the same.

In the Territory Sucheufu, at the South-West side of the City Sucheu, near the
Lake Tai, lies the Mountain Liguien, remarkable for the many fair Buildings
which crown the same.

By the Lake Tai the Mountain Siu is coronetted with a stately Chapel and
Cloister.

Within the City Changxo the Mountain You extends to the West several Furlongs.

In the County Sungkiangfu, on the South-East side of the City Sungkiang, on
the Shore of the River, is the Kin, only remarkable in this County; upon it
stands a great Fort, and at the Foot thereof a considerable number of Ships for
the securing of the Havens thereabouts.

In the County Changcheufu, by the City Vusie, is the Si, a Mountain out of
which they dig Tin.

In the Territory Chinkiangfu, on the North-West side of the City Chinkiang,
lies the Mountain Kin, which makes an Isle in the River Kiang; upon it are
several fair Temples and Cloisters for Priests: There also springs out of it a
Brook called Chungleang, whose Water is much esteemed amongst the Chinese; so
that it is exceeding pleasant both by Art and Nature.

In the Territory Hoaiganfu lies the Yocheu, in the Sea near the City Hai, a
Mountain very remarkable for a most stately Chapel and Cloister, to which many
People from all Parts in China come to make Offerings.

By the City Lukiang in the County of Lucheufu, the Mountain Taifu has many
pleasant Groves and delightful Ascents.

By the City Sosung lies the Mountain Siaoku, with two high Spiry Tops, between
which being a Valley runs the River Kiang: on one of the Spires is a great
Chapel and Cloister.

Southward from the City Chicheu lies the Mountain Kieuhoa, that is, Nine
Spires and the Flower, for it consists of so many Hills, and appears hanging
down like a Flower.

In the County Hoeicheufu, on the West side of the City Hoeicheu, is the
Mountain Hoang, the greatest in the whole County; it reckons twenty four
Brooks, thirty two high Tops, and eighteen obscure Valleys.

In the little Territory of the City Quangte, near the Towns Quangte and
Kienping, lie several great and pleasant Mountains; the most famous of which
are the Hang and Ling: the first whereof, lying on the West side of the City
Quangte, pierces the Clouds, yet nevertheless has a Spring on the top thereof,
which overflows continually.

The Mountain Ling, not inferior to the others in height, has also a steep
and craggy Ascent, and at the top is fifteen Furlongs in circumference. Near
it, at the entrance of a Passage, stands the Image of a Priest, who (as they
say) was thus transformed.

Besides these above mentioned, there are in this Province, by the City
Iungchiung in the County Gunkinfu, the steep and cavernous Mountain Feu;
South-East of the City Taiping, the Mountain Tienmen; within the Walls of Ning,
the pleasant Hill Lingyang; by the City Tung in the Territory Chicheufu, the
Mountain Hing, very rich in Fruit Trees, especially the Armenian Plum; by the
City Hicuning, the Mountain Ki, a hundred Rods high; with some others which
have not been thought worthy to be named.

IN the Territory Hangcheufu in the Province of Chekiang, on the South side
Mountains in the Province of Chekiang.
of the City Hangcheu, the Mountain Funghoang divides it self upwards into
exceeding high Spiry Heads; yet on each of them is a Steepled Chapel with nine
Galleries.

On the Eastern Shore of the Lake Si, near the City Hangcheu, the Mountain
Xeceng lifts up a Temple with a Turret, and about it nine Galleries.

By the City Lingan begins the great and steep Mountain Tienmo, extending above
eight hundred Furlongs, and the thirty fourth in order in the Books of Tausu;
it overlooks most pleasant Woods, and Fields of Rice, and has growing upon it
great store of rare Mushrooms, which, being Pickled, are from thence sent
through all China. Tienmo signifies Eye of Heaven, because this Mountain on two
several Precipices has two Lakes, which the Chinese call Eyes, with which it
looks up to Heaven.

By the City Chung hoa the Mountain Cienking has upon it a Lake which
possesses the space of two hundred Acres, very remarkable for yellow Fish, by
the Chinese called Kinyu, that breed therein.

The Tiencho, a Mountain which lies South-West from the City Hangcheu, is
partly very craggy, and partly pleasant and delightful; it has one top called
Filaifung, all of hard Rocky Stones, and within full of Holes or Caves; upon it
also are several fair Temples and Cloisters, to which (they say) above three
thousand Priests belong, most of them betaking themselves to a most solitary
Life, and choosing to dwell in those dark Caves, out of which not being able to
get without the assistance of some from without, they are upon occasion drawn
up by Ropes; after which manner they receive Alms from those that pass by,
which sometimes amounts to no small value; for this Place is all the year long
(especially in May) frequented both by Strangers and Natives. Tilaifung
signifies To come flying; which Denomination it received from an Indian Priest,
who so soon as he saw this Mountain said, This is the Hill which we miss out of
India, certainly it is flown hither.

The County Kiahingfu is for the most part Champain, having only one Mountain
or Hill named Utai, on the North-West side of the City Kiahing in the Lake
Tiensing, which affords the City a Moat; upon it are five pleasant Gardens and
Banquetting-houses, built by Persons of Quality for Places of Recreation; from
whence also the Hill has received its Denomination, for Utai signifies Five
Altars.

To the North side of the City Niencheu in the Territory Niencheufu, lies the
Mountain Ulum, which in a manner surrounds the City; it upholds two Lakes, one
of which, though not far distant from the other, has clear, and the other
muddy Water.

The Mountain Tuichung rises out of the Valley Kieuli, through which flows a
little River; upon it are the Chapels and Gardens of the famous Philosopher
Nienculin, to whom those that Travel that way pay their Visits, in
commemoration of so eminent a Person. They say that here he made Fishing his
chief Recreation when he hid himself from the Emperor, because he would not
accept of the prime Place in the Government, which was so far urged upon him,
that the Emperor himself coming to him, lay with him a whole Night in one Bed,
so great an esteem did the greatest of the Chinese Emperor's set upon Learned
and Pious Men.

In the County Kinhoafu, Northward from the City Kinhoa, the Mountain Kinhoa
extends it self rhree hundred and sixty Furlongs in circumference, and is the
thirty sixth in the Books of Tausu; on which the Chinese say that the Contest
was between Venus and Pallas.

By the City You is the Mountain Kiming, the biggest in the whole County, high
and difficult to ascend; on the top thereof appears a fair Palace.

Near the City Pukiang lies Sunhoa, a Mountain whereon (according to the
Relation of the Chinese) the ancient Emperor Hoangti's Daughter resided, and
devoted her self to Virginity.

By the City Iungkang the Mountain Fangnien is by Stone Steps ascended to the
top, where a great Bridge leads cross a Valley.

In the County Kiucheufu, on the South side of the City Kiucheu, lies the
Mountain Lano, the eighth in the Books of Tausu.

Near the City Kiangxan begins the Mountain Civen, and from thence extends
above three hundred Furlongs.

Through these Mountains a Way runs to the Province of Fokien, though over many
Precipices, very troublesome to Travelers; but most of all in the steep and
high Mountain Sienhoa, to ascend which are built three hundred and sixty Stone
Steps like a pair of winding Stairs: On its highest Top is a fair Temple, and
many Inns, or Houses of Entertainment for Travelers.

In the County Chucheufu, near the City Cinyun, begins the great Mountain
Hocang, the thirteenth in order in the Books of Tausu, and spreads it self
three hundred Furlongs toward the Sea, and according to the Chinese
Geographers is a thousand Rods high, and not subject to Snow, Hail, Thunder,
Rain, or any alteration of Weather.

In the Territory Xaohingfu, on the South-East side of the City Xaohing, is the
Mountain Hoeiki, the eleventh in the Books of Tausu; from whence anciently the
Province Hoeiki (which compriseth the Eastern Countries) had its Denomination.

The Mountain Suming, the ninth in order amongst the most famous in the Book of
Tausu, rises with two hundred Spiry Heads, has eight thousand Rods in height,
and extends two hundred and eighty Furlongs: it begins about the City Yuyao,
and runs South-West to the City Ningpo.

By the City Xing lies the Mountain Tenchi, the twenty seventh in the Book of
Tausu, which has its Denomination from a Lake whose water is Blood-Red.

Near the City Sinchan is the Mountain Vocheu, the fifteenth in the Book of
Tausu.

There is also the Mountain Tienlao, the sixteenth in the Book of Taoxu.

In the County Ningpofu, near the City Cuki, the Mountain Lu advances to sight
a fair Temple, to which the Chinese often resort with Supplications to their
Idols, to have their Dreams Interpreted.

In the Territory Taicheufu, Southward from the City Taicheu, the Mountain
Kaicho, the nineteenth in the Book of Taoxu, is remarkable for the Stones
thereon, which are all perfectly square.

By the City Hoangnieu is the Mountain Queiyu, the second in the Book of Taoxu.

By the City Tientai is the red Mountain Cheching, the sixth in the Book of
Taoxu; and near it, by a City of the same Name, the Mountain Tientai, accounted
eight thousand Rods high, and eight hundred Furlongs about, the famousest, and
first in order amongst all those Mountains described by Taoxu, and, as they
say, in happy Auspice: Upon it are many fair Temples and Cloisters.

More Southwardly in the Sea, is a Mountainous Isle, called Yohoan, which
signifies Precious Circle, so named from its convenient Harbor for Ships, being
almost hemmed in with Mountains, and subject to no manner of Winds, having only
one Gap like a Mouth, for the entrance of Ships.

By the City Taiping, lies the Mountain Fangching; on which King Yue lived in a
private condition.

In the County Vencheufu, South-West from the City Vencheu, in the River
Lungyeu, lies the Mountain Cuyu, surrounded with Water; yet on the top thereof
is a Chapel and Cloister.

By the City Suigan, is the Mountain Siennien, the twenty sixth in the Books of
Taoxu.

Near Locing, is the Mountain Yentany, on which is a Lake of ten Furlongs, also
named Yentang, that is, A Bath for Geese, because the Wild-Geese, which
according to the several Seasons of the Year, change their Stations, generally
make it one of their resting places.

ON the North side of the City Fokien, in the County Fokhenfu, in the Province
Mountains in the Province of Fokien.
of Fokien, begins the high and large Mountain Sive or Fung, and runs from
thence to another County to the Cities Cutieu, Mincing, and Leyuen; toward the
South side of the Metropolis, lies the Mountain Fang, which has a Valley of
forty Furlongs; and on the neighboring Hills many Orange, Citron, and
Lemon-Trees.

About the City Iungfu, toward the North, a famous and high Mountain, named
Kaoca, the seventh in the Books of Taoxu, yields a delightful Prospect by its
ancient Woods, and the stately Cloisters built on it.

In the County Civencheufu, Southward from the City Civencheu, is the Paocai, a
Mountain, which on its top has a Turret with nine Galleries, and serves for a
Landmark to Seamen: Eastward lies the Mountain Siaoso.

In the County Changcheufu, toward the East side of the City Changcheu, is the
Cio, a Mountain, on which (according to the Chinese Writers) stands a Stone of
five Rods high, that before Rain or Tempestuous Weather, shivers and shakes
like a Tree, blown by the Wind: Nearer the City lies another Mountain called
Kieulang, which joins to the former, and is remarkable for a Crystal Fountain.

In the Territory Kienningfu, on the North-East side of the City Kienning, lies
the high Mountain Xin; from whose top the Sunrising may be seen over all the
other Mountains: There is also the Ciaoyven, the thirteenth in the Books of
Tausu.

But that which exceeds all the other in Fame and Bigness, is the Mountain Vuy,
near the City Zunggan, upon it are many Pagods or Cloisters, the Residences for
Priests and solitary Persons; amongst which are diverse Noblemen, who despising
the World, live thus retired to serve their Idols with the greater Zeal.

By the City Pucing is the Mountain Yuleang, one of the ten greatest in all
China.

Southward from the City Ienping, lies the Mountain Yuevang, on which the Kings
of Iue used to have many Palaces for Retiring places, from the heat in Summer:
more Southerly, are the Mountains Kieusieu and Yeuki.

In the Territory Zincheufu, is the Mountain Kin, or Gold, so named, from its
Gold-mines, which the Family Sung caused to be opened: It lies South from the
City Tincheu, near the City Xanhang, on the Eastern shore of the River Ting; it
is so pleasant, that it appears like an excellent Landscape; upon it are three
little Lakes, which, they say, turn the Iron that is thrown therein, into
Copper.

In the County Hinghoafu, toward the South side of the City Hinghoa, lies the
Mountain Hucung; upon which, the Chinese Mountain-Gazers make many
Observations: Toward the South-East from the City, is the Mountain Goching,
having a large Village at its Foot.

There are besides in this Province, in the County Ienpingfu, the Mountain
Tung, which surrounds the City Sianglo: Through the Borders of Kiangsi, runs
the great Mountain Pechang: West of the City Ienping, the great Mountain Huon:
By the City Singlieu, the high Mountain Tiung: West from the City Ninghoai, the
Mountain Lungmien: South of the City Tinquien, the Mountains Leang and Linting:
East of the City Tincheu, the Mountain Liensung: South-East of the City Xaonu,
the Mountain Cietai: North from the City Taining, the Mountain Kingoa: A little
above the City Foning, the Mountain Lunxen: South of the same City, the high
Mountain Hung: On the same side of the same City, the Mountain Nanquin: West of
the City Ningte, the Mountain Hoeung: North of the City Foning, the Mountain
Lunizen: North-East from the same, the Mountain Talao, having six high
Precipices, with several others.

IN the Province of Quantung, the vast Mountain Talo begins near the City
Cingquen; Mountains in the Province of Quantung.
from whence it reaches to the Jurisdiction of the City Hoaicie, lying in the
Province of Quangsi; upon it dwell a Wild and Salvage People, which are not
under the Dominion of the Chinese: Within the Walls of the City Canton, lie
three Hills, Crowned with stately Buildings; the first called Iuesieu, the
second, Fan; and the third, Gheu.

By the City Xunte, is the Mountain Lungnien, out of which springs a Fountain
as clear as Crystal; it produces also Red Stones, of a strange and wonderful
form, with which, the Chinese build their Artificial Mounts.

Near the City Ungyven, is the Mountain Lichi, and in the middle of it a Lake
which proceeds from eight Rivulets, whose Water is good against many Distempers.

In the County Nanhyungfu, lies the noted Mountain Nuilen, on the top whereof
stands a Chapel, Consecrated to the General Chankieuling.

In the Territory Hoeicheufu, near the City Polo, begins the Mountain Lefeu,
one amongst the ten greatest Mountains in the whole Empire: It rises from the
joining of the Mountains, Lo and Feu, and extends to the Jurisdiction of the
chief City Quancheu, and to the City Cengching: Its height is accounted to be
three thousand six hundred Paces, and its Circumference three hundred Furlongs:
It has fifteen steep Hills, and above four hundred seventy two Holes or
Caverns: The Chinese Mountain-Gazers look upon it as one of the chief Mountains
for Divination.

By the City Lungchuen, near the City Kieyang, lies the Mountain Cangpu, which
extends to the Sea, where on the Shore it ends in a most dreadful Precepice:
They say that Flowers and Birds grow and breed on the same, of so strange a
kind, as are found in no other places. By this City Kieyang lies a Mountain of
the same denomination, divided, as it were, into Arms or Branches; one of which
extends to the City Hinning, of the County Hoeicheufu; and the other toward
the City Haifung.

By the City Hoeilay, lies the Mountain Pehoa, so called from the Flowers which
continually grow upon it, for it produces several Flowers, according to the
season of the Year.

By the City Chinkiang, are also many great Hills which lie close together, and
wherein there are many deep Caverns, but not pried into by the Chinese; for
that, as it is said, many going to dig in them, never came out alive, none
knowing what became of them, or whither they went.

In the County Chaokingfu, at the North side of the City Chaoking, lies the
Mountain Ting, on which, according to the Writings of the Chinese, stands a
Stone two hundred Rods high.

In the Jurisdiction of the City Suhoci, lies the Mountain Sin, that is, The
Mountain of Chastity, so called from a Maid, who vowing Solitude and Chastity,
Lived and Died there a Virgin, in pure Devotion to the memory of one, who
having been her Lover, and Bethroth'd to her, was accidentally devoured by a
Tiger; her Parents, in vain, endeavoring to force her to Marry some other
Person, to avoid which constraint, she fled to this Mountain, on which are two
Temples built and Consecrated to her.

By the City Teking lies the Mountain Koleang, eminent for its producing a sort
of Trees, which because of the exceeding hardness of their Wood, are called
Iron Trees.

In the County Kaocheufu, on the East side of the City Kaocheu, is the Mountain
Feu, which is of such a height, that this only (as the Chinese say) appeared
with its Crown above the Water, in the time of their general Deluge, and that
some were preserved alive on the same.

Near the City Tienpe lies the Mountain Koleang, which is said to be of that
quality, that its Inhabitants neither feel excess of heat in the Summer, nor
cold in the Winter, but enjoy all the Year long continual Spring.

By the City Hoa, lies a brave and pleasant Mountain, named Pao, that is,
Precious; to which the Inhabitants resort in great companies to Recreate
themselves.

In the Territory Liencheufu, near the North side of the City Liencheu, lies in
a private place the great Mountain Uhoang; famous amongst the Chinese, upon a
supposition they have, that the Fruit which grows there, is found no where
else, and that if any one should presume to carry any away with him (having
liberty to Eat as much as he pleases there) he would never find his way out of
the Mountain.

From the City King toward the West, the way through the Mountains is so
troublesome to find, that Mayven, a General of the Chinese marching with an
Army against the Emperor of Tungking, caused Copper Columes to be set up in the
same, that thereby he might find that way out again at his return; to this day
one of them may be seen, standing on a steep ascent called Fuenmoa, where the
Boundaries are between the Kingdom of Tungkin and China.

In the County Luicheufu, Southward from the City Luicheu, is the Mountain
Kingliu, on which, from a flash of Lightning, sprung a Fountain.

Another Hill named Tatunglai, near the City Cuiki, on an Isle in the Sea, near
the Shore; has seventy Furlongs in Circumference, and eight Populous Villages,
which maintain themselves with fishing for Pearls.

There are moreover in this Province, in the County Quancheufu, near the City
Tunguen, the Mountain Heufu making an Isle in the Sea: Near the same City, the
Mountain Tahi, on the Seashore: In the County Hoeucheufu, the Mountain Lofeu,
extending from the City Changing, to the City Polo: In the County Xaocheu, near
the City Lochang, the Mountain Chang: North of the City Nanking, the high and
far-spreading Mountain Tecafung: By the City Xihing, the fair and pleasant
Mountain Sicung: Near the Moat of the City King, the Mountain Heng: About the
City Linxan, the high Hill Loyang.

THe Province of Quangsi possesses an endless Ridge of barren and unaccessible
Mountains in the Province of Quangsi.
Mountains.

In the County Queilufu, toward the North-East of the chief City Queilin,
appears the Quei, a Mountain so called, from the abundance of Trees named Quei;
these Trees suffer no other to grow near them, nor in the same places where
they have stood formerly. The Mountain Tosieu lies also near the City Queilin,
and has a very fine College. More Northward, in the same Tract of Land, lies
the Mountain Xin, with three high Precipices; on the top of one of them stands
a Palace, so high, that the Chinese affirm it to be in the third or purest
Region of the Air, above all the Clouds.

By the City Hingquan, lies the Mountain Haiyang, which reaches to the City
Lingchuen; upon it is a Pool which breeds four Footed Beasts, and Horned Fish,
which Monsters, the Chinese believe are to Recreate the Dragon, therefore dare
not offer to kill any of them.

The Mountain Hoa, that is, Flower, so called from its pleasant Prospect, lies
on the Shore of the River Quei, near the City Yangso.

By the City Iungfo lies the Mountain Fungcao, that is, Phoenix Nest,; the
Chinese affirm, that the Bird Phoenix bred, and made his Nest on the same, and
that under the Phoenix Nest, a very Precious and unvaluable Stone has been
found.

About the City Cyven lies the Mountain Siang, Crowned with a fair Temple and
Cloister.

Northward, beyond the City Queilin, a Ridge of steep Hills runs along with
seven rising tops, which exactly represent the shape of The great Bear,
wherefore it is called Chiesing, that is, Hill of the seven Stars.

In the County Lieucheufu, lies Southward from the City Lieucheu, the Mountain
Sienie; from whose several observable things, as its deep Caverns, Spiry Point,
which like a Pillar of one entire Stone, shoots up in a straight and
Perpendicular Line, its Stone Image of a Horse, etc. the Chinese Draw in their
Fancy many lucky Omens.

Northward of the City Siang, rises the Mountain Xintang, which is so high and
steep, that it is almost inaccessible; yet on its top has a pleasant Lake,
full of Fish, and surrounded with Trees; whereupon the Chinese, who are very
curious to see such things, climb up this Mountain with great labor and
trouble; reporting, that for its pleasant Situation, it was formerly frequented
by a People, which they say, never Die, and are called Xincien.

In the County Kingyvenfu, Northward from the City Kingyven, appears the
Mountain Y; only remarkable for its standing alone, for whereas others are
very high, and extend a vast way, this stands alone like a Pyramid, and
therefore eminent amongst the Chinese.

In the County Pinglofu, at the South-West side of the City Pinglo, begins the
Mountain Kai, and extends to the City Lipu; on the East side is the steep and
great Mountain Iung, which has nine craggy Hills; on the West side lies the
Hill Monica, that is to say, The Crown of Eyes, because it has two great
Stones which appear like two Eyes on its top, so exactly formed by Nature, that
scarce any Artist could match them; the Ball of the Eye may easily be
distinguished, for round about are two Streaks, one white, and another black,
as in our Eyes.

By the City Fuchuen appears the Mountain Sin, on which by a flash of Lightning
eight great Holes were made.

Not far from the City Ho lies the Mountain Kiue, so called from the abundance
of Golden-colour'd Apples that grow thereon.

Southward from the City Sieugin lies a pretty high Hill named To, which is
inaccessible one way, but toward the City ascended by Stairs made by Nature.

In the County Guchenfu, Northward from the City Gucheu, the Mountain Tayun
begins near the Metropolis of the County.

By the City Teng lies a very pleasant Mountain named Nan, from which the
Chinese make many strange Observations.

By the City Yung begins the Mountain Tayung, which reaches to the Jurisdiction
of the Cities Pelieu, Hinge, Yolin, and Cin.

Near the same place is the Mountain Tuki^o, the twenty second in the Book of
Tausu; it has eight steep Spires and twenty Caverns.

By the City Yolin lies the Mountain Han, that is, Cold, because it is so
exceeding cold, that no Man can live on the same, notwithstanding it lies under
a very hot Clymate.

Soutward from the City Pope lies the Mountain Fiyun, remarkable because in the
Rocks thereof appear Prints of Men's Feet, some four Spans long: The whole
Mountain is barren and full of Caverns.

Northward from the City Pelieu lies the great Mountain Kilieu, which has many
Precipices, and is the twenty second in the Book of Tausu.

Westward from the City Yung lies the Mountain Ho, that is, Fiery, so called
because every Night appears a Fire like a lighted Torch on the same.

They say that these Lights are little Insects, which we call Glowworms, and
that they run out of the River upon the Mountain, from whence they give that
Light.

The great Mountain Xepao lies also in this County, has great Woods of Trees
and Indian Canes, and nourishes a multitude of Tigers.

In the County Chincheufu, at the South side of the City Sincheu, lies the
Mountain Pexe, the one and twentieth in the Book of Tausu, and advances its Top
called Toucu above the Clouds; on the North side is the Mountain Lungxe, the
largest in the whole County, overspread with many pleasant Groves and
Cornfieldsd.

By the City Quei lies the great Mountain Nan, which thrusts up twenty four
Spiry Hillocks.

In the County Nanningfu, on the East side of the City Nanning, rises the the
Mountain Heng, so called, because in the middle of the River Yeu or Puon it
receives the Water, which with great force is driven by the Stream: The Family
Sung caused a Fort to be built on the same for a Defense of the Country.

There are besides in this Province, North-East of the River Hung, the Mountain
Hocio; North of the City Heng, the Florid Mountain Sieulia; East of the City
Yunghung, the Mountain Suchung; having Iron Mines; West of the City Naning, the
Mountain Moye; in the Territory Taipingfu, near the City Lung, the very high
Mountain Cieuling; East of the City Taiping, the Mountain Peyun; not far from
thence, the Mountain Gomui; and near it, the Mountain Kin; by the City Co, in
the County Sumingfu, near the Rity Hiaxe, the woody Mountain Pelo; in the
Territory Chinyanfu, the high and pleasant Mountain Iun; in the Garrisoned
County Sugenfu, East of the City Sugen, the Mountain Tosieu; by the City
Vuyuen, the Mountain Kifung, and a little farther the Moye; in the Territory
Suchingfu, near the City Suching, the high craggy Mountain Lengyum; by the
Cities Fulo, Tukang, and Suling, the Mountains Tanping, Siecung, and Lyfang,
and not far thence the Mountain Xipi.

IN the Territory Queiyangfu, on the East side of the City Queiyang in the
Province Mountains in the Province of Queicheu.
of Queicheu, lies the Mountain Tengen, signifying Copper Drum, from the sound
of a Drum (as the Chinese affirm) that is heard upon it against Rain.

In the Territory Sunangfu, on the South side of the City Sunang, rises the
Vancing; to which there being no Ascent but only one way, the Inhabitants find
it a safe place of refuge in time of War. On the South-West side lies the
Mountain Lungmuen; by the City Vuchuen, the great Mountain Tanien; on which
reside many People unknown to the Chinese.

In the County Sinyven, near the Moat of the City Ciniven, rises the Mountain
Xeping, which signifies Stone Pillar, because an entire Stone is erected there,
which, as they say, is a hundred Rods high.

On the North-West side of the City Sinyven, lies the Mountain Sikiung, on
which anciently stood a City, whereof the Ruins yet remain.

In the Territory Tuchofu, near the City Pinglang, lies the Mountain Kaiyang,
fortified with a Castle.

On the North side of the City Hokiang is the Mountain Ching, to whose top
leads only a narrow Foot-path, which is guarded by a strong Fort.

About the City Fuiugning lies the Mountain Hinglang, ascended by Stone Stairs,
which are guarded by the Inhabitants to secure the Passage.

By the City Pincheu lies the Mountain Lotung, which extends twelve hundred
Rods, and near the City Cinping piercing the Clouds with its Spiry Top, is
called Hianglu.

In the little County of the City Pugan, on the North-East side thereof,
appears the Mountain Puonkiang, which extends to the Kingdom of Gannan and the
Fort Ganchoang: On the South-West side is the Mountain Tangpi, out of which
they dig Quicksilver and the Mineral Hiunghoang.

In the little County Iunningfu, near the City Muy, rises the Hungyai, a very
high Mountain, terrible to behold. There is also a Hill named Lincing,
overgrown with Indian Canes.

By the City Tinging lies the Mountain Quangso, which extending a hundred
Furlongs, has a Fort for the safeguard of the Way.

In the little County of the City Chinning, near the City Xenk, appears the
Mountain Magan, so named from its resembling a Saddle.

The small Territory of the City Ganxun has but one Mountain, which lies on
the East side thereof, and is called Niencung, which though very high, is not
above ten Furlongs in compass.

In the Garrisoned County Sintienfu, on the North side of the chief City
Sintien, is a very high Mountain called Pie, which pierces the Clouds, and runs
up like a Pyramid, for which reason it is named Pie, which signifies A Pencil,
with which the Chinese Write. On the North side lies the Mountain Yangpo,
which for its pleasantness and variety of colors may be resembled to a
Picture. The Mountain Caimiao, lies on the North-East side, from which Water
falls, whereon the Sunbeams reflecting continually, represent a Rain-bowe.

Westward from the Garrison Pingao lies the Mountain Loco, which signifies
Harts*horn, so called from the abundance of broken Stones which stick out of
the same.

There are also in this Province, North of the City Queiang, the high craggy
Mountain Nannang; In the County Suchenfu, South of Suchen, the inaccessible
Mountain Go; West of the same City, the Mountain Tienyung; In the Territory
Xecienfu, South of Xecie, the Mountain Pipa; East of the same, the Heu; In the
County Tunganfu, East of Tungan, the Mountain Tung; South of the City, the
Tungyai; On the South-East side, the Cloud-piercing Vienpi; On the South-West
side, the woody Mountain Pechang; In the County Lipingfu, North of Liping, the
Mountain Patung; East of the same City, the pleasant Mountain Kinping, called
The Gilded Wall; East of the City Tanki, the high Mountain Tungquen; also the
Mountain Taiping, with its rising Top Metien, and square Cavern Tunqui; In the
County Putingfu, North-West of Putting, the high craggy Mountain Ki; and East of
the same City, the Magan; East of the chief City of Pinguefu, the Mountain Pie;
By the City Yangy, the craggy Mocing; In the County Lungtefu, by the City
Pingtu, the high high Mountain Iunctao; By Taiping, the Rocky Mountain Cohai;
East of Picie, the craggy Mountain Mohi; North of the Garrison Cingping, the
Mountains Lochung and Cosung.

IN the County Iunnanfu, within the Walls of the chief City Iunnan, is the
Mountains in the Province of Iunnan*
Mountain Uhao, adorned with many Cloisters and Temples, and diverse other
Buildings.

Westward from the Lake Tien and the City Iunnan, lies the far-spreading and
high Mountain Kingki; and on the North side of the same City is the Mountain
Xang, which produces a Spring with very cold Water, which nevertheless is
exceeding good against all manner of pain in the Joints and Limbs.

In this County also is the Mountain Lo, being high and slender, appears like a
Spire, and with the Mountain Kinki, rises above all the other Mountains in the
County. On the North-West side lies the Toyang, full of Cloisters, the
Residences of Priests.

In the County Talifu, on the West side of the City Tali, is the Mountain
Tiencang, which extends three hundred Furlongs, and rises up with eighteen high
Spiry Heads: Upon it is a very deep Pool.

By the City Chao is the Mountain Fungy; where there is also an artificial
Mount of Earth; under which two hundred thousand Men belonging to the King of
Nanchao lie buried, they being all slain in a Battle against the Chinese,
under the Conduct of the General Tangsiengu: After which Victory the Kingdom of
Nanchao, which contains all that lies toward the South over the River Gangas,
was by the Family of Han subdued.

By the City Tengchuen, toward the South-West lies the Mountain Kico, famous
for many stately Pagods and Cloisters. From this Place the knowledge of the
Pagan Religion is thought to have come first to the Chinese.

On one of the Mountains near the City Chao, a steep Spiry Hill called Tinsi
shoots up a thousand Rods above the Mountain on which it rises: and at the Foot
thereof lies a Fort for defense of the Ways. The other Mountains of lesser
remark are Xuimo, Chung, Tungi, and Lofeu.

In the County Linganfu the Mountain Uchung bears on the middlemost of three
Spiry Risings the City Omi.

By the City Ning the Mountain Vansung, so called from the Pine-Trees it bears.

Near Tunghai is the Hill Siau, which (as the Chinese say) has a Spring whose
Water clears and whitens the Skin of those that drink it, and also makes lean
People fat.

In the Territory Cuhiungfu, on the West side of the City Cuhiung, are the
Mountains Minfung and Viki, from the last of which flow above a thousand
Brooks, which makes it all over very Flowery and fruitful.

Northward from Quantung lies the high Mountain Cieupuon, which sinks in the
middle, and makes a deep Cavern.

Near the City Nangan is the Piaolo, full of Silver Mines. The others are Heu,
Southward from the City Sinhoa; Minfung, Westward from the City Cuhiungfu; and
Umung, Eastward from the City Tingyven.

In the County Chinkiangfu, on the South side of the City Chinkiang, near the
Lake Vusien, the woody Mountain Yokeu thrusts up one Spiry Hillock.

On the East side of the same City is the Mountain Kinlieu, which at the rising
of the Sun glisters like Gold.

By the City Kiangchuen, toward the South, the Mountai Si sends forth several
Rivulets.

Not far from thence is the Mountains Puon and Quen, in one of which stands a
Temple and Cloister, inhabited by Priests.

In the County Munghoafu, on the South-East side of the City Munghoa, the
Mountain Guaipo over-tops all the other Mountains in the County. On the
South-West side lies the Mountain Tunghoang, which is so called from the
Chinese Phoenix, which (as they say) died on the same, after having Sung very
sweetly a considerable time. On the North side lies the Mountain Tiencul, that
is Ear of Heaven, because there is such a perfect Echo on the same, that the
Voice, though uttered never so softly, is repeated again.

In the County Quangnangfu, on the East side of the City Quangnang, is the
Mountain Lienhoa, that is, Lien-Flower, because it represents the shape of that
Flower.

Near the City Tai is the Mountain Yocyven, so called from a pure Spring which
rises on its top; for Yocyven signifies An excellent Spring.

In the County Sinyvenfu, on the West side of the City Sinyven, is the Mountain
Polung, with many Hills, which running along in a Ridge, rise higher and
higher, and appear like swollen Waves of the Sea; wherefore it has the Name
Polung, that is, Many Waves. On the North-East side lies the Mountain Nalo,
which abounds with Tigers and Leopards.

In the Territory Iungningfu, on the South-East side of the City Iungning, is
the Mountain Canmo, which being all a Rock, stands apart from other Mountains
in a great Plain.

By the City Volu is the Mountain Lopu; By Hinglo, the Mountain Pouo; By
Lochuho, the Mountain Lovi.

In the County Xunningfu, on the North-West of the City Xuuning, lies the
Mountain Loping; on the North side the Mountain Mengpa, which is inhabited by
salvage People.

In the Garrisoned County Kioungfu, on the East side of the City Kiocing, is
the Mountain Kuking, which has a Spring, whose Waters (if we may believe the
Chinese) given to Children to drink, sharpens their Wit.

In the Territory Sokingfu, near the City Kienchuen, Westward, lies the Kinhoa,
a Mountain which abounds in Gold, and extends from thence in a continued Line
through the Kingdom of Sifan. One of the Hills belonging to it shines all over
like Gold.

On the South side of the City Siking lies the large Mountain Fauchang.

By the City Kienchuen is the Mountain Xepao; on which on a Column of Stone is
the Image of the Idol Fe, an Elephant, Lion, Clock, and Drum, all of one piece,
yet every Representation of a particular color; but by whom erected is not
known.

In the County Vutingfu, on the East side of the City Vuting, is the large
Mountain Umong, rising with twelve Spiry Heads.

About the City Lokiven, Northward lies the Mountain Hinkieu, which is barren
and craggy, yet plain on the top, and ascended only by a long and narrow Path,
just broad enough for one Man; so that it affords a safe refuge for the
Inhabitants in the time of War.

By the City Hokio lies the Mountain Sokien, which is commonly called The
continual Spring, because it feels none of the alterations which usually attend
the several Seasons of the year. On its West side is a great Cavern like a deep
Pit, in which stand two Images, one of a Man, the other of some kind of Beast.

The Chinese write, That if any one chancing to come near these Images speaks
aloud, there follows immediately Thunder and tempestuous Weather.

In the County Cintienfu, on the North side of the City Cintien, is the
Mountain Iuecu, fifty Furlongs in circumference; and on the North-West side the
Mountain Into, the Air whereof is so very pure and wholesome, that those who
inhabit there live very long, and free from all Diseases, nor are ever troubled
with that excessive Heat, with which in the Dog Days other places are infested.

By the City Kiucin is the Mountain Kiusna, so called from the divers-colour'd
Stones thereon, being in the form of a Horse.

In the Territory Likiangfu, on the North-West side of the City Likiang, which
looks toward the Kingdom of Tibet lies the Mountain Sieu, so called from the
Snow, which never melting is always found upon it.

In the County Iuenkiangfu, on the North-East side of the City Iuenkiang, is
the pleasant Mountain Lecekia, signifying Fair Tower; On the East side, the
great Mountain Iotai, with twenty five Spiry Tops.

In the County Iunchangfu, on the East side of the City Iungchiang, is the
Mountain Gailo, or Ganlo; upon which is a deep Pond, from which the Husbandmen
take Observations whether the approaching Year will be fruitful or not, by
taking notice in the Springtime, whether its Water falls or rises. There is
also a Stone, which representing a Man's Nose, sends forth out of the Nostrils
two Fountains, one with cold, and the other with warm Water.

Near the City Lay lies the Kaoli, a great and high Mountain.

By the City Iunping lies the Mountain Ponan, very troublesome and dangerous to
ascend.

Near Xintien, is the Mountain Mocang, one of whose Tops seems to kiss the
Skies.

The Mountain Funko, which lies Westward from the City Ienping, has a Fort of
the same Denomination.

These are the most remarkable Mountains of this Province; besides which there
are North of the City Caoming the high Mountain Sieucao: By the City Synning,
the Golden Mountain Kiuma: South of Queniang, the Pecio: North of the same
City, the Mountains Yleang and Kocing: South of the City Lyngan, the high
Mountain Puonchang: North of the chief City of the County Kingtungfu, the high
and far stretching Mountain Munglo: And not far from thence, the Garrisoned
Mountain Pingtai: North of Quangsi, in the County Quangsifu, the Mountain
Fiaco: Within the Walls of the same City, the Mountain Chungfien: About the
City Mile, the Mountain Siaolung: By the City Cheneye, the Woody Mountain
Xingan: By the City Loleang, the Mountain Xemuon; through which runs a Road ten
Furlongs broad: By the City Yeco, the Mountain Yceng: Near the City Malnug, the
high topt Mountain Quenfo: West of the chief City, in the County Yaoganfu, the
Mountain Kienlien: On the East of the same City, the Mountain Tung, o'respread
with pleasant Groves: On the North of the Mountain Lolo, and by the City Zayao,
the Mountain Luki: South of the City Pexing, the high Mountain Rieulung: On the
East side, the Mountain Tung; on the West, the Utung: On the North-West side of
the City Sinhon, the Mountain Talung: On the North side, the Checung, on which
is a warm Spring: By the Garrison Chelo, the Mountain Munglo: By the Garrison
Taheu, the steep Mountain Olun: By the Garrisoned City Mangxi, the high Stony
and Cavernous Mountain Singxe: By the Garrison Mengyang, the high Mountain
Queikive, so full of Holes, that it is said to have been Undermined by Evil
Spirits.

As to what concerns the Temperature of the Air, and Quality of the Soil in the
several Countries of China in particular, having heretofore spoken of it in
general, we find in the Chinese Books of Geography this account given.

The Temperature of the Air, and Quality of the Soil.
IN the first little County, wherein stands the City Chin, in the Province of
Xensi, the Air, in regard of the Country, lies very high, and is much colder
than in other places; but in most parts of the Province of Xensi, the Air is
pleasant and temperate.

It Rains very seldom in the Province of Xantung.

In diverse places of the Province of Honan the Air is very Temperate, and
consequently Healthful; as likewise in the County Houiking.

The Air of the Province of Fokien is generally hot, but clear and Healthful;
except in the County Tincheufu.

The Southern part of the Province of Quangsi, is under a warm Climate.

The Air of the Province of Iunnan is much hotter than that of the other
Provinces, as being nearer to the Line, and for the most part agreeing with
that of India.

The Soil of the Province of Peking, is in most places Barren and Sandy, though
Champain; but in the second County Paotingfu, very pleasant and Fruitful of all
things; and so likewise in the seventh Territory Tamingfu: In the eighth County
of this Province grows the Root Gingten.

In the Jurisdiction of the City Yenking, the first of the three Cities without
the bounds of the Province of Peking, are store of Vines; yet the Inhabitants
know not how, or rather (which is most probable) will not make Wine of Grapes,
but content themselves with Liquors made of Rice, which are exceeding good, and
so well approved of by the Jesuits, who went thither from Europe, that they
used no Liquor else, except at Mass.

The Province of Xansi produces Vineyards and Grapes, much sweeter than in
other parts in China; so that the Chinese, if they would, might make excellent
Wine in great abundance; but in stead thereof, they have a way of drying their
Grapes like Raisins, which, when so ordered, are Vended in all parts of China.

The Fathers which Promulgated the Gospel in this Province, took a convenient
course to Press their Wine themselves which they use at Mass, and furnished
others of their Fraternity in the Neighboring Provinces therewith; whereas,
formerly with great trouble and charge they sent for their Wine from the City
Makao.

The second County Pingyangfu, of the Province of Xansi, is partly Champain,
and partly Mountainous; but of the Champain, which is very Fruitful, not an
Acre lies Untilled.

The fourth County Luganfu, of the same Province, is very Pleasant, and though
small, yet abounds with all manner of Provision.

The fifth County Fuencheufu, though Hilly, yet on the Hills themselves has
some places capable of Tillage; and beneath, diverse thick Woods and Forests,
stored with Venison, fruitful Cornfieldsd and Meadows for Pasture.

The Province of Xensi is more subject to Drought than any other Province, and
very often infinitely endamag'd by swarms of Locusts, which like a vast Army
devour the Fruits of the Earth, and lay waste all before them: This Province
particularly produces the Physical Plant Rhubarb.

The first County Siganfu, of the Province of Xensi, has both Pleasant
Mountains and Fruitful Plains, producing all store of Fruits and other
Provision: The second likewise is both Manured, and not behind in natural
Fertility.

The third Territory Hanchungfu, has many rank Pastures and rich Fields.

The fourth Pingleangfu, has many pleasant Mountains, which are not altogether
barren.

The Soil of the whole Province of Xantung is enriched by the many Rivers,
Lakes, and Brooks that are in the same, and has plenty of all kind of
Necessaries, as well Rice, Barley, and other sorts of Corn, as of Beans, Hau,
and diverse sorts of excellent Fruit, but Drought and Locust do often great
hurt: Nevertheless, the Country is naturally so exceeding Fertile, that they
say, the Harvest of one Fruitful Year stored them for ten Years, in such
plenty, as to spare great quantities to other Countries: Particularly, it
yields large Pears and Apples of several sorts, Chest-nuts, Small-nuts, and
great abundance of Plums, which are dried and sent to other Countries.

The first County Cinunfu, yields not, for pleasure, to any other of the
Northern Provinces, for all manner of Grain or Fruits, especially Wheat and
Rice, which grow there in great abundance.

In like manner, the second County Yeucheufu has many delightful Fields,
Woody Mountains, and in most places, is well Cultivated.

The third County Tungchangfu has a Plain and Rich Soil, produces great store
of Grain, and wants in a manner nothing of what is requisite for the sustaining
of Man's Life.

The Province of Honan is in some parts Champain, and in others Mountainous,
especially Westward; yet the Soil being every where Fruitful, no place lies
Untilled, except toward the West, where several craggy Mountains obstruct the
Husbandmans Labor: The Fields produce Rice, and all other sorts of Grain: They
have all manner of European Fruits, and that in such abundance, that they are
bought at very cheap Rates; so that it is no wonder this Province is by the
Chinese called A Paradise of Delight; for the Eastern part thereof is so
pleasant, and every where so improved by Tillage, that those who shall for
several days Travel through the same, may fancy they walk through a most
delightful Garden.

But above all, for richness of Soil, are the Counties Queitefu and Changtefu,
as being for the most part Plain, without any Mountains.

The third Territory on the contrary is very barren and Sandy; yet that defect
is much supplied by the convenience of its Rivers. The fifth County Hoaikingfu
again is exceeding Fertile; as also the sixth and seventh, being Honanfu and
Nanyangfu; the last well Watered with Rivers and surrounded with Mountains, so
abounds with Provision, that it is able to furnish whole Armies therewith. In
like manner the little County, in which stands the City Iu, is very Fruitful.

The Province of Suchuen has many pleasant Pastures and rich Cornfieldsd, yet
is Mountainous in several places: The Physical Drugs which this Country
produces, as well Herbs as Minerals, are much esteemed, and from thence
Transported to Europe; among others the true China-Root, and best Rhubarb.

The whole Territory Chingtufu is partly Champain, and in some parts with
Mountains; the Plains are enriched by Natures Hand, and the very Mountainous
parts by good Tillage, are made Fruitful; all the Fields are Watered by
Rivulets, either Natural or Cut, insomuch, that whoever Travels through them,
has, for three days, an exceeding pleasant Journey.

In the County Paoningfu, of the Province of Suchuen, in a Pagod-Temple in the
great City Kien, grows an Indian Fig Tree, in the Portuguese Tongue called
Arvor de Rays.

In the Country Xunkingfu grow great store of Gold-colour'd Apples, a Root
called Soozanem, and Chest-nuts which melt in the Mouth like Sugar.

The Territory Siucheufu, though craggy and Mountainous, produces among many
other things requisite, abundance of Indian Sugarcanes, and an excellent Fruit
called Lichi.

The County Chunkingfu has store of Meutang-Flowers, and the Fruit Licheu.

The Territory Queicheufu, Fruitful of its self, is also by the Inhabitants
very much improved by Tillage, no spot of Ground being left Unmanur'd, except
some Sandy and Stony Mountains, which lie especially toward the North: Among
other excellent Fruits, this Country abounds in Oranges and Lemons.

The first little County, wherein stands the City Tungchun, is exceedingly
enriched by the abundance of Rivers which Water the same.

The small Territory belonging to the City Kiating, is a pleasant place, and
yields plenty of Rice and other Grains.

By the fourth Garrisoned City Chinhiung grow a sort of Beans, which the
Chinese for their hardness call The Stone-Beans; they grow on Shrubs, and are
exceeding good against Heart-burning.

The County of Huquang for its Fruitfulness is called Iumichity, that is, The
Country of Fish and Rice; it is also called The Corn-store-house of the
Chinese (as Sicilie was anciently called, The Storehouse of Italy) from its
abundance of all things, especially Corn, and all manner of Grain, which it not
only yields to its Inhabitants, but in a plentiful manner furnishes all the
neighboring Countries.

The County Vuchangfu is advantaged by the many Streams and Channels that run
through the same, and along whose Banks grow abundance of Reeds, of which they
make Paper.

The second Honia, among other things, produces in particular great plenty of
Lemons, Oranges, and Cytrons: Nor are the fifth and sixth Territories inferior;
which last yields all manner of Provisions.

The seventh County Iocheufu, is very much enriched by three Rivers, viz. the
Kiang, Siang, and Fungi, and brings forth incomparable Fruits, especially
Oranges and Lemons.

The eighth County Changxafu, generally Champain, but in some places
Mountainous, has a fat and fertile Soil, and plenty of all things, Rice
growing there in abundance, without danger of withering in the dryest Seasons,
because there seldom wants Rain, which if there should, the Husbandman
supplies it sufficiently with Water, which by an Engine is drawn out of the
Lakes and Streams over their Fields, so to moisten the Roots of their Plants.

The County Hengcheufu is a delightful and well Tilled Country, yielding all
manner of Provisions, and among the rest, Paper-canes: Much of the same Nature
are the tenth and fourteenth Counties.

In the Territory Chingyangfu grows a Plant, which like our Ivy runs up in
height, bears Yellow Flowers, and some White. The utmost end of the Sprigs are
very thin, like Silken Threads; they say, that a small Branch thereof being laid
to the Naked Body, occasions Sleep, and therefore is called Munghao, that is,
Flower of Sleep.

The County Nanchangfu, the first of the Province of Kiangfi, having every
where a fruitful and fat Soil, is Tilled in most places: In like manner, the
second Territory Iaocheufu is made very pregnant by several Rivers that run
through it.

The Chinese also esteem the fourth County Nankangfu, for its affording them
all kind of Necessaries; the low Grounds yielding plenty of Rice, Corn, and
Shell-Fruit; the Mountains store of Wood for Fuel.

The sixth County Kienchangfu, is, though Mountainous, a Pleasant and Fertile
Country; as likewise the seventh Vuchenfu, (through which run many Rivers) it
yields store of Gold-colour'd Apples; nor is it wanting in all sorts of Fruit
and other Provisions: No less Pleasant and Fruitful is the eighth County
Lingkiangfu, esteemed by the Chinese; as also the ninth Kieganfu, though Hilly
and Mountainous: But above all, the tenth Territory Xuicheufu, abounds in
Rice-Fields; as appears by its paying three thousand Bags of Rice for Custom
Yearly; when as it contains only three Cities, of which, the chief at this day
called Xuicheu, was in the time of the Family Tang named Micheu, that is, City
of Rice: Not much short of this in plenty is the eleventh County Iuencheufu.

The fourth County Sunkiangfu, of the Province of Kiangnan, though small, is
not to be left out of the Fruitful Countries: The fifth Changcheufu, being a
plain Country and Watered by several Rivers, exceeds many other Territories in
the goodness of its Soil; producing an excellent kind of Grain. The seventh
Yancheufu has also a delightful and fertile Soil.

The ninth County Lucheufu, being watered by the Lake Cao, possesses in most
parts thereof very luxuriant Plains: In like manner does the eleventh,
Taipingfu.

The Province of Chekiang, by reason of the many Brooks, Rivers and Lakes which
wash the same, is a rich Magazine of Plenty: And though Chokiang has many
Mountains on its South and West parts, yet they are all Tilled* except those
which are stony; and they also afford Timber, fit for the building of Ships or
Houses. In most parts are store of Mulberry Trees, which are Pruned yearly like
our Vines, thereby the better to provide Food for the Silkworms; for the
Chinese suffer them not to grow too high, having by the experience of many
years learned, that the Leaves of the Orange Trees, and those that are most
kept down, yield the best Silk.

In the County Hucheufu, the third of the Province of Chekiang, grows Cha,
which is called Riaicha.

In the fifth Territory Kinhaofu grows a sort of great Plumbs, which being
dried, are sent from thence to most parts of China.

The whole County of Ningpofu, in the Province of Chekiang, has a fertile
Soil, except where it is full of Rocks and Mountains.

The eleventh County Vencheufu flourishes all along till you come to the
Mountains in the Province of Fokien, which extend themselves a vast way.

The Province of Fokien is for the most part over*spread with Mountains, which
in many places are covered with pleasant Woods, especially on steep Ascents:
The Timber is good for the building of Ships, Houses, and the like. That part
also which is plain, is for the most part Sandy and unfit for Tillage: but to
supply that defect, the Water is led thither in little Channels, whereby those
places that are barren by Nature, are rendered productive by the Art and
Industry of Man.

The sixth County Tingcheufu has abundance of all things requisite for the
subsistence of Mankind, notwithstanding it is very Mountainous.

The seventh Territory Hinghoafu in the Province of Fokien, is the fertilest
and pleasantest in the whole Country, and especially abounding in Rice, as
appears by its paying seventy two thousand Bags of Tribute, whereas it only
contains two Cities.

The little Territory of the City Foning has also plenty of Provision,
notwithstanding it is every where full of Mountains.

The Province of Quantung is a rich Storehouse of Plenty: The Fields are so
bountiful in the production of Rice and Wheat, that they are Sown twice a year,
each Harvest yielding the Husbandman a most plentiful Crop, by reason the
whole Province feels neither Frost nor Snow, insomuch that the Chinese have a
Proverb concerning it, viz. That in the Province of Quantung are three unusual
things, The Sky without Snow, The Trees always green, and The Inhabitants
continually spitting Blood, that is to say, a red-colour'd Spittle occasioned
by the continual chewing the Leaves of Betel with Faufel or Araka, a
Composition made of burnt Oyster-shells.

In the same Province also are every where many excellent Fruits, as
Pomegranates, Grapes, Pears, Chestnuts, Indian Figs, Indian Nuts, Anana's,
Lichin, Lunggon, Ieucu, or Muskmelons, Apples, and all sorts of Citrons.

The fifth Territory Iaocheufu in the Province of Quantung, has a fertile
Soil, except in some places where it is oppressed with Rocks.

The sixth Chaokingfu yields store of sweet Wood, and amongst the rest that
which the Portuguese name Pao de Rosa, that is, Rose-Wood.

The ninth County Luicheufu exceeds in many things all the other Territories in
the Province of Quantung:

In most parts of this Country grows a Twig, which the Chinese call Teng, and
the Portuguese, Rosa.

The Province of Quangsi is not altogether so delightful as that of Quantung;
yet in some measure is supplied with Provisions: The whole Province is full of
Hills, except the South part, which reaches to the Shore, where it is all
Tilled and Manured.

The third County Kingyvenfu is a Craggy and Mountainous Country, yet produces
Araka, little Indian Nuts, and the Fruit Lichias.

The sixth Territory Cincheufu, is a pleasant Place, and not so barren as the
former.

The Province of Queicheu is the craggiest and unfertilest Place in all China,
being nothing but a continued and inaccessible Ridge of Mountains.

In the fourth Territory Chinyvenfu grow a sort of Flowers, highly esteemed by
the Chinese, Granates, and Golden Apples.

The first County Iunnanfu in the Province of Iunnan, is a very pleasant
Country, having plenty of all things, and rises in some places in Hills and
high. Mountains, and in others extends a vast way on plain and Champain
Grounds: It produces Rose-Wood.

In the second County Talifu in the Province of Iunnan, grow European Figs,
which the Chinese call Vuhoaquo, that is, Fruit without Flowers, because they
grow without ever having any Blossoms; for Vu signifies Without; Hoa, Flower;
and Quo, A Blossom. There likewise grows Cha or Tee.

The third County Langanfu yields Rice, Wheat, Honey, and Wax; and also all
sorts of Fruits which grow in India. It is partly Champain, and partly
Mountainous.

The fourth Territory Cuihungfu is a plain Country, flourishing with
Cornfieldsd, brave Meadows, and Pastures for Cattle.

The whole County Kingtungfu produces chiefly (and therefore in great
abundance) Rice.

The Territory Quangnangfu is by the Chinese, for its excellent fertility,
called The Golden Land.

In the fifth Territory Iunnanfu, where stands the Garrisoned City Cioking, are
store of Pine-Apples; as likewise in the sixth.

The seventh abounds with Silk, Ebony-Wood, Date-Trees, and Araka, which the
Inhabitants chew with Betel-Leaves, as also the Indians, who call it Makinnang.

Thus much of the temperature of the Air, and fertility of the Soil of China;
as to what concerns their manner of Husbandry, and the Description of some
Plants that belong properly to China, we will here Treat at large.

Of their manner of Husbandry.
AS to what concerns Husbandry, no People in the World are more skilful and
experienced than the Chinese: They say (and not without some Ground) that a
Man may live without all Arts, except that of Husbandry, which is amongst them
esteemed the only Business of Consequence. They say continually that Husbandry
is the greatest and chiefest Work of the Empire, and that even Kings and
Magistrates ought seriously to concern themselves in it. And it comes to pass
by the great Privileges and Encouragements allowed to the Husbandman, that
not one Spot of Land is left unimprov'd, if it be either naturally fruitful, or
can be made so by Art: and because it is a great part of their care to keep
their Ground in heart by frequent Dunging and Manuring, they use many more
sorts of Dung than are in use amongst us, as Man's Dung, Ox Legs stamped, Hogs
Bristles, etc. insomuch, that the Chinese, though stored with great abundance
of precious things, nothing is lost, how mean soever it is, but is all improved
to the great benefit of the whole Empire. Where there is want of Water, it is
conveyed, though a considerable way, out of the Rivers, along dug Channels;
(by which means all China is made Navigable) and conducted from low to high
places by means of an Engine made of four square Planks holding great store of
Water, which with Iron Chains they hale up like Buckets. It is reported, that
several of their Emperors and Empresses did in ancient times practice Husbandry.

The Emperor Ven, who began his Reign Anno 197 before the Incarnation, promoted
Husbandry, then decayed by the continual Wars, with great zeal, and put his own
Hands to the Work, that by his Example he might oblige all the greatest
Noblemen to follow him. He caused all Women to plant Mulbery-Trees, and breed
Silkworms, from the Example of his Empress, whom he enjoined to set the
forementioned Trees, and breed Silkworms in his Palace; insomuch that all the
Clothes she wore, and which were used in their Religious Ceremonies, were of
her making.

It is credible that from hence the high Feast, which the Chinese call
Hinchun, has its original: This may well be termed The Countrey-man's Holiday;
for in the beginning of the Spring, when the Sun is in the Equator, this Day
is by the Chinese through the whole Empire kept with great Solemnity, by all
degrees of Persons in every City, and in the Metropolis Peking it self after
this manner:

One of the chiefest of the Nobility, Crowned with a Garland of Flowers, goes
to the Eastern Gate of the City, with all manner of Instruments Playing before
him, and attended with a number of burning Torches and Flags. Behind follow a
Train of Men, which carry several Dishes of Meat to Trees, whereon hang the
ancient Monuments of Husbandry, being either made of Wood or some other
Material, and set forth with Silk and Cloth of Gold. In several places through
which they pass, stand Triumphal Arches, and all the Streets are hung with
Tapestry. In this manner the Nobleman goes to the Eastern Gate, as it were, to
meet the approaching Spring.

The chiefest Pageantries of this Solemnity are, A Cow of Baked Clay, so big,
that forty Men are scarce able to carry it: The other is a Youth, whom they
call The Careful and Industrious Spirit, who going bare with one Leg, and the
other covered with a Stocking, continually strikes the Cow on the Back with a
Switch: Then follow diverse Contrymen, carrying Spades, Shovels, Axes, and
the like Tools, used in Husbandry; yet nothing of what they carry or do, but
represents a peculiar Secret; as by the continual beating on the Cow, they
signify, what care the Husbandman must take in the Manuring of his Lands; by
the Youths going with one Leg bare, and the other antickly clad, they express
what speed they must use to go to their Labor, and scarce allow time to Clothe
themselves.

When the whole Train is led to the King's or Governor's Palace, the Stone Cow
is bereaved of all her Garlands and other Ornamentals: Out of her opened Belly
(like as from the Trojan Horse) little Clayie Oxen are drawn in great numbers,
of which the Emperor sends one to every Governor, with admonishments, that the
Subjects would be careful and diligent in the Tilling of their Lands, and leave
not an Acre unsow'd; and among other Ceremonies, the Emperor himself Plows, and
throws Seed on the Ground that day.

The Emperor Hiaou, though when he was grown very old, betook himself three
years before his Death to Husbandry, and forsaking all kind of State Affairs,
Plough'd and Sowed the Ground himself, that by that means he might show good
examples to his Subjects, and stir them up in like manner to Husbandry: Then
enquiring out experienced Planters, commanded them to go through his whole
Dominions, and teach all People the way of Husbandry: to which purpose, they
found out all sorts of Implements or Tools useful in Tillage, and many other
the like things which are required in Husbandry; so that we may now cease from
wondering, that formerly mean Rusticks were raised from the Plough to the
Imperial Throne and sole Monarchy of all China, when we see that Emperors
descended from the Throne to the Plough, nay, which is more, managed the Empire
and the Plough at once.

The ancient Chinese Emperors and Kings have had several Laws concerning Laws
for Husbandry.
Husbandry, amongst which were these.

The nineteenth part of whatsoever the Soil produces, falls to the Emperor.

The Governors ought in time of Famine to take notice of the Subjects Goods and
Estates, and Tax them according to their Quality.

The dividing of the Ground was after this manner; every Person was to have an
equal share, and one Family no more than the other: All the Fields were divided
into great Squares, and these again into nine lesser, of which each Person had
one to Manure; but the middlemost was either the Emperor's or the King's
Square, which was also by eight Overseers Tilled on the Emperor's Account.

The eight Squares were called Peculiar Acres, but the middlemost, The Cammon
or Free Square, which when left Untilled, no Man was permitted to Manure his
own. He Reigned Anno 2837. before the Nativity.


The Emperor Xinnung first Invented the Plough and other Necessary things for
Husbandry, and taught the Inhabitants to Sow Wheat, Rice, Barley, Maiz or
Turkish Corn, and other Grains. Martin. D^cas p. 45.


The Emperor You, who Reigned Anno 2207. before the Nativity, has written many
things concerning Tillage, viz. after what manner the Fields of every County,
are to be Tilled and Sown; for he had gained excellent knowledge of the Nature
of several Soils, to which he attained by his own Industry: And observing their
Situation among Rivers, concerning which he also wrote several Treatises, and
from his Writings the Chinese observe several Rules in their Tilling,
according to the several qualities of the Ground.

The Mountains are also in China Manured after a peculiar manner, but in no
Province so much, as in that of Fokien, because there are the most Mountains.

Michael Boem observes, that the Country of China is exceeding fruitful, not
only in the producing of Indian, (especially the Southern Provinces) but also
all sorts of European Fruits, besides others, solely belonging to it self: It
is a wonder to consider, how many excellent Fruits the Inhabitants in the
fifteen Provinces of China enjoy; for those Provinces which want any sorts of
Fruits are furnished by their Neighbors with those which they have not; by
which means they have all the Year long fresh Fruits, even in the midst of
Winter; for in some Provinces, the Fruits are ripe in November, December,
January, and February; in others, in March, April, May and June; and in some,
in July, August, September and October.

The manner of Nursing up of young Plants amongst the Chinese and most Indians
is three several ways: The first is by burying of the Fruit and Seed together
in the Ground; for the Chinese Gardners put whole Golden Apples and other
Fruits in the Earth, and then Plant the Sprouts which shoot from the Seed at a
distance from one another, by which means they grow in a short time to be great
Trees, and bear excellent Fruit.

They Graff their Trees also after the same manner as we do ours; and not only
Graff Trees, but also Flowers, by which means, one Stalk, if Graffed, bears
several Flowers of diverse shapes and Colors the next Year.

The third way of Nursing up of Plants, is by Lopping, as they do in Vineyards,
and by cutting off Sprigs from old Trees, and Planting them again; after which
manner they increase their Manga and Goyava; sometimes only the Leaves, as the
Paparja, which in a short time run up to be high Trees.

It is to be observed in Trees, of what size or sort soever, the Chinese
intend should speedily grow to Perfection and produce Fruit, they Plant the
cut off Branches that day when the Sun enters the fifteenth Degree of
Capricorn, which never fails to shoot forth in a short time; for they have
either observed by experience, or learnt from the Ancients from time to time,
that only this day is fit for that business, viz. that if a Sprig of what Tree
soever be Planted or set in the Ground on that day, it will very suddenly
become a Fruit*bearing Tree.

Plants.
Diverse sorts of strange Herbs, Trees, Roots, Canes, and Flowers grow in the
Country of China, some of which are proper to China only; others again common
to that, with other Countries, especially India. Most of the Provinces yield
each of them many Herbs, which are of a strange Sovereign Virtue.

In the seventh County Kingyangfu, in the Province of Xensi, grows an Herb Herb
Kinsu.
in manner like a Tuft of Yellow Hair, wherefore it is called Kinsu, that is,
Silk of Gold, or Golden Thread of Silkworms, for Kin signifies Gold, and Su,
Silk: It is of a bitterish Taste, but more cooling than heating; cures suddenly
all manner of Scabs and Breakings-out in the Body, without leaving the least
Spot behind.

In the same County is a sort of Rice, exceeding good to cleanse the Body, and
especially to provoke Urine: There are also several sorts of Beans, which are
an excellent Remedy against Poison.

In the eighth County Ienganfu grows a Flower named Meutang, which signifies
Flower Meutang.
King of Flowers; it is highly esteemed by the Chinese, being bigger than a
common Rose, and also resembling the same, but spreads its Leaves out further;
and though it smells not so sweet, yet is pleasanter to the Eye, and without
prickles; the color of it is a pale Purple streaked with White; there are also
some which are Red and Yellow. It grows on a Tree not unlike our Birch-Trees,
and is Planted in all Gardens through the whole Empire of China, though with
great Care and Industry; for in warm places it must be preserved from the heat
of the Sun.

By the Garrisoned City Hocheu, grow those Trees that produce Mirobalans, and
others, whose Wood is the Drug called Santalum.

In the County Cinanfu, of the Province of Xantung, grows a kind of Fruit
called Linkio and Lieu.

In the third County Changtefu, in the Province of Honan, grow several sorts
Wormwood.
of Wormwood. In the County Hoangcheufu, in the Province of Huquang, grows
White Wormwood, so called for its excellency by the Chinese Druggists. On the
Mountains, in the County Fangyangfu, in the Province of Kiangnan, is Red
Wormwood, both being used by the Chinese against many Distempers, especially
against Heat.

The true and real China-Root grows only in the Province of Suchuen, but
China- Root. Martin.
that sort which is Wild in all parts of China, for there are two sorts; Wild
and Tame, both which are by the Chinese called Folcin, or as some say,
Lampatam.

None but that which is Wild, being of a Reddish Color within, is brought over
to us: It is not so big as the true and Tame Root, neither has it that Power,
yet is not altogether void of Efficacy.

The true Root, as they say, grows only in the Province of Suchuen, under the
Ground, in old Woods of Pine-Trees, almost after the same manner as Potatoes in
India; wherefore the Chinese write, that it grows from a tough Slime or Pitch
of the Pine Tree, which dropping on the Earth, fastens in the Ground, and
becomes a Plant, which spreading all about over the Earth, breeds a Root under
Ground, sometimes as big as a Child's Head, and in Weight and Form not unlike
Coco-nuts, from which the Shell or Rind does not differ much, though not so
hard and thick, but much weaker and thinner; under the Rind is a Kernel or
white Spungy Flesh, which is highly esteemed by the Chinese, and used amongst
their Medicines; yet if they want this, they despise not the forementioned
Wild sort, though it is not altogether of so powerful an Operation.

The Wild China-Root grows also in Cochin-China, on the Coast of Malabar, and
several other places in India.

The China-Root, as Michael Boem writes, is by the Chinese called Pe Folcin;
by the Portuguese, Pao de Cina; and in Europe, China, among the Chinese it
grows only in the Provinces of Iunnan, Quamsi, Quantum, Kaoli, and Leaotum: The
Plant or Tree is surrounded with many Thorns, which touch not the Leaves.

The Chinese eat the Pith of the Root of this Tree in Broth, which is wholesome
and used against the Gout, Ulcers, Stoppings in the Stomach, Lameness, Dropsy,
Pain in the Legs and Body, and many other Distempers; the heaviest of them is
accounted the best, and the White esteemed before the Red: The Powder of this
Root taken with Sugar, and used like a Conserve, is generally with good success
given against Distempers in the Breast. They say, that the use and knowledge of
this Root was Anno 1535. by the Portuguese brought into India and Europe.

Another Bastard China-Root of the same Virtue, as the Wild Root, grows in
Brasile, especially in the Province of Parayba, where the Inhabitants call it
Ivaspecanga.

In the eighth County Iungpingfu, in the Province of Peking; and in that of
Root Ginseng.
Xansi near the City Leao, grows the most excellent and famous Root in all
China, by the Chinese called Ginseng, and by the Iapanners, Nisi. The Chinese
name Ginseng is taken from the shape, because it represents a Man (in the
Chinese Tongue called Gin) striding with his Legs; it is much smaller than our
Mandragora, or Mandrake; yet we need not doubt but it is a sort of it, because
it is exactly like it, and has the same Operation. The dried Root is of a
yellow Color, has very few or scarce any Strings, by which it draws
Nourishment; is streaked round about with blackish Vains, as if drawn with Ink;
yields when chaw'd an unpleasant sweetness, being mixed with bitterness; a
quarter of an Ounce of this Root taken in Syrup, exceedingly revives the
Spirits, and if taken in a greater quantity, strengthens those that are Sick
and Weak, and pleasantly warms the whole Body.

Those that are of a hot and strong Constitution endanger their Lives by using
the same, because of its too much increasing and heighthning the Spirits; but
on the contrary, it recovers those that by long Sicknesses or other Causes are
consumed and grown weak. It oftentimes restores those that lie a dying, and
with the help of some other Physic restores them to their Health again. Many
other Virtues the Chinese ascribe to this Root, and give three pound of Gold
for one pound of it. The same Root is sometimes to be had in Holland; but
because of its excessive dearness is little used.

The Provinces of Xensi and Suchuen, according to Martinius, bring forth
excellent Medicines, especially the Root Rhubarb, in the Chinese Tongue called
Taihoang. This Root (says he) grows not wild, as some affirm, but on the
contrary requires great care and pains in the Planting of it: it is of a yellow
Color streak'e with Flames, not hollow, but firm and hard, and in some places
having Knobs and Swellings: The Leaves are somewhat like our Cabbage Leaves,
but much bigger. The Chinese make a Hole through the Root, and hang them out
to dry in the Shade, for being dried in the Sun they lose their Virtue.

Most of the Rhubarb which is brought into Europe, comes for the most part out
of the Provinces of Xensi and Suchuen; being brought from China and Persia by
Sea to Batavia, and from thence to Holland; or else out of China by Land to
Kaskar, Astrakan and Russia, or through Thebet and Persia by Venice to Italy;
for those of Tebet and Mogor frequent the Province of Suchuen, and from thence
bring the Rhubarb hither. Thus far Martinius.

Matthiolus gives us another Description of Rhubarb in his Comment upon
Di^scorides, which agrees with that of Michael Boem, in his Chinese Flora, and
with Baptista Ramusio, formerly Secretary to the State of Venice, in his
Preface before the Voyage of Marcus Paulus Venetus, which is to this effect*

Though (say they) Rhubarb grows in all parts of China, yet it grows in greater
abundance in the Provinces of Suciven, (perhaps Suchuen) Xensi, and in the
Jurisdiction of the City Socieu near the Great Wall, than in any other place.
The Earth in which it grows is red and Clayie, occasioned by its being
continually moistened with Springs and Rain: The Leaves, according to the Plant,
are two Handfuls long, narrow below, broad at the end, and the edges thereof
covered with a hairy Wool: When they are come to their f^ll growth and
maturity, they immediately grow yellow and lank: The Stalk shoots a
Handsbreadth with the Leaves above the Earth; from the middle of the Leaf runs
a thin Stalk, which bears Flowers not unlike a great Pink; likewise toward the
top, which is of a sharp and strong smell: The Root or Stalk which is in the
Ground, is of a dark Copper color, one, two, and sometimes three Handfuls
long, and as thick as a Man's Arm; from which shoot forth other lesser Roots,
which are cut off from the same. The Root Rhubarb, when cut asunder, shows a
dark yellow Flesh streaked with red Veins, out of which drops a red slimy
Juice. Moreover, if any one immediately hangs these moist pieces up to dry,
then, as experience has taught, the moisture instantly vanishes, and the Root
growing very light, loses all its Virtue; therefore those who are experienced
herein, first lay the pieces of green Rhubarb on Tables, and turn them twice or
thrice in a day, that so the Sap or Juice may soak and dry by degrees into the
pieces, and remain in them; four days after, when the moisture is dried up,
they put the pieces on Strings, and hang them from the Sun in the Shadow to dry
by the Wind.

The best time to dig up the Rhubarb is in the Winter before the Trees begin Or
rather in Spring* as Ramusio will have it*
to Bud, because at that time (about the beginning of April) the Juice and
Virtue unites and gathers together. But if the Root of Rhubarb be dug up in
Summer, or at that time when it sends forth green Leaves, which is a sign of
its not being ripe, then it never comes to the perfection of the Rhubarb, which
is dug up in the Winter.

One Wagon full of Rhubarb Roots which is full of moisture, costs one Scudo and
a half: The Juice when dried up abates so much of the weight, that of seven
Pound of green, there scarce remains one Pound when dressed. The Chinese call
it Tayhuan, that is, High Yellow.

This Plant is discoursed of at large by the fore mentioned Authors, and
particularly Michael Boem makes a curious Disquisition, whether the Rhaponticum
of Alpinus be the same with that which is commonly brought out of Muscovy, and
takes much pains to prove that that which grows in China is much better than
that which is brought by Russia into Europe.

In the County Chungkingfu, belonging to the Province of Suchuen, grows in The
Fruit Lichi.
great plenty a Fruit by the Chinese called Lichi, and by the Portuguese of
Makao, Lichias: but in greater abundance in the Southern parts of the Province
of Fokien; yet the best sort in the County Hinghoafu: It grows on very large
and high Trees, whose Leaves resemble those of a Laurel-Tree: On the tops of
the Boughs hang Clusters of Fruit like Grapes, not altogether so thick, but on
longer Stalks: It bears the shape of a Deers Heart, and is as big as a
Coco-Nut, having a thin shrubby and knotty Shell, like that of a Pineapple,
which may easily be pulled off with the Fingers: within is a white juicy Kernel
of a pleasant taste, and smelling like a Rose: The ripe Fruits are of a Purple
color, so that the Trees show as if hung round about with Purple Hearts, a
Sight delightful to behold: within the Flesh is a Stone, which the smaller it
is, the better the Fruit is esteemed of.

This Fruit may justly be called The King of Fruits, since in so ample a
measure it both delights the Eye and pleases the Palate, which seems never
satisfied therewith: The Kernel of it melts in the Mouth like Sugar.

Another Fruit named Lungyen, that is, Dragons-Eye, grows in China; it is not
The Fruit Lungyen, or Dragons-Eye.
much unlike the former, though smaller and rounder like our Cherries; but the
Shell of the Fruit Lichi is somewhat harder and thicker. Both these Fruits are
dried and sent from this Province through the whole Empire as a Dainty:
nevertheless the dried are not comparable to the green, because all the Juice
is dried out of them. They also press a Juice out of the Fruit Lichi, which the
Chinese call Wine, which is very sweet, but very scarce to be had. The ripe
Fruit Lichi is generally brought fresh out of the County Chinkingfu.

A particular Description of both these Fruits may be seen in the forementioned
Flor. Sin.
Author Michael Boem, in his Book called Flores sinarum regionis.

In the same County Focheufu in the Province of Fokien, grows a Fruit called
The Herb Muigiuli.
Muigiuli, that is to say, Fair Woman's Plumb. These Plumbs are of an Oval
Figure, bigger and much better than Damask Prunes.

In the County Kingcheufu, belonging to the Province of Huquang, grows an The
Herb of a thousand years.
Herb which the Chinese call Herb of a thousand years; nay, affirm that it
never fades, but is as it were immortal.

To drink the Water wherein the formention'd Herb has lay'n to soak, makes
white Hair black, and is said to be exceeding good to prolong Life, and restore
Youth to the Aged.

In the County Changtefu, in the Province of Huquang, grow all sorts of Golden
Apples; amongst which are some that by the Chinese are called Winter Apples,
for when all the others fall off, these begin to grow ripe, and are of a sweet
taste.

In the Province of Kiangsi and other places, grows (for the most part in Lakes
and standing Waters) a Plant with a Flower, by the Chinese called Lien, and by
the Portuguese, Fula de Golfon.

The Flower Lien shoots up two or three Yards above the Water on hard and
strong Stalks, and is of several Colors, as Purple, White, Parti-colour'd,
Red, etc. only Yellow is a Color peculiar to those that grow in Iuncheufu, a
County of the Province of Huquang.

This Flower exceeds our Lilies in bigness, and much more in beauty, but is in
scent rather worse than better. We should call this Flower The great Lilie,
because it differs not much in fashion, especially when it opens its Leaves.

To this Plont belongs also a sort of Fruit like a Ninepin, which is above a
Span lang, and a Hand thick. The top or point of this Fruit is fast to the
Stalk, on which the Flower hung before, the Cod stands upright, and has
several Partitions filled with Fruits bigger than Hazle-Nuts, or French Beans:
each Fruit is without covered with a green Rind, and within filled up with a
white Kernel, or Pith of a delightful taste, whether fresh or dried.

This Fruit is by the Chinese Physicians highly esteemed, and accounted an
excellent Food; wherefore they are generally given to sick Persons that are
upon their recovery.

The Leaves of this Plant are very big, sometimes two Handfuls broad, and for
the most part round: They lie and drive on the Water like those of our
Water-Lilies, and join by long Stalks to the Root. The Root, which is thicker
than a Man's Arm, sends forth a very fine Stalk two or three Else long,
distinguished with Joints like a Cane: The outward Shell is firm and whole, but
the Flesh is parted, and in several divisions: The dried Leaves are by Grocers
and other Tradesmen used in stead of Paper to wrap or wind their Wares in. The
Root also is very excellent, and esteemed a Dainty of great value in the
Summer, when it is taken to cool and expel Heat; so that nothing belongs to
this Plant but what is useful.

In China are whole Lakes (a pleasant thing to behold) overgrown with Flowers,
not wild, but produced by Art, by throwing once a year the Seed into the Water.
Moreover, diverse Persons of Quality keep great Earthen Vessels filled with
Slime and Water in their Gardens, wherein they Sow the forementioned Flowers.

In the Lake Hung, on the East side of the City Hoaigan in the Province of
Kiangnan, grows a kind of high Reed, which by the Inhabitants of the whole
County are burnt in stead of Wood, very few Trees growing in that Country.

In all parts of the County Kiahingfu in the Province of Chekiang, in standing
The Fruit Peci.
Water, grows a Fruit called Peci, which is no bigger than a Chestnut, and has
a Kernel covered with a dark-colour'd Skin, white within, full of Juice, and of
a pleasing taste, harder than an ordinary Apple, and somewhat sowerer.

This Fruit is said to be of such a Nature, that the Juice of it softens Copper
to that degree, that it may be chewed in the Mouth.

In the County Kinhoafu in the Province of Chekiang, grows a small Tree with
Mogorin Flower.
one Flower, which the Portuguese in India call Mogorin; It is very white like
a Iessamin Flower, yet fuller of Leaves, and of a sweeter smell, insomuch that
a few of them put in any Room perfumes the whole House; wherefore it is not
undeservedly held in great esteem amongst the Chinese, and the Tree thereof
preserved with great care in the Winter in Earthen Pots.

In the same County grows also a Tree called Kieuyen, which produces a Kieuyen,
or Fat-Flower.
kind of fat substance like Tallow, of which pure white Candles are made, and
are not subject to grease the Fingers though often handled, like those which
are of Tallow. The Tree has pretty big Leaves, somewhat like those of our
Pear Tree, with white Blossoms like our Cherry-Trees: after the Blossom follows
a round Cod as big as a Cherry, covered with a blackish thin Skin, which
incloses a white Pith appearing through the Skin, which cracks when the Cod is
grown ripe. The Cods thus ripe, are pulled off and boiled in Water; by which
means the Flesh melting, becomes perfect Tallow when grown cold again; then the
remaining Kernel being pressed produces store of Oil, which they use not in
Sallets, but burn in Lamps: In the Winter the Leaves are quite red like Copper,
which is pleasant to behold, for they appear at a distance like Red-woods: At
last the Leaves falling off afford excellent Feeding (by reason of their
fatness) for Sheep and other Cattle, which so Fed grow exceeding fat.

On the Mountain Loseu, by the City Polo in the Province of Quantung, grows a
very long and thick Cane, the Body thereof being ten Handfulls in circumference.

On the Mountain Chang, by the City Lochang in the same Province, grows a black
Cane, of which the Chinese make their Pipes, and many other things, which seem
as if made of Ebony Wood.

On the Shore of the River Kinxe, near the City Kinhao, grows abundance of
thick Canes, which the Inhabitants beating into thin Shreds, Weave and make
Clothes of them.

The Shore of the River Tao, in the County Xaocheufu in the Province of
Quantung, is all Planted with Peach-Trees, from whence it has its
Denomination, for Tao signifies A Peach.

In the County Chaokingfu in the same Province, grow diverse sorts of sweet
Wood, and amongst others Rose-Wood, by the Portuguese called Pao de Rosa; of
which they make Cabinets, Stools, Tables, and the like: It is exceeding good
Wood, of a dark Red, with several Veins, and looks naturally as if Painted: It
grows also in the County Iunnanfu in the Province of Iunnan.

In most parts of the Province of Quantung, and on the Island Aynan, grows a
The Twig Teng.
kind of Plant, by the Chinese called Teng, and by the Portuguese, Rota, which
seems like a Rope naturally twisted together; for it runs along the Ground and
over the Mountains like a Rope; it is full of Prickles, and has long green
Leaves, and though scarce a Finger thick, extends it self a whole Furlong in
length, and in such abundance over the Mountains, that it makes the Way, by its
twining and twisting together, unpassable: It is an exceeding tough Plant, and
cannot be broke; wherefore the Chinese make Cables and Tackling for their
Ships of it; and slitting it into thin Twigs, make Baskets, Hurdles, and the
like, of them, but most of all exceeding fine Mats, on which the Chinese, from
the meanest Person to the Emperor himself, sleep or repose themselves, they
being very cool in the Summer, and by the Chinese long Custom of sleeping in
that manner, are judged very easy, notwithstanding they are spread on the bare
Floor. Of the same Plant they make Quilts and Bolsters for their Beds, which
they fill with diverse sorts of Perfumes. The whole Isle of Ainan is overgrown
with it, especially with the white, which is the best.

In most parts of China grows a Flower called Quei, but no where in such The
Flower Quei.
abundance as in the Province of Quangsi, especially in the County Quelingfu,
from whence the chief City Quelin has its Denomination, for Quelin signifies
Flowery Green. This Flower grows upon a high Tree, whose Leaves are not unlike
those of the Laurel or Cinamon-Tree: It being very small, and of a yellow
Color, smells very odoriferously: When displayed, it hangs a considerable time
on the Tree without withering; when it falls off, the Tree within a Month
after Buds again, and in Harvest smells so strong and sweet, that it may be
scented at a very considerable distance.

The Chinese prepare many Dainties of this Flower, both to please the Palate,
and to delight the Smell. This also is the same Flower which steeped in the
Juice of Lemmon the Turks use to color their Hair with: The Trees thereof
suffer no other to grow near them, nor grow in places where others have grown.

In the County Lieucheufu in the Province of Quangsi, on the Shore of the The
Herb Pusu.
River Lieu, grow many Willow Trees. There are likewise several excellent
Herbs, good against many Sicknesses; amongst which the Herb Pusu, that is,
Immortal, so called by the Chinese, because they always preserve it green in
their Houses.

In the County Gucheufu in the Province of Quangsi, grows a Tree named The
Quanglang Tree.
Quanglang, which in stead of Pith or Marrow, incloses a kind of thin Matter
like Honey, in stead of which it is often used, being no less pleasing to the
Palate.

In the Territory Cincheufu, in the Province of Quangsi, grows an Herb called
You; of which the Inhabitants make their Clothes, which are richer than Silk,
and amongst them of greater value. There also grows a Tree, whose Wood is like
Iron, it being much harder than our Box-wood. The same County likewise produces
excellent Cinnamon, in the Chinese Tongue called Kueypi, which only differs
from the Ceylon Cinnamon in this, that it is more biting on the Tongue, and of a
better scent.

The Chinese in ancient times used to carry Cinnamon from the Island Ceylon,
(which was, according to Boem, so called by the Chinese from the many Ships
which suffered Shipwreck on the same; or else Ceylon, or rather Sinland,
signifies, according to Martinius, People of China, or Chinese) by Sea to
Ormuz, from whence it was carried by Land to Aleppo in Syria, and Greece. The
ignorant sort of People supposed that it came out of the Moors Country and
Egypt, whenas it never grew in that Country, though sometimes a Fleet of four
thousand Ships came Laden with Gold, Silk, Precious Stones, Musk, Porcelane,
Copper, Allom, Nutmegs, Cloves, and chiefly Cinnamon, into the Bay of Persia.
The Merchants, as the same Boem tells us, called Cinnamon (otherwise by the
Chinese named The Bark of the sweet Tree) Cina and Momum, which signifies
Sweet and well scented Chinese Wood.

In the County Lipingfu in the Province of Queicheu, grows an Herb like The
Herb Ko.
Hemp, which the Chinese call Ko, and make their Summer Garments thereof,
which are an excellent Wear against the excessive heat of the Sun: It also
grows in the County Nankangfu, in the Province of Kiangsi.

In the Southern Provinces of Iunnan, Quangsi, Quantung, Fokien, and on the
Fanyaycocu.
Isle Ainan, grows in great abundance a Tree by the Chinese called Fanyaycocu;
by the Eastern Indians, Papayo; by the West-Indian Inhabitants, Pinoyuacu; and
by the Portuguese Mamoua: It produces a Fruit which springs out of the top of
the The Fruit of the Tree Fanyay.
Body of the Tree, looking red within, and having in stead of Pith a thin
Juice, that may be eaten with a Spoon. They are accounted to be very cooling,
and to abate lascivious Desires, and cause Barrenness.

This Tree (a strange thing!) has no Branches, but only Leaves, which grow on
the top thereof; from amongst which Leaves sprout out white Flowers, which
afterward become Fruit. The Fruit has no set-time of the Year to ripen in,
but successively ripe Fruits are to be found on the Trees every Month in the
Year. The Chinese call it Fanyaycocu, that is, Fruit of the Fanyay; for Kocu
signifies Fruit; and the Portuguese, Maman, because it hangs on the Tree like a
Teat. The Fruit, Leaves, and whole Tree, are pleasant and delightful to the
Eye. The Tree springs first from the Seed of its Fruit, and afterward new
Trees from the Strings which shoot out of the Root: The Leaves and part of the
Body of the Tree being put into the Ground, grow very speedily and in a short
time to a high Tree.

Anno 1626. the Papayo-Tree being Sow'n, grew in Naples: It had a whitish Root
full of Strings, a whitish Stem or Body, eighteen Inches long and a Finger
thick, of the same color with the Root, spongy and round, not unlike the Body
of the Wonder-Tree, and notch'd after the same manner under the Leaves, which
when green hang by a long Stalk round about the Body of the Tree, sloaping from
the middle upwards, all of them four or five Inches broad, divided like the
Fig Leaves into five parts, but notch'd much deeper, smooth, and of a pleasant
Green; all of them fell off in the Winter, and the Body with the Root also
withered away by degrees: But we may doubt whether this Tree was the right
Papayo, because, according to Michael Boem, the Fanyacu, or Papayo, has its
Leaves only on the top, and not as this in Naples, from the middle upwards.

Peter de Valla, by Letters to Fabius Columna, gives quite another Description
of the Papayo, which (says he) is a Plant like our Fig Tree, but much
pleasanter; the Fruit like our ordinary Melons, oval, smooth, and with a green
Rind; the Flesh within of an Orange color, and tasting like a sweet Orange,
but more Spicy and pleasanter; the fresh Seed blackish, when dried turns to a
Chestnut color, and is about the thickness of Coriander Seeds, but longer; the
Flesh thereof being cut through in the middle looks whitish, is tough, tastes
sweet, and is like old Musk*melons Seed; the Stalk of the Fruit, though green,
yields like those of Figs: The Tree is full of Branches like the Fig Tree.

The experienced and Learned Physician, William Piso, makes mention of two
Histor. Nature. and M^. L. 4.
sorts of Papayo growing in the West Indies, where it is called Pinoguacu, a
Male and Female; of both which he has a particular Description, which may be
seen at large in his Natural History.

To conclude, most agree in this, that the Papayo-Tree grows not of it self,
but is Planted: What Country it properly belongs to is not yet certainly
known, but it is by most believed to be a Stranger to India, and brought
thither from a foreign Country.

In no Place, except China, grows that Tree and excellent Fruit, in the Chinese
The Tree Supim* Michael Boem.
Tongue called Supim; it is of a Golden color, bigger than an ordinary Apple,
and has within its Shell or Rind, a soft and red Pulp, within which are
several Stones: The dry Fruit is very like an European Fig, and keeps good many
years: The Chinese Physicians use it often in their Compounds. In the Province
of Quantung it ripens in January, February, and March; but in Xensi, Honan, and
other Northern Provinces, in June, July, and August.

The Tree laden with this Fruit affords a pleasant Prospect, and is constantly
watched against the Birds.

There also grows a Tree in the Province of Quantung, and in the Island Ainan,
with Leaves of half the size of a Man of ordinary Stature: The Root thereof
grows half in the Ground, and the other half out, and bears red Flowers, and a
Fruit like our Figs. The ripe Fruits are also red, and the Flesh within tastes
also like our Figs, and are ripe in July and August.

The Fruit by the Chinese called Cienko, is by the Indians and Portuguese
called The Fruit Cienko.
Goyaun: It seems to those that are not used thereto, to have no good savor,
but indeed smells very Spicy, and is desired afterward by those that at first
disrelish'd it, because it warms, and has a sovereign healing power, and is
exceeding good to stop a Looseness, and fortify the Stomach: Within it are many
little round Stones, from which the Trees grow, though quickerby Setting a
Bough thereof in the Ground: The Boughs bear great store of Fruit and
sweet smelling Leaves, which rubbed to pieces smell very strong, and are
accounted excellent Medicines against Fevers: The Fruit is also in the
Portuguese Tongue called Pera, that is, Pear, because it is exactly like a Pear.

In India this Fruit ripens in November and December, and for the most part
continues in all the other Months; but in the Province of Quantung, in June
and July.

On the Island Hiamxan, lying near China, in Makau, and in Malacca, grows a The
Tree and Fruit Giambo. Mithael Boem.
Tree and Fruit named Giambo, which is of two or three sorts; for in India are
red, white, and yellow, which smell like Roses: the first has a white, and the
second a pale yellow Flower: The Body and Boughs are Ash-colored, the Leaves
smooth, a Hand-breadth long, and three Fingers broad: The Fruit is as big as a
Pear, with a thin sweetish spongy Flesh; it is pleasant to the Eye, either
quite red or white, or partly red and partly white: On one Bough grow Flowers,
green and ripe Fruit together. They are very cooling, and the only thing in
great Fevers to quench Thirst.

The Indians make a Conserve of this Fruit, exceeding good against Agues and
other Distempers arising from the Gaul. In stead of Seed it incloses a round
Kernel; but the yellow sort has two Kernels, or rather one divided into two
parts: the Flesh of the yellow is very sweet and luscious: the red ripens in
India in October and November, but the yellow in some places in March, and in
other places in July.

The Pipa is a Fruit of a yellowish Green when it is ripe, sweet of taste like
The Fruit Pipa.
our Plumbs, and covered with the like sort of Skin, within it lies a hard oval
Stone; it is generally gathered ripe in February and March: The Tree, by reason
of its fine Leaves and Flowers, is very pleasant to behold.

The Fruit Yata has a green, knotty, and prickly Shell, like a Pineapple; The
Fruit Yata.
within which is a waterish Pulp as white as Snow, hiding in little
Repositories hard and black Stones: The bigger this Fruit is, the better it is
esteemed. The Tree grows chiefly in Malacca, from whence it was transplanted
into China, where it grows in some plenty: In some places the Fruit is ripe in
October and November, and in others in February and March.

The Fruit Manko, by the Chinese and the Indians called Manga, and by the The
Fruit Manko.
Turks, Ambo, grows most plentifully in the Southern Provinces of China: In
India are several sorts, the biggest whereof weigh two, and sometimes three
Pound, especially if they grow on a Bough Pruned to a Cedar-Tree, of whose
Fruit they borrow the Coat and rough Shell.

Their Pruning on other Trees is much like ours in Europe, but not in the
Mango-Tree, a Bough of which being cut off, is tied to the Bough of another
Tree, and daubed all about with Clay, by which means the Boughs in time growing
together bear Fruit. The ripe Fruits sometimes all upon one Tree Boem.
are of several Colors, some green, others yellow, and some red; or as others
^auhin.
write, greenish yellow, and reddish: It has a bitter Kernel within a hard and
woolly Shell, as big as an Almond: there are also some without Stones. The
Flesh of those that are ripe is of a kind of Purple color, and exceeds all
other in lusciousness: Some account it the best Fruit in the World: They are
ripe in April and May, and continue till November.

The Tree, according to Garcias, on which this Fruit grows, is like a
Pear Tree, high and full of Boughs; the Leaves are very thin, ten Inches long
and three broad, with a thick sinew in the middle.

Garcias had a Tree which bore Fruit twice in a year, viz. in May and August;
the Fruit thereof is cool and moist: Of the green Fruits they make a Conserve:
they are also Pickled and boiled in Rice and Water. The Netherlanders at their
Return from India use them in stead of Pickled Cucumbers or Girkins: The
Indians account them hot and very Feverish, but they are rather moist and
cooling. The Stones thereof calcined into a Powder, kill the Worms in the
Belly, and are a present Remedy against a Looseness. The fresh Kernel is
supposed to destroy the Worms because of its bitterness.

Acosta tells us, That the Fruit being sliced and laid to soke in Wine is
counted for a dainty Banquet. It is also laid in Sugar, thereby to preserve it
the longer; and sometimes opened with a Knife is filled with Ginger, Garlic,
and Mustard Seed, and laid to steep in Salt, Oil, and Vinegar, or else is eaten
with Rice, or Pickled like Olives: It grows in many places in India, as in
Malabar, Goa, Surrat, Balagate, Bengale, Pegu, and others; but the best sort is
judged to grow in Ormus, the second in Surrat, and the (...) in Balagate.

A Fruit named Mangan, which grows on the Isle Iava, is by the Inhabitants
accounted above all Cordials in the World, whether Lapis Bezoar, or any other:
It is as big as a Coco*Nut, and joins close together till grown ripe, for then
it cracks and bursts asunder; within lies the Seed wrapped up in Wool, which
if not taken off in time, is blown away by the Wind. This Fruit is so dear,
that it can scarce be purchased with Money. Moreover, the parts split from each
other stick so fast at the bottom to the Stalk, that the strongest Man cannot
pull them from it.

In many places in China grows also Cotton, but in greatest abundance in the
Province of Nanking, especially near the City Xangchai, where there are said to
dwell two hundred Cotton-Weavers, it being in that place and two neighboring
Villages, the only thing whereby the Inhabitants maintain themselves. The
Seed, according to their Relation, was brought out of other Countries into
China about five hundred years ago. The Herb or Plant on which the Cotton grows
in China, has a woody Stalk of a Foot and a half long, or two Foot high, and
being covered with a darkish red Bark or Rind, divides it self into several
short Branches: The Leaves like those of a Vine are divided into three parts,
and hang on rough Stalks of two or three Inches long: The Blossom or Flower is
like those of Mallows, and ends in Saffron, or (as others say) blue and Purple
Stalks; after the Flower follows round Fruit as big as a small Apple, which
when grown ripe cracks in two or three places, and shows the white Cotton which
is in it; under it is an Oval and white-colour'd Seed, which tastes like an
Almond or Pineapple.

Another Plant also which produces Cotton, but grows like a Tree, and has
smoother Leaves, grows in Egypt and Arabia; where by the Egyptians it is called
Gotnel Segia,, and shoots up to the height of ten Cubits; the Leaves hang on
Violet-colour'd Stalks, and are divided into five parts; when grown to
maturity, the Fruit is almost of the same fashion, though bigger, with brown
Seed. Of these Cotton-Trees they make the fine Clothes called Sessa in Arabia.

The County Chucheufu is full of ancient Pine Tree Woods, of which the Chinese
build their Houses and Ships.

It is said, that by the Singian, that is, Earth of Pine-Trees, are such
exceeding large Trees, that eighty Men cannot grasp one of them; and some of so
vast a compass, that they can enclose thirty Men in their hollow Trunks.

In the same County in the Province of Chekiang, in the River Luyeu, by the
City Kingning, grow great Woods of Canes, which the Chinese by a general Name
called Cho; (for there are several sorts) the Indians, Mambu; the Portuguese,
Bambu; and the Hollanders, Bamba's: some smaller, others bigger, but all of
them as hard as Iron, and oftentimes two or three Span thick, and toward the
bottom about the bigness of a Man's Thigh; nay, there are some of such a
thickness, that the Indians make Boats of them, by only splitting them in the
middle, leaving on each side only two of the undermost Joints, there sitting
on each end a naked Indian with a Paddle in each hand, with which they Row
these Boats with great swiftness against the Stream. Of the thickest parts of
these Canes they make Vessels to put Water or Merchandise into, the Wood
thereof being about three Inches thick: The least of them are half a Rod high,
and the biggest much higher; wherefore they are not unjustly by some called
Trees, and particularly by Garcias compared to the Poplar; some are green,
others quite black, and most of them Massive; the Portuguese in India call them
Bambu Macho, that is, Man's Cane; though the last sort grows not in China but
in India: They grow in Rocky places, shooting upright, though sometimes by Art
made crooked, the better to be used for the making of Palakins: They consist
from top to bottom of Knots or Joints, about a Handbreadth from each other; out
of which shoot some straight Branches.

Piso tells of two sorts of Bambu or Mambu that grows in India, the one small,
though fuller within, the other bigger, and less filled, which in height and
firmness exceeds all other Canes. A more exact Description whereof, together
Mantis. Arom. p. 185.
with their use, both in Physic and in the making of diverse Utensils, may be
found in the abovementioned Author, in his Mantissa Aromatica, and also in
Martinius.

In the Gallery of the high School at Leyden are kept two of the forementioned
Kilus.
Canes, broke off at both ends, which were brought Anno 1601. out of the
East Indies; the smallest is about one and twenty Foot long, distinguished by
twenty nine Joints at the bottom, seventeen Inches in circumference, and
fourteen on the top; the biggest is a Foot and a half longer, and three Inches
thicker: how big the whole Canes were, may be guessed by these pieces.

In many places of China grow also Sugarcanes, especially in the County
Sugarcanes.
Tungchuenfu in the Province of Suchuen, out of which they press great store of
good Sugar. But those Canes were in a manner useless amongst the Chinese, till
of late years that they were taught this Art of making Sugar, as it is said, by
an Indian Priest upon this occasion: This Priest's Ass on which he used to
Ride, running into a Cane-Field, was detained by the Owner thereof for
satisfaction for the damage which he had done; whereupon the Priest, that he
might make satisfaction without the forfeiture of his Ass, taught him the Art
of boiling Sugar out of the Canes.

In the Province of Quantung, and many other places in China, grows a Rose
Chinese Rose.
which changes its color twice a day, first it is of a yellowish color, then
Purple, and anon quite white: It has no smell, and grows on a little Tree.
Concerning which change of color Kircher makes a curious Enquiry, and takes
upon him to give the reason thereof in his China Illustrata.

Ioannes Baptista Ferrarius largely describes a sort of Chinese Rose, by the
Inhabitants Flora lib. 4. ca. 6. p. 974.
called Fuyo, by others named The Indian and Japan Melleuwe, which by the same
Ferrarius was brought out of the West Indies to Rome; where being Sowed it grew
up in a short time: It is of a Milky color, but afterward changes to white
and red, and at last turning to a Purple, fades and withers: In India it is in
one day of three several colors (and flourishes only one day) viz. in the
Morning it is White, at Noon, Red, and Purple at Night.

The Province of Quantung produces a Fruit, by the Chinese called Yencu; by
Fruit Iamboes, or Pampelmoes.
the Portuguese, Iambos, (and the Tree Iambeiro;) by the Malabars, and those of
the Canaries, Iambali; by the Indians, Tufa; by the Persians and Arabians,
Tufat; by the Turks, Almat; and by the Hollanders, Pampelmoes; the Tree whereon
it grows is prickly like the Lemon Tree, but somewhat bigger; the Flower or
Blossom being also like that of the Lemon, is white and smells very
oderiferously, and out of which they Distill sweet Water: The Fruit much exceeds
the greatest Lemons in bigness, for it is oftentimes as big as a Man's Head: The
Shell is in Color like that of the Golden Apple; the Pulp, red and sweet, mixed
with a little tartness, and tasting like a Grape which is not quite ripe; so
that often times a Liquor is Pressed out of them to drink, in the manner of
Cherry-Wine, Perry, or Syder; it remains good a whole Year.

Garcias tell us, that this Fruit is in high esteem amongst the Indians, and
that it was brought first thither a few years since from Malaka, where it grows
in great abundance; and gives a farther Description much to the same purpose
with what has been already delivered.

There are two sorts of these Trees, very like one another; (yet their Fruits
differ a little) and resemble not only in fashion and shape, but also in
bigness our European Apple Trees.

The Flowers and Fruits of Iambos moisten and cool, smell very sweet, and are
therefore by the Indians accounted amongst the greatest Dainties; they
generally use them in Physic, for being Preserved in Sugar, they are exceeding
good against hot Distempers, because by their coolness and moistness, they
quench Thirst in Fevers, and revive the Spirits.

In the County Chivencheufu and Changcheufu, in the Province of Fokien, grow
Golden Apples.
abundance of Golden-Apples, which in weight and bigness differ little from the
European, but surpass them in Scent and Deliciousness; neither does the Tree
differ much from the European, but the Fruit differs from that which grows in
other parts of China, and both Tastes and Smells exactly like a Muskadel-Grape,
so that it yields not to any kind of Fruit that Europe affords: the Golden and
thick Rind is easily Pill'd off; in like manner, the Meat is distinguished by a
thin Skin, which is easily broken.

The Inhabitants Preserve the Fruits (after having Pressed the same between two
Boards) in Sugar, and so keeping them a whole Year, both furnish their
Neighbors, and send of them into foraign Countries.

In most parts of China, in all standing-Waters, they Sow a Seed, which with
Fruit Linkio.
small Leaves covers all the Water: The Fruit thereof called Linkio, grows in
great abundance under the Water, and is in fashion like a three-sided Spire:
The Rind which is green and thick, and red at the corners, turns black when
dried: The Kernel thereof is very White, and tastes like a Chest-nut, but is
twice or thrice as big.

The Lake Malo lying in the fifth County Xuntefu in the Province of Peking, is
much noted for the forementioned Fruit.

In the Southern Provinces of China, and especially in the Province of
Queicheu, The Fruit Bananas, or Mauz.
by the little City Pugan, grows a Fruit, by the Chinese called Pacayao; by
the Malabars and Malaers, Palan; by the Iavans, Piesang or Pysang; by the
Brasilians in the West Indies, Bananas; by the Arabians in Egypt, Mauz; by some
in Europe, Indian-Figs, and Adams-Apples, from the Opinion of a Franciscan
Monk, who holds this Fruit to be the same with that which Adam eat in Paradise,
and with the Leaves whereof being very large, he covered his Nakedness.

The Tree, or rather Sprout, is according to Acosta, a fine Plant, and grows
eighteen or twenty handfuls high, and being as big about as a Man's Thigh,
consists of many Barks, which lie close one upon another; it grows to the
height of a Granate-Tree without Branches, for it spreads its Leaves like
Canes. Boem writes, that the body thereof is thick, round, and green, not firm
nor massy, but swelled with a Watery moisture; it seems to consist of
abundance of roul'd-up Leaves, which are nine handfuls long, and two and a half
broad; or according to Alpinus, three or four Yards long, and about two
Vesting. in Alpin.
broad, insomuch, that one Leaf may cover a Man all over, nay, wind round about
him. The young Leaves extend in length and height like Indian Canes, being
first roul'd up together, but when grown old, begin to open; through the middle
long-ways, runs a pretty thick and long Vein, yet nevertheless, they are
subject to crack and rent at the edges, if ruffl'd by the Wind; and on each
side many cross Veins, which are of a sad Color underneath, but upwards of a
pale Green; from the top of the Tree grows a Stalk with ruddy Colored Flowers,
like a Pineapple, each of them is bigger than a Tulip or Lilly, but round, or
rather Oval; afterward it produces a Branch, divided into many Joints, on each
of which hang ten or fourteen Figs, so that this Bough is sometimes laden with
a hundred, or two hundred Figs: Or as Boem says, from the middle of the Leaf
shoots one single Branch with Flowers, which also grow to be Figs, to the
number sometimes of above a thousand on one Bough, which one man is scarce able
to carry; some of the Figs are as small as a Damsin, others as big as a great
Pear, according to the Boughs on which they grow. The Fruit it self is very
sweet, has a Yellow Shell, with a soft, sweet, and well-scented Pulp, which
tastes like Preserved Rasberries; being boiled either in Honey or Sugar, and
afterward dried, it is counted good against Phlegmatic Humors. The Fruit is
all the Year long to be had in the Southern Provinces of China, but in the
Northern, it bears only great Leaves, and yields no Fruit; though it requires
six Months to ripen, yet ripe Figs may be had every Month, since this Tree
observes no set-time, but Buds, Flowers, and is Ripe in several places all at
one time. If one Bough be cut off from the Alpinus.
Tree, or one Fig plucked from a Bough, the Tree will never produce either
Bough or Fruit more, but withering, is cut off, and given in India for Food to
the Elephants.

This Plant, as some say, grew first from a Sugar-Cane, Graffed on the Root of
another Plant, called Colokasia, very common in Egypt; and indeed you may
perceive the nature of both in the same, for the Leaves are as long as those of
Sugarcanes, and as broad as those of Colokasia; it is always Green, and never
bare of Leaves.

The common Opinion is, that from the Mouth of the Flower, opened at Vesting.
the right time, drops a kind of Spittle, which is supposed to be its Seed,
since young Sprouts grow out of the Root or Foot of the Tree, before ever the
Flower opens.

The Chinese in the Province of Quangsi, in the County Pinglofu, make Clothes
of the Red Muisu Leaves.

In diverse places in China, and especially on the Isle Ainan, grows a
Fruit-Tree, by the Chinese called Polomie; by the Portuguese, from the
Indians, Giaka and Iaka; by those of Surat, Pana's; by those of the Canaries,
Panasu; by the Arabians, Panax; by the Persians, Funax; and in Kalicut,
Ionceras.

The Tree in the Chinese Tongue properly called Polomioxu, that is, Polomy
Tree, is, as Acosta tells us, very tall and big about, has pale Green Leaves,
about a Hand big, with a hard sinew in the middle; it bears a small number of a
very large Fruit, which grow not on the Boughs, but on the main Body of the
Tree (as Peter Martyr says) as if the Boughs refused to carry so great a
burden, notwithstanding they are very tough and strong.

Acosta says, that the Fruit Iaka is long, thick, dark Green, hard, and has a
thick Shell: Martin affirms, that it is so hard and thick, that it must be
opened with an Ax: It is full of Green Thorns with Black Points, very like the
Fruit Durion, but not sharp nor prickly, though seeming so; when ripe it has a
strong Scent: The smallest of this sort of Fruit is bigger than the greatest
Pumkin, especially that which grows in Malabar, but that of Goa is lesser and
of a worse Taste. Martinius says, That the Iaka or Polomie is accounted the
biggest Fruit in the World: And Boem affirms, That one of them alone is a Man's
burden: It is White, and has a firm Pulp, with little Husks, wherein are
several Nuts or Kernels like Chest-nuts, (sometimes enough to suffice ten or
twenty Men) longer and thicker than Dates, and covered with Ash-colored
Shells; Earthy, of an ill Taste, and causing Wind if eaten Raw, but if Roasted
like Chest-nuts, well-tasted; they are said to provoke Leachery, for which
reason the Common People esteem them highly.

Every Chest-nut-like-Kernel is enclosed in a Yellow and tough Husk (like that
of the Fruit Durion, yet not without a little difference) and being Boiled,
tastes like a sweet Chest-nut.

This Fruit is by the Chinese called A Bag full of Honey-Chest-nuts; it tastes
much better than a Mellon, but is counted unwholesome and hard of Digestion. The
Pith about the Kernels, which the Portuguese call Cocobarka, is by how much
harder, so much the better; the softness of the Skin, is a sign of the ripeness
of the Fruit; it ripens commonly in May and June.

Another sort of Iaka, called Champidaka, grows not only in China, but on the
Fruit Champidaka.
Island Iava, and several other places in India; and that after the common
manner, not on the Body of the Tree, as the first sort; it is of a better
taste, and wholsomer than the common Iaka: The Tree spreads it self very much,
and is extraordinary high, and broad Leaved; out of the calcined Shells of
these two prickly Fruits, the Indians make a Composition, which they use in
stead of Soap or Lie to scowr Clothes with.

In the Southern Provinces, Quantung, Quangsi, Iunnan, Foquieu, and on the
Fruit Fa^, Polo, or Ana nas.
Island Ainan, grows in great abundance a Fruit, by the Chinese called
Fanpolomie; by the Brasilians, (acording to Piso) Nano; (according to Lerius,)
Panaco; by the Spaniards in New-Spain, Iajama, from its likeness with a
Pineapple; and by the Portuguese, Ananas, which they hammered without doubt
from the Brasilian name Nana.

The Fruit (as Acosta tells us) was first brought from the Province of St.
Cruis in Brasile to Peru, and from thence to the East Indies, and lastly to
China: The Plant of this Fruit grows like an Artichoke, but without prickly
Points; but about the same bigness, upon the top of it are Ears which lie upon
one another: As it grows to Maturity, there shoot forth from between the Leaves
several colored Flowers, for the most part Blue, consisting of three Leaves,
which at the Ripening of the Fruit fall off: The Leaves, out of which the
Ananas grow, are twenty in number; longish, Indented about the edges, and sharp
at the ends like a Sword, and are very like the Leaves of Aloe; small, Reddish,
or Black Grains lie Enclosed in the Fruit, which being Sowed or put into the
Ground produce others.

The ripe Fruit is very Juycie, and of a sweetish taste with a mixture of
sowrness; of a deep Vermillion Color, or (as Acosta says) Yellow, as big as a
Mellon or Cytron, or (as Boem writes) as a Pineapple; the edges are of a
lively Color, good smell, nay so strong it is, that any Person walking may
smell in what House they hang up in to ripen: It is generally without full of
whitish knobs; the ripe Fruit is crowned with a young Plant, which cut off, and
without Root, (for it has none put into the Ground) bears Fruit the next Year;
every Plant produces only one Fruit a Year, and that Fruit a new Plant, which
when cut off and set in the Ground, the old is pulled out, and thrown away as
unfruitful; the Root is like that of an Artichoke; the Fruit sliced and steeped
in Wine, gives it an excellent Savor and Relish, but bites the Tongue and
heats the Palate: The Juice thereof refreshes the fainting Heart, revives the
Spirits, and strengthens a squemish Stomach: Moreover, its Juice or Wine (much
more the Distilled Water) is exceeding good against the Gravel: The Root also
is a Remedy to cure the forementioned Distemper: But those that are troubled
with, or are careful to avoid Agues, must be sure to abstain both from the
Fruit, and all that belongs to it.

China also produces several sorts of Spices and Aromatic Plants, in the
Southern Province, bordering upon India, though in no great abundance, viz.
Pepper, in the Chinese Tongue called Hucyao, which grows in the Province of
Iunnan. Cinnamon (as already we have made mention) in the Province of Quantung
and Quangsi: But there is exceeding good Ginger in great abundance, which they
call Sem Kiam, and store of Coco-nuts in the Southern Provinces, and especially
on the Isle Ainan: But because all those Plants and Fruits have been largely
described by others, it would be needless to make rehearsal thereof.

In several places in China grows the Plant Tee or Cha, so called by the
Chinese, Tee or Cha.
by which Name it is known among us; and Cia or Tchia and Tsia, by the
Iapanners; though amongst the Chinese, according to the several places wherein
it grows, it has several Denominations; as likewise from its goodness, for the
Inhabitants of the thirteenth County Chucheufu in the Province of Nanking, call
the best Tee Sunglocha; those of the third County Hucheufu, in the Province of
Chekiang, Kiaichai; those in the Province of Fokien, Ziazcha.

The Water or Liquor in which this Plant is boiled, is also by the Chinese
Piso Annotas. in Bort.
properly called Tee and Cha, and Chia or Tsia by the Iapanners: There are
those which say, that Tsia or Chia in general signifies Meat and Drink; as Lo
Chia, Will you please to have Meat or Drink?

The Plant The, according to Martin and Trigaut, is a Shrub and no Tree, grows
about the Piso.
height of an European Rasberry-bush, or Rose-Tree, and Martin.
dividing it self into several Boughs, is like the Mirtle-Tree, and partly
tastes like it, yet grows not Wild but is Planted: Piso.
The Boughs and Stalks of the whole Sprout, are from top to bottom, always full
of Leaves and Flowers: The Leaves are thin, sharp before, and notch'd round
about, in shape Oval, in bigness like those of the Granate-Tree; and though of
one shape, yet are of such several bignesses, that on one Sprout four or five
sizes of Leaves are to be seen: The first and biggest grow on the undermost
Boughs, and are like the Leaves of Garden-Balsom: The second size much less
than the first; so accordingly the rest which grow higher, still lessen more
and more; but as much as the uppermost Leaves abate in bigness, so much they
increase in value; for one of the first rank of Leaves dried and prepared,
costs five Pence; the second sort, fifty; the third, ten Shillings; the fourth,
if rightly prepared, thirty; the difference of the Value, follows from the
difference of the Virtue, which according to Trigaut, is very considerable;
insomuch, that they often give for one Pound of the best, two, sometimes three
Ducats: In Iapan, the best cost ten, and twelve Ducats.

The Flowers of the The are of a Yellowish White, in bigness and shape like the
Eglantine, but not in smell, which according to Martin, is faintyish. After the
falling off of the Flowers, there remains a Cod or Husk, which is first Green,
and afterward turns Black, in it lies a round Black Seed, like those of Roses:
This Seed Sown, yields a new Plant in three years time. Martin.


The Root is full of Strings, divided into several Knobs, which lie not deep in
the Ground, but are just covered with the same, and are for no use; all the
Virtue of this Plant consisting only in the Leaves; the freshest and youngest
of which are made use of in the making their Drink Cha; they gather them in the
Spring, one by one, and immediately put them to warm in an Iron Kettle over the
fire, then laying them a on fine light Mat, roll them together with their
Hands: The Leaves thus roul'd up, are again hanged over the fire, and then
again roul'd closer together, till they are dry, and then put up carefully in
Tin Vessels, thereby to keep them from all moystness; Trigaut tells us, that
the Chinese dry not the Leaves over the fire, but in the Sun.

In the using of these Leaves is some differnece betwixt the Iapanners and
Chinese, for they (says Trigaut) throw some of the Leaves into a Pot of
boiling Water, which when the Virtue of the Leaf is sufficiently infused into
it, they Drink hot, without eating the Leaves: The Chinese, as the Lord Tulp
tells us, boil the Leaves with a little Salt and Sugar, to take away the
bitterness in a certain Liquor which they drink warm; or else they put a
Handful of The Leaves in a Pint-Pot, then pour it full of scalding Water, and
about two or three Minutes after, Drink the same very hot.

The Chinese generally, both Night and Day, drink of the Liquor wherein the
fore mentioned Leaves are boiled, and not only ordinarily at Table, but have
it ready upon all occasions at great Entertainments; and the greatest Nobles
and Princes think not much to prepare it themselves, and have in their Palaces
Hearths of rich Stone, principally made for that purpose, and are much looked
upon according to the richness of the Utensils they use therein.

The Water of the Fountain Hoei, in the County Chancheufu, of the Province of
Kiangnan, is accounted the best by the Chinese to make their Drink Cha; and
for that use bought by the Grandees, and from thence carried to the remotest
Provinces, nay to the Emperor's Court at Peking.

The Chinese also drink their Cha out of peculiar Earthen Dishes, which add a
curious smell to the Liquor, almost like that of Juniper, Cypress and
Aloes-Wood; some of them are to be seen, being brought from thence hither.

The best of these Cups (according to Martinius) are made in the City Guihing,
(in the Province of Kiangnang) which from whence takes its Denomination, for
Guihing signifies Glory of the Earth; these are for this reason by the Chinese
chosen before those of the Province of Kiangsi, notwithstanding those are
clearer and brighter, because they give a pleasant scent and taste to the
Liquor, for which cause they are highly esteemed by them; and in the whole City
before named, they do in a manner nothing else but make Tee-Cups, some of which
they sell very dear.

The Chinese highly extol the Virtue of the Liquor Tee, and chiefly ascribe
the reason that they are never troubled with the Stone nor Gout, to the same;
for, say they, to drink it after Meals, takes away all indigestion and rawness
of the Stomach, and causes Digestion, makes those that are inebriated sober,
and restores them fresh power and Senses, removes giddiness and pains of the
Head, occasioned by excess of Drink, because it consumes the abundance of
Moistures; and those that are called upon to vigilance, by drinking the same
expel their drowsiness, and become very vigorous and fit for Business; it
prolongs life also, fortifies the Sight, and is commended by the famous
Physician Nicholaus Tulp, for the wholsomest Plant that grows: And for a more
particular enumeration of its Virtues, the said Physician may not unfitly
beconsulted.

Moreover, the Chinese not only use this Drink, but also the Indians,
Tartars, those of Tibet, Mogor, and almost all the People on the Shore of the
Oriental Sea; and of late years it has been in use in diverse parts of Europe,
where it is prepared after the same manner as amongst the Chinese, excepting
that we put a little Sugar Candy into it, to abate the bitterness of it, as it
appears to our Palates.

It is doubted whether this Plant and the use thereof were known to the
Chinese in former Ages: Trigaut tells us that they have not used it long,
because in the old Chinese Books not one Character or Letter is found that
expresses the same. Others affirm, that this Plant or Herb grew many Ages ago
wild, and without Planting, but that the Setting or Sowing of it, its Virtue
and manner of making Liquor thereof was known but of late to the Chinese. The
Herb at this day grows not wild, but is planted with great care on Hills, and
Set about three Foot distant one Plant from another. It grows in no other place
but China, Siam, Iapan and Tunking; but in no part of China in greater
abundance than in the thirteenth County Chicheufu in the Province of Nanking.

In the seventh County Iuenki in the Province of Iunnan, and in the third
County Kingyuen in the Province of Quangsi, grows the Fruit called Areka
(already spoken of) otherwise called Fausel, which the Inhabitants, as most of
the Indians, chew with the Leaves of Betel, which colors their Spittle red: It
is in the Country Language named Makinnang.

Beasts.
AS the Country of China is blessed with diverse sorts of Trees, Plants and
Herbs, so it likewise abounds with four-footed Beasts, Birds, Fishes, and
creeping Animals.

In all parts of China, especially in the Province of Quantung, are Hearts,
Stags, Bucks, Hares, and the like, which by Travelers are seen in great Herds.
Great abundance of Deer are also in the Province of Huquang.

China also is every where stored with such like Sheep as are found in Persia
and Tartary, viz. having long and thick Tails, which trail after them, and
weigh sometimes forty Pound, and are extraordinary good Meat.

About the tenth Garrisoned City Tieki in the Province of Suchuen, and in the
County Iungningfu in the Province of Iunnan, are a sort of Cattle with long,
thick, and curled Hair on their Tails, which the Chinese Soldiers wear on their
Helmets and Ensigns in stead of Feathers. Of this Hair they also make Tapestry,
and exceeding good Clothes to keep out Rain. Great store of these kind of
Cattle are also in the Kingdom of Tibet.

The Kine in the Counties Chingcheufu and Tengcheufu in the Province of
Xantung, have a certain Stone found in their Maw, which they call Nicuhoang,
that is, The yellowness of a Cow, because of the yellow color, for Nicu is A
Cow, and Hoang, Yellow. This Stone differs in bigness, and is sometimes as big
as a Goose Egg, but is not so firm as a Bezoar Stone, and therefore much
lighter, yet in greater esteem amongst the Chinese Physicians: it appears to
those that look on it like yellowish Chalk. It is, as the Chinese affirm, of a
cold Temper, but dries up the Rheum in the Head extremely: Its Powder, if
thrown into boiling Water, immediately cools the same, but cold Water being
poured upon it, a Vapor arises from it, and presently soaks up the Water.

According to Martinius, this Stone is by Bellenius called the Gall-Stone; and
by the Arabians, as the same Author writes, Haraczi.

In the County Luicheufu in the Province of Quantung, is a Beast, by the
Chinese Flying Cow:
called The flying Cow, because of its swiftness in running, for they say it
can run three hundred Furlongs in a day: It has a long round Horn on the Head.

In the County Cincheufu in the Province of Quangsi, is a Horned Beast like an
Ox, whose Horns are much whiter than Ivory. This Beast is strangely desirous of
Salt; whereof the Hunters taking their advantage, lay whole Bags full before
it, which it falls upon so greedily, that it suffers it self rather to be
taken, bound, and killed, than to desist from licking the Salt-Bags, which is
the only way they have to take it.

In the Province of Peking are Cats with white long Hair, and hanging Ears,
White Cats like Iselan Shocks.
which by Ladies and Persons of Quality are kept for their pleasure, but will
not catch Mice, being perhaps fed with other Dainties; yet there are other good
Mousing Cats, which are not so well fed as the former. And amongst the rest is
a Cat called Xumxu, of a yellow color (though some are black) with The Beast
Xamxu.
very shining Hair, being an excellent Mouser.

These Creatures are naturally wild, but when taken by the Chinese are made
tame, and hang Silver about their Necks: Some of them are sold for nine
Scudo's. A Scudo is about 2 d.


In the Province of Peking, about the Garrisoned City Siven, are great Mice
Great Mice.
with yellow Hair, in great esteem amongst the Chinese.

In the Province of Xantung are Wolves, which devour both Men and Plants.
Wolves.


In the Province of Xensi are many Bears, whose fore-Feet are by the Chinese
Dears.
accounted a great Dainty.

In the Mountainous County Linyaofu in the Province of Xensi, are many wild
Bulls, and Beasts like Tigers, or Panthers, or Leopards, and according to
Martinius called Pau, and by Boem, Hiven Pao: The Chinese make Clothing of
their Skins.

In the Province of Suchuen, and likewise in the fifth County Chucheufu in the
Province of Quangsi, is the Beast which the Greeks call Rhinoceros, that is
Nose-Horn, because of a Horn which it has on its Snout or Nose.

The Elephants which are seen in most parts of China, are all brought out of
the Provinces of Iunnan and Quangsi, where they breed in great numbers, the
Inhabitants making use of them in time of War.

The whole Province of Chekiang is infested with fierce Tigers; but on the
Mountain Kutien, near the City Kaiho, breed Tigers which do no hurt to Men. In
the neighboring Countries again they are very wild, and of a cruel Nature; yet
the wildest of them being brought to this Mountain grow immediately tame.
Tigers breed also on the Mountain Xepao in the County Gucheufu in the Province
of Quangsi. There are likewise ravenous Tigers and Leopards in the Mountain
Nalo in the County Chinyvenfu in the Province of Iunnan.

In the County Nanningfu in the Province of Quangsi, are great wild Boars,
Boars.
with Tusks of a Foot and a half long, which with a strange motion of their
Bodies they strike at all Persons which come near them, and certainly tear them
to pieces.

In no part of China are so many good Horses as in the Province of Iunnan,
Horses;
especially in the County Iunnanfu, and by the Garrison Moping; likewise in the
Province of Suchuen, near the Garrisoned City Po.

On the Mountain Holan in the Province of Xensi, by the Garrisoned City
Ninghia, are many wild Horses.

The Chinese Horses are generally of no high size, but very fat, broad
Buttock'd, and strong for Travel; they are Ridden with a Bit, and without being
beaten, observe their Masters words of command.

In the County Cungkingfu in the Province of Suchuen, on the Mountain Tayung,
Baboons.
are Baboons, which in bigness and shape are very like a Man, and so furiously
lustful after Women, that oftentimes surprising them in the Way, they Ravish
them.

In the Province of Fokien, by the third little City on the Mountain Puon, as
the Chinese write, there is a hairy Animal very like a Man. The same Creature
called Tuse, is found in the Kingdom of Gannan.

In the Province of Xansi, about the City Leao, and especially in the third
County Hangcheufu in the Province of Suchuen, in the second Paoningfu, and
about the City Kiating, by the sixth Garrisoned City Tienciven, in several
places in the Province of Iunnan, and many other parts toward the West, there
is great store of Musk, which a kind of Matter taken from the sweating of the
Navel (in form of a Purse) of a certain Beast like a Deer, in the Chinese
Tongue called Xe, and the Musk Xehiang, that is, Scent of the Xe, for Hiang
signifies Scent; or according to Michael Boem, and Philip Marinus, in his
History of the Kingdom of Tunking, Xehiang signifies properly A sweet-scented
Heart.

Philip Marinus before mentioned describes the Musk which this Beast produces
in this manner:

They have (meaning those of Laos) the natural and true Musk out of the Kingdom
of Goai. In the Woods lurks a Deer which the Chinese call Yehiam, that is,
Musk-Deer, which is as big as a Do or Heart, though, to speak truth, I know no
Beast that has greater resemblance with it (except the Head, which is like
that of a Wolf, and has two long Teeth) than an old wild Boar: it is of a
sadder color than a Deer, and so slow in motion, that the Hunters thereof are
only troubled to rouse it, for then it stands still, and suffers it self to be
killed without making the least resistance. Moreover, the Musk which they take
from this Beast is of diverse Prices: After they have taken it they draw all the
Blood from it, and keep it apart from his Navel; they also cut a Bag which is
full of Blood, or sweet-scented Moisture; then they flay and cut it in many
pieces. When they will make the best Musk of it, they take one half of the
Beast, the hind part from the Kidneys, which with a little Blood they stamp in
a great Stone-Mortar till they have made it a Pap, with which after it is dried
they fill little Bags made of the Deers Skin. There is a worse sort, made of
the forepart of the Beast as far as the Kidneys; but the worst of all is made
of the whole Beast together: And this last is the Musk used in these Countries
of Europe. Thus far Marinus.

When this Beast, as the Chinese write, is carried out of the Kingdom of Lu
into that of Laos, it dies instantly, like a Fish which is taken out of the
Water.

Birds.
IN the Province of Xensi, about the Garrisoned City Mincheu, and by the sixth
Garrisoned City Tienciven in the Province of Suchuen, are Hens, whose Bodies
are covered with Wool like that of Sheep in stead of Feathers: they are little,
and have short Legs, but are very valiant; great Ladies keep them for their
pleasure. The like sort are also in Kambodia and Siam. But Kircher objects
against this Relation, and maintains by several Arguments, that they are rather
fine curled Feathers or Down, than Wool.

In the County Nanningfu in the Province of Quangsi are a sort of strange and
wonderful Hens, which evacuate long Threads, such as are generally Spun of the
Cotton which grows on Trees, and (if they be not immediately taken from them)
swallow them up again.

Another sort of wild Hens called Ieki, breed on the high Mountains in the
Provinces of Xensi and Quangsi, and are of an extraordinary bigness, having
white Heads and diverse colored Feathers, with Bunches both on their Backs and
Breasts, wherefore they are by some called Toki, that is, Cammel-Hens.

In the first County Chingtefu in the Province of Suchuen, is a strange and The
Bird Tunghoafung.
wonderful Bird, which the Chinese call Tunghoafung, that is, The Bird of the
Flower Tung; Fung signifies a Bird, and Hoa a Flower; and Tung is the proper
Name for the Flower, for it grows out of the Flower Tunghoa, and lives so long
as the Flower of the Tree continues: We might justly call it A Living Flower,
partly for its likeness and beauty, and partly for its shortness of life: It
has a reddish Bill, tastes very sweet, and is very admirable to behold, being
of all sorts of Colors.

In several parts of China is a Bird named Chin, whose Feathers mixed with Wine
made of Rice, and afterward pounded very small, is so deadly a Poison, that no
Medicine whatsoever can expel the same.

In the County Xincheufu in the Province of Huquang, breeds a Bird on the The
Bird Lokung.
Mountain Lekung, which never makes a noise but against Rain, and thereby gives
warning thereof to the Husbandmen.

In the County Kiahingfu in the Province of Chekiang, the Chinese catch
certain The Bird Hoangcio.
Birds named Hoangcio, which steeping in Wine made with Rice, they sell all the
year long for a great Dainty.

In the first Territory Queilingfu in the Province of Quangsi, are many curious
Birds, whose various colored Feathers the Chinese Weave amongst their
Silk-Stuffs.

In the County Kiocingfu in the Province of Iunnan are Swallows with diverse
Swallows.
white Spots under their Bellies, some bigger, some lesser: The Chinese
Physicians Distill an excellent Water from them, which cures all Distempers
incident to the Eyes.

The Province of Quantung abounds with a sort of Ducks, which are brought Ducks.
up with great care by the Inhabitants; they are in most parts of China, but no
where in such abundance as in Quantung.

These Ducks, Hatch not their Eggs as with us, but the Chinese put them into a
warm Oven, or bury them in hot Dung after the same manner as it is said the
Egyptians do at Grand Cairo.

The Chinese also on Shipboard breed whole Coops full of Ducks, setting them
on the Shore at Low Water, there to feed on Oysters, Crabs, and the like.
Several Companies of them belonging to diverse Vessels, oftentimes mix
themselves together in the Water and on the Shore, but toward Evening at the
Ringing on a Basin return to their several Vessels.

The Chinese also use Ducks to Weed their Rice.

In most parts of China is found a Bird in the Chinese Tongue called Louwa, The
Bird Louwa.
which is smaller than a Goose, and not unlike a Raven, with a long Bill and
Neck like a Crane, at the end crooked, with Feet like a Swan, and a very wide
Maw, excellent for Fishing.

This Bird seems to be the same with that which Pliny calls by the Greek Name
(...), which signifies Asse's Cymbal, because of its strange noise, and is by
him described in the following words:

The (...) (says he) differs not much in shape from a Swan, except in the
Throat, in which, being of an extraordinary bigness, this unreasonable Creature
stores all that it gets: After it has gotten its fill, the gorged Store comes
up again into the Mouth, and from thence being chewed, goes into the Belly.
Thus far Pliny.

The Chinese fish with these Birds, teaching them to catch Fish as here we
teach our Dogs to Hunt: Their Fishing is in this manner:

The Fisherman goes with little Boats, or Floats of Canes joined close
together, puts out into some River or Lake with the forementioned Birds; which
being let out, immediately dive under Water, and shoot down with great
swiftness. So soon as any of these Birds have overtaken a Fish in the Water, he
swallows him up into his Maw, and immediately rising again comes to the side of
the Boat, where the Fisherman forces open his Bill, and pulls the Fish out of
his Maw with great dexterity; then puts the Bird overboard again, to catch
more Fish after the same manner.

But to prevent these Birds from swallowing the Fish, which they are very
greedy of; they lock their Throats, by putting on an Iron Ring about them,
beyond which the Fish cannot pass.

Those Fish which by reason of their bigness cannot be swallowed, they bring up
in their Bills, giving timely notice to the Fisherman, by a noise which they
make, that so he may be ready to take the Fish from them; nay sometimes one
Bird helps another (if the Fish be very big) to bring him to the Boat, each
holding a part thereof in his Bill.

If any Bird, after his being put overboard, Dive not instantly under Water,
it is cruelly beaten with a Cane, till the Feathers fly off, thereby to break
it of its slothfulness.

After they have taken a considerable number of Fish, the Iron Ring is taken
off from them, that then they may Fish for themselves, which makes them another
time the willinger to Fish for their Masters.

The Fishermen pay yearly for every Fish a certain Tribute to the Emperor.

The Birds beforementioned are very dear, one of them (which is any thing
dextrous in fishing) being sold for fifty Tail of Silver, every Tail being an
English Crown.

John Gonzalves of Mendoza, in his Description of the Empire of China, calls
these Fishing-birds Sholfers, and gives an account of their Fishing, much to
the same purpose as has been already described.

The Chinese (says he) have a peculiar way of Fishing, which is very pleasant
and good. The Emperor keeps in every Town built near Rivers certain Houses, in
which every year young Sholfers are bred up, with which they Fish in certain
seasons, after this manner:

The Masters of the Fowls take them out of their Coops, and carry them down to
the Shore, where they keep many Boats to Fish with, and fill them half way full
of Water, then they tie their Crop with a String under their Wings so close
that they cannot swallow the Fish; then they throw them into the Water to Fish,
which they do with great eagerness, and Dive with great dexterity and swiftness
under the Water; after having been a while out of sight, they appear again with
their Bill and Throat full of Fish, and come flying toward the Boat, and
evacuate the Fish in the Water which is in the Boat, that so they may be kept
alive.

In the County Nanningfu, of the Province of Quangsi, are a kind of small
Parrets, in bigness and shape like Mag-Pies.

On the craggy Mountains of Suchuen are very large Mag-Pies, and in the same
County, near the Garrisoned City Ydmui great store of Larks.

In the Provinces of Quantung, Quangsi, and Iunnan, are both tame and wild
Peacocks; they are in no other Provinces, unless brought from thence.

In the County Hoaiganfu, in the Province of Nanking, are more Quails and
Pheasants than in any other part of China.

In the County Taipingfu, in the Province of Nanking, lies an Island named Hoa,
in the River Kiang, which seems to be nothing but a hollow Rock, in which are
an incredible number of Owls; from whence the Island has gotten its
Denomination.

In the Province of Xantung are great store of Poultrey, Pheasants and
Wood-Cocks, insomuch that they are bought there extraordinary cheap.

Very remarkable is a Bird properly called Fung, and by addition of the word
Ciang, is named Fungciang, in regard the appearance of the Bird (which is very
seldom and always alone) is by the Chinese looked upon as a good Omen, and
very fortunate to the whole Empire. Boem also writes, that if this Bird
disappears suddenly from the sight of Men, it is a sign of one or other sad
event, or threatening danger to those of the Royal Blood. The Chinese have this
Bird in great veneration, so that the Figure of it is frequently seen among
them, both in their Paintings, Tapestry, Weavings, and their Imbroyderies of
Gold, Silver and Silk, and the greatest of the Nobility have the Effigies of it
often wrought on their Clothes. Martinius will have him to be the Phoenix, or
else an unknown sort of Crane, resembling a Peacock in head, and variety of
Colors; it is said to breed in the Mountain of the Kingdom of Tang.

The same Martinius tells us, that in the County Munghoafu, in the Province of
Iunnan, is a Mountain, from the Chinese Phoenix called Funghoang; because this
Bird (as they say) died on the same, after he had sung a while very
melodiously. They also add, that all the Birds about the latter end of Harvest
meet on the same, and there bewail the death of their Phoenix: The Inhabitants
observe also that time, and climb up the Hill in the Night with Lights to catch
Birds, and return from thence laden with their purchase.

In the Province of Xensi are Bats as big as Hens or Geese; they are by the
Chinese accounted great Dainties, who prefer their flesh before that of
Poultry. The like Bats being all over Hairy, and Headed like Apes or Cats, and
as big Piso.
as Pigeons, Hens, or Geese, are found in several parts of Asia, as in the
Kingdom of Mogor, in the Country of Kasmir in Surrat, and on the neighboring
Isle, as also in Brasile; they fly in great shoals in Surrat, like Wild-Geese,
and in the Evening are seen to hang on Trees; and because of their
extraordinary bigness, appear so strangely, that they strike amazement to such
as never saw them before: Wherefore the Netherlanders surprised with the sudden
sight and novelty thereof, called them Flying Apes; yet they may well be
reckoned amongst the other sort of Bats, having their Wings Skinny and not
Feathered, and because they have Ears and Claws, and lay no Eggs, but suckle
their Young: they are as big as a Cat, with a thick Hairy Breast and Belly, and
likewise are covered all over from their Neck to the Claws with a Skin like a
Sprit-Sail; they seem to differ from all other Bats, besides that, this Skin
like a Sail is fleshy underneath, but on the top covered with soft Hair like a
Conies, of an Ash Color: Moreover, their Wings are not as those of other Bats,
drawn together, and spread out again with folds; therefore we shall find, if
these and the Bats of Brasile, or any other in India be compared together, that
there is a great difference betwixt them. The whole Creature is about three
Foot long, and of a proportionable breadth; has a thin Tail of a Span long,
which seems to be fastened to the forementioned Skin, which covers the whole
Body from Head to Foot, like a Sprit-Sail; the Legs are also covered with a
soft yellow Wool; the Feet are armed with sharp Claws, with which it holds all
things that it seizes on, especially Fruit; it has a long Head of an ugly
aspect and wide Mouth, little Teeth, and round short Ears, consisting of a thin
Skin. Kircher tells us, that those Bats have not Quilly, but Sinnewie Wings,
with which they fly in the Air like ordinary Bats; yet, that their Nervous
Wings are so well distinguished in length, that they show as if they were
Feathered. They breed in thick Woods, and hang by their Claws on the hollow
Bodies and Boughs of Trees, or on the Roofs of Huts, appearing with their
Sail-like Skins, rather like Sachels than Animls, by which means they escape
the fury of other Creatures their Enemies: They annoy the Cattle exceedingly by
sucking their Blood and Milk, which is their best Food.

Moreover, (according to Bontius) on the Island Iava, breed ordinary Bats in
the Woods, which are as big as Pigeons, which the Iavans eat for a great
Dainty: They often come into the Houses at Night, if the Windows or Doors
chance to be left open in the Day, and fastening themselves like Leeches to the
Feet of those whom they find asleep, suck great abundance of Blood from them,
which more amazes than hurts them when they awake.

Fishes.
BEcause of the many Rivers, Pools and Lakes, the Country of China abounds
with variety of Fish, especially the Province of Xantung, which by reason of
its Neighborhood to the Sea, has, besides the Fish taken in Rivers and Lakes,
great store which are got in the Sea, in such abundance, that for the value of
a Penny they purchase ten Pound weight of Fish.

Also there is incredible store of Fish in the Province of Huquang, and
likewise in that of Kiangsi, especially Salmon.

In the River Kiang, about the City Kieukyang, though some Leagues from the
Sea, store of Fish is caught, as Cod, Dolphins, and Salmon.

In the River Lofeu, by the City Xeu in the Province of Huquang, are excellent
Lamprees in abundance.

The Yellow River amongst the rest breeds a Fish named Xehon, that is Marbled
Flower, so called from the Marble Spots on its Skin: It is caught in no other
place but near the City Paote in the Province of Xansi, and is in great esteem
amongst such as take upon them to understand Eating: They are taken chiefly in
the Province of Fokien near the City Hunghoa.

The River Tan, which glides close by the chief City Nanyang in the Province of
Honan, has Fish of a perfect red color, which are only seen and caught in
the beginning of Summer; for the remaining time of the year they hide
themselves.

The Chinese ridiculously believe, and some have written to that effect: If
any one besmears his Feet with the Blood of this Fish, he may walk on the Water
as well as on the Land. They add moreover, That if the Water be stirred at that
time, it immediately turns red, together with all the Fish, which at that
present appear; wherefore it has the Name of Tan, that is, Red.

The County of Ningpofu in the Province of Chekiang, lying near the Sea, is
well provided with Seafish, which they dry in the Sun, as Oysters, Crabs, and
Lobsters, with which they furnish most parts of China.

In the beginning of Summer is caught a Fish named Hoang, that is to say, The
Fish Hoang.
Yellow, because of its yellow color. This Fish is of such a Nature, that it
will not last one hour good after it is taken out of the Water; but it is
exceedingly valued amongst the Chinese: they put it into Vessels with Ice, and
so bring it to Market; for which purpose they preserve Ice in the Winter to
keep the forementioned Fish in in the Summer.

In a Lake of the compass of two hundred Acres, lying on the Mountain The Fish
Kinyu.
Cienking in the County Hancheufu in the Province of Chekiang, they catch Fish
of a Golden color, from which they are called Kinyu, for Kin signifies Gold,
and You, a Fish, having a Scale which shines as if sprinkled with Gold. They
scarce ever exceed a Fingers length, yet have Tails split into two or three
parts, sometimes entire and broad, which make them appear fair to the Eye: They
are by the Chinese kept with great care alive in their Houses or Gardens in
neat Vessels made for that purpose. The Grandees often with their own Hands
catch this Fish, which on the other side, as if it knew who was its Lord, and
what pleasure it did him, comes as it were on purpose with his Companion and
plays just above the Water. One of these Fishes, if it be perfect and sound,
costs sometimes three or four Crowns.

In the watery Valley on the Mountain Haiyang, near the City Queiling in the
Province of Quangsi, are Four-footed and Horned Fish.

In the River Siang, in the County Changxafu in the Province of Huquang, and
The Fish Kiyu, or Xau^l.
in the great River Kiang, where it runs through the Province of Nanking, are a
sort of Fish, by the Chinese from the Portuguese corruptly called Xanel. A
great quantity of this Fish packed up alive in Ice in peculiar Vessels, is sent
to the Emperor to Peking, every Week two Ships Lading of them as long as the
time of Fishing continues; and though it be above two hundred Leagues by Water,
yet in eight or ten days they finish their Journey: for Night and Day the
Vessels are Toed by a Line, and new Toers taken so soon as the old ones begin
to be tired, which at appointed places, like our Stages, stand ready: for by a
Letter sent before they acquaint them with the Hour when they shall be there;
and if any neglect happen herein, the Governors forfeit their Lives. No Cost
nor Charges are spared to procure the Emperor this excellent Fish, of which he
gives some to his Council of State.

The County Chinkiangfu in the Province of Iunnan, has many Rivers, Pools and
Lakes abounding with Fish, and amongst others one, out of which the Physicians
draw an excellent Medicine against all kind of Scurf and Scabs.

In the same County by the City Yangcung, in the Lake Ming, is a black colored
(...).
Fish named Cing, which is said to be good against many Diseases.

In the County Fungciangfu in the Province of Xensi near the City Pingyang, The
(...) (...).
they take a Fish called Xe, that is, Stone, which being dried and beaten to
Powder, keeps Moths out of Clothes if strow'd on the same.

In the Sea before the County Taicheufu in the Province of Chekiang, the
Chinese catch many Haions, or Seals, whose Skins they send to Iapan to make
Scabbards for Swords, and through all parts of China, making great profit of
them; as the said Skin is used amongst us, for the making Cases for Watches,
and Handles for Knives.

Serpents and creeping Animals.
IN the County Fungchiangfu in the Province of Xensi, is a sort of black
Serpent, of which the Chinese make a Medicine to expel Poison, and cure many
Distempers.

In the County Nanyangfu in the Province of Honan, are Serpents, whose Skin is
generally full of white Spots. The Wine in which they have been steeped, is an
excellent Remedy against Stiffness of the Joints or Limbs.

In the County Hoangcheufu in the Province of Huquang, are Serpents which heal
the Leprosy and Scabbiness.

On the Mountain Citien, by the City Caihoa in the Province of Chekiang, are
very great Serpents, which have no manner of Poison.

In the County Gucheufu in the Province of Quangsi, are (as the Chinese write)
Serpent Gento.
Serpents several Rods in length, no wonder then if they are affirmed to be the
biggest in the whole World. Michael Boem says, That these Serpents, called
Gento, are found on the Isle Ainan in the Provinces of Quantung, Quangsi, and
some other places, and are without doubt the biggest of all Serpents, being
about eighteen or twenty Foot long: they are said to swallow whole Deer, but
are not accounted very poisonous; when hungry they leap out of Hedges or
Bramble-Bushes, then rising upright and standing on their Tail, encounter
whatever they meet, whether Man or Beast; sometimes from a Tree set upon
Travelers, and winding about their middle, destroy them: Their Gall is
accounted by the Chinese good for sore Eyes.

In the Province of Quangsi, and in many other places in India, is a sort of
Serpent Cabros de Cabello.
Serpents, by the Portuguese called Cabros de Cabello, that is, Serpents of
Hair, or Hairy Serpents; in the Heads whereof a Stone is found, by the
Portuguese named Piedro del Cobra, or Serpent-Stone, good against Wounds or the
Bitings of the same Serpent, which otherwise would destroy in twenty four
Hours: It is round, and of a blue color, in the middle pierced with white;
being laid to the Wound it sticks fast thereon of it self, but when impregnated
with the Poison, it falls from it, then thrown a while into Milk, it returns to
its natural Quality; if it sticks the second time to the Wound, it is a certain
sign that all the Poison is not drawn out, but if it falls off, then the
Patient is certainly past danger.

This Stone has been experienced with good success upon diverse, both Men and
Beasts, according to the testimony of Kircher and several others.

There is also a Root good against the Bitings of these Serpents, which the
Portuguese call Raise de Cabro, that is, Serpent-Root, which being chewed so
long till the Patient Sneezes two or three times, cures him.

This Virtue is not only in the natural, but also the artificial Stone made of
some of the pieces of the natural Stone, or of the Head, Liver, Teeth, and
Heart of the Serpent, mixed with Terra Sigillata, or Sealed Earth. The
Brachmans, though proffered never so great a Sum of Money, will not teach this
Art to any.

Moreover, there is another very venomous Serpent amongst the Chinese, which
by biting kills a Man in few Hours; out of which also they draw a Medicine,
good against several Sicknesses, after this manner: The Tail and Body is put
into a Kettle of the best Wine, leaving only the Head, which is put through a
Hole made in the Lid thereof; out of which the Serpent at the boiling of the
Wine, which is hung over a great Fire, breathes forth all the Poison through
its gaping Mouth. The Flesh, the Head being cut off, is given to the Sick, and
preserved, being (as they say) the only precious thing to expel Poison, like
Treacle, or other sovereign Medicines.

The Province of Xensi is exceedingly infested with Locusts, which devour all
the Product of the Fields, insomuch that at some times there is not one Blade
of Grass to be seen, notwithstanding the Inhabitants, both great and small, at
Command of their Magistrates, kill and destroy them in the Fields. There are
often in such thick great Swarms, that by Clouding the Sun they darken the
Earth; but they make some amends with their Bodies, for the Chinese boil these
Locusts for a Dainty Dish.

In the County Tegaufu, of the Province of Huquang, and in the County Pinglofu
in the Province of Quangsi, are little Worms, which make white Wax after the
same manner as the Bees do their Honey-Combs; but the Combs of these Worms are
much less, and extraordinary white; neither are they bred up by Hand, but wild.
Of the Combs the Chinese make Candles, as we of our Wax, but they are much
whiter, and being very dear, are only used by Persons of Quality; for besides
their whiteness they give an excellent scent when lighted; neither do they spot
the Clothes they drop upon, and burn also very clear and bright.

In several Inlets or Creeks along the Seashore of China, and also under the
Island Ainan, is a Land and Sea Monster, in the Chinese Tongue called Hayma,
that is, Seahorse, for Hay signifies the Sea, and May a Horse: It is knownto
us by the Name of Seahorse, as it was to the Greeks by that of (...), that is,
River-Horse, not for its likeness to a Horse, but for its bigness, for the word
(...) in the Greek is applied to those things which are to be represented
bigger than ordinary. It is by the Chinese represented like a Horse with a
Mayn, but having on each side of the Mouth long Teeth sticking out like Horns.
The Head (according to Boem, who saw these Beasts wading in shallow places on
the Coast of Cafruria, opposite to Mosambique) is from the Mouth to the
Shoulders three Cubits long; on his nethermost Jaw grow two very long and
crooked Teeth, and on the uppermost also two thick ones, though shorter, which
jut upon them; between lies their Tongue: Their Skin is very hard, insomuch
that it can scarce be pierced with a Lance; it has no Hair, except at the end
of the Tail, which shines like black Horn; each Hair is about the bigness of a
Straw, and which bending is not easily to be broke. The Caffers, both Men and
Women, make Bracelets of the Hair, which serves both for an Ornament about
their Wrists, and is said to prevent the Palsy. Of the Teeth (says Boem) in
India and Goa, are made Garlands, Images, and also Crosses. It has also been
found, that these Teeth are great stoppers of Bleeding; though experience has
taught us, that the Teeth of these Horses have not always the same Virtue, but
certain times must be observed in the killing of this Beast, that then his
Teeth may have the forementioned Power in a greater measure.

No place in China feeds more Silkworms than the Province of Chekiang; for it
not only furnishes its own Inhabitants, and all China with Silk-Stuffs of
diverse sorts, but also the neighboring Country Iapan, the Spaniards on the
Philippine Isles, nay, India and the remotest Countries in Europe; for the
Hollanders buy great store of Silk at Hocksieu in the Province of Fokien, which
is all brought thither out of the Province of Chekiang.

The Silk-Stuffs made in this Province are accounted the best in all China, and
are to be had at so cheap a Rate, that ten Men may go clad in Silk at less
Charge than one Man in Cloth in Europe. They Prune their Mulberry-Trees once a
year, as we do our Vines, and suffer them not to grow up to high Trees, because
through long experience they have learned, that the Leaves of the smallest and
youngest Trees make the best Silk, and know thereby how to distinguish the
first Spinning of the Threads from the second, viz. the first is that which
comes from the young Leaves that are gathered in March, with which they feed
their Silkworms; and the second is of the old Summer Leaves, and it is only
the change of Food, as the young and old Leaves, which makes the difference in
the Silk. This is perhaps the reason why the Silk which is made in Europe is
courser than that made by the Chinese. The Prices of the first and second
Spinning also differs amongst the Chinese, whenas most Silk-Throsters in
Europe make no difference therein. The best Silk is Spun in March, the coursest
in June, yet both in one year. The breeding of the Worms is all one, and
requires as much trouble and care as in some places in Europe; therefore it is
plainly false, and a Romance, That all the Silk in China is produced by the
Silkworms on the Trees without care or labor.

Martinius tells us, That the breeding of Silkworms, and making of Cotton and
Silk, is an ancient Invention of the Chinese; for the Wife of the Emperor Ya,
who Reigned Anno 2357. before the Navity of Christ, is said to have been the
first Inventress and Teacher thereof to her Subjects: for though the breeding
of Silkworms was not unknown to the Chinese at that time, yet they were
ignorant in the Art of making Clothes of the same, as it generally happens in
the beginning of all things. To the Chinese justly belongs the honor, that
from them originally the Art of making Silk was translated to other Countries
of Asia and Europe.

In the Province of Xantung the Silk Threads are Spun on Trees and in the
Fields, not by tame Silkworms, but another kind of Worm like a Caterpiller
which Spin not their Silk in manner of a Ball or Egg, but in long Threads of a
white color, which are blown to and again by the Wind on Trees and Houses,
from whence the Inhabitants fetch them; almost after the same manner as our
long Spider-Threds in Cobwebs, which fly up and down in Summer. Of this Silk
they also make Silk-Stuffs as well as of that Spun by Silkworms, and much
stronger, though somewhat courser.

Diverse Animals in the Greek Tongue called (...), or Creatures which live in
the Water as well as on the Shore, are in several places of China.

In the County Hoeicheufu in the Province of Quantung, breeds a Monster of
Nature, by the Chinese called Hoangcioyu, that is, Yellow-Bird Fish; for it is
neither Bird nor Fish, but both; that is to say, all the Summer it is a Bird of
a Saffron color, and flies in the Mountains, but at the end of Harvest it
betakes it self to the Sea and becomes a Fish, and being caught in Winter, is
(as the Chinese say) very sweet and good Meat.

In the County Chaocheufu in the same Province, are many Crocodiles in the
River Zo, which oftentimes hurt the neighboring People.

On the East side of the chief City Gucheu in the Province of Quangsi, is a
little Lake named Go, in which King Pegao in ancient times kept ten Crocodiles,
to which he threw Malefactors to be devoured by them; those which were
guiltless or innocent, being (as the Chinese say) found untouched, were taken
out again and released.

In the Province of Huquang, in the River Siang, is a Beast which chiefly
resembles a Horse, but with Scales on its Body, and Claws like a Tiger: It is
of a cruel Nature, and seizes on Man and Beast, especially in Harvest, for then
it often comes out of the Water, and runs all over the Country.

In the River Iun, in the same County Chaokingfu in the Province of Quantung,
breeds a Fish, by the Chinese called The Swimming Cow, because it often comes
out of the Water and engages with its Horns the tame Cow; but if it stays long
out of the Water its Horns turn yellow, and lose their hardness, by which means
it is forced to return to the Water, where it becomes a Fish again, and the
Horns obtain their former hardness.

In the County Changtefu in the Province of Honan, breeds a Fish in the Rivers,
by the Chinese named Hagul, that is, Child, because when caught it cries like
a Child. In shape this Fish differs little from a Crocodile, has a long Tail,
and goes on four Feet: The Fat thereof once set on fire, cannot be quenched
either by Water, or any other means.

In China also are many Land and Sea-Tortoises, or Turtles, called Quei,
especially in the County Chunkingfu in the Province of Suchuen, and in the
Island Pequei, that is, Isle of Turtles, lying in the River Kiang, and the
Province of Huquang; some of them are very big, and others small and handsome,
which the Inhabitants keep in their Houses; some are no bigger than a small
Bird.

The Chinese relate of a strange accident that happened there to a Soldier,
who being accidentally by his Enemies thrown into the River, was by a Tortoise
(which it is likely he had formerly fed and set at liberty) carried like an
Arion on a Dolphins back to the opposite Shore.

In the fourth County Hoeicheufu, in the Province of Quantung, are seen at Sea,
Turtles of such a vast bigness, that afar off they seem to be Rocks, some
having Shrubs and other Plants growing on their Shells.

In some Provinces of China, and especially in Honan are flying Turtles, with
green, and others with blue Wings on their Feet, by the spreading out of which
they push themselves forward, leaping after the manner of Grasshoppers: The Feet
of these Turtles, are for the Rarity thereof, in great esteem among the
Chinese; those that have green Winged Feet are called Lo Mae Quey, Quey
signifying A Tortoise; Lo, Green; and Mae, Wings.

In all places near the Sea are plenty of Oysters, almost as good as our
Colchester-Oysters, especially in the County Tencheufu, in the Province of
Xantung.

In the eleventh County Vencheufu, of the Province of Chikiang, are small
Oysters, of which it is reported, that from the Powder of them, dried and
stamped, and Sown like Seed along the Fields in Marsh Ground, there grow
Oysters of a very sweet Relish; most of the Sea-bordering places abound also
with Crabs and Lobsters.

Minerals, Stones, and Earths.
THrough all China are an innumerable company of Mines, which abound in all
sorts of Metal, and in particular Gold and Silver in great store, though there
be an Edict in China not to Dig for them; because (as the Chinese say) Men are
generally killed in the Mines, by the dangerous Damps and Vapors that arise
from the Earth: But to gather Gold on the Shores of Rivers is free for every
Man, after which manner they get great store; and Gold is rather a Commodity or
Merchandise it self amongst the Chinese, than a Purchaser of other Commodities.

In the Province of Iunnan they gather great quantities of Gold out of the
cleans'd Sand; but if the Mines might be opened, the Chinese could not expect
greater abundance of Gold or Silver from any other place: from whence there is
a Proverb amongst them, wherein those that are seen to spend their Estates in
Riot and Prodigality, are asked, Whither their Fathers be Receivers of the
Emperors Revenue in the Province of Junnan? There are also in this Province
Mines of Tin, Iron, and Lead.

The Province of Fokien has Copper, Tin, and Iron Mines, and in some places
Gold and Siver Mines also: Particularly in the sixth County Tingcheufu, in the
same Province, the Mountain Kin, that is, Gold, is so called from its Golden
Mines which were opened by the Family Sung.

The Mountains in the Province of Queicheu, enclose (as the Chinese write)
Gold, Silver, Quicksilver, and the like rich Metals, all which might easily be
gotten, if the Mountaineers, or Inhabitants of the Mountains could be subdued
and brought to Obedience; but now the Chinese have no more benefit than the
forementioned People will give them out of their free Wills in Barter for
Salt, or any other Necessaries.

The County Hengcheufu, in the Province of Huquang, has many rich Silver Mines
which may not be opened.

All over the Province of Suchuen great store of Iron, Lead, and Tin is Dug
out of the Mountains: China has also diverse sorts of Precious and ordinary
Stones.

In the Province of Suchuen are the best sort of Load-stones to be found; as
also in the Provinces of Huquang and Honan.

In the little County Lincheufu, in the Province of Suchuen, is a sort of Green
Stone called Lapis Lazuli: and likewise in the seventh County Nanganfu, in the
Province of Honan: and in the Territory Honanfu of the Province of Iunnan.

In the seventh County Kaocheufu, in the Province of Quantung, and out of the
Mountain Tiniang, in the second Talifu, in the Province of Iunnan, they Dig
very excellent Marble, which the Chinese cut in thin Squares to make Tables,
Walls, and the like Ornaments for their Houses; for this Marble is naturally
streaked with several Colors, in such a manner, that it represents Mountains,
Rivers, Trees, Landskips, and the like, as if done by a great Artist with a
Pencil. This Marble is called Tienciang, from the Mountain out of which it is
Dug. There is also very good Marble in the County Iunnanfu: Out of the
Mountains near the Garrisoned City Siven, in the Province of Peking, they Dig
white and red Marble or Porphyre-stones, and also exceeding good Crystal, which
is also found on the Mountain Ting, in the County Quanglingfu, in the Province
of Quangsi: In the same Province are Agats, for their color and hardness
highly esteemed.

By the little City Queiyang, in the County Hengchufu, in the Province of
Huquang, on the Mountain Xeyen, are Stones found after Rainy Weather exactly
resembling Swallows; which we have already mentioned among the Mountains.

On the Mountain Queiyu, in the County Taicheufu, in the Province of Chekiang,
all the Stones, as well great as small, grow naturally square.

In the County Cunchangfu, in the Province of Xensi, they gather little blue
Stones with white Veins or Streaks, which are highly esteemed by Persons of
Quality; for the common Opinion is, that being burnt to Chalk and pounded very
small, they are good to prolong Life.

On the Mountain Pao, in the fifth County Hoangcheufu, in the Province of
Huquang they find Stones, of which, some if laid in the Sun, turn Red, others
Yellow, and retain that Color for a considerable time.

Out of the almost inaccessible Mountain Io, by the City Pa, in the County
Paoningfu, in the Province of Suchuen, they Dig Precious Stones.

Out of the Mountains Vutu, in the third County Hangchungfu, in the Province of
Xensi; and in the fourth, Cungchangfu; and also in the Province of Suchuen, by
the Garrisoned City Po, they Dig a Mineral, by the Chinese called Hiunghoang:
It is of a deep yellow, or sometimes Vermillion, distinguished with black
Spots; it is like a Chalky Stone or hard Earth, and is accounted an excellent
Medicine against many Malignant Fevers and Agues, dangerous Heats in the
Dog Days, if laid to steep in Wine, and drunk up.

Out of the Mountain Tape, by the City Lungkieu, in the County Taitungfu, of
the Province of Xansi, they Dig Earth so Red, that it is used in stead of
Vermillion to Print the Red Chinese Characters with.

Out of the Mountain Nieuxeu, in the County Siganfu, in the Province of Xensi,
is Dug a certain White Earth, which is used by the Women in stead of White
Lead, to make them Beautiful, by taking away all Spots and Freckles in the
Face: The Chinese call it Queiki, that is, Fair Woman.

The Mountain Io, in the Province of Xensi, produces a certain Blue Earth or
Mineral, with which they make a kind of Starch for their Linen.

Through all the Province of Xansi, they Dig a sort of Coal, firm and slick
like Jet or black Marble, such as those of Luker-land, or like our Cannel-Coal
in Derby-shire: The Chinese, especially the Common people, burn these Coals
(called Mui) on their Hearths, in their Kitchins or Chambers, but first break
them very small, (they being Dug in great Pieces) and then mixed with Water,
make them into Balls; they are a long while a kindling, but once lighted, they
cast a great heat, and keep in a great while: The Northern Chinese burn also
Wood, Cane, and other Fuel.

In the same Province are wonderful Fire-pits, like our Water-pits; they are in
most places, and serve in stead of other Fires, for the poor people to boil
their Meat over; which they do after this manner, the Mouth of the Pit is shut
very close, except a little hole just big enough for the Pot to stand in; and
so the Inhabitants Boil their Meat without trouble: They say that this Fire
burns dull and not bright, and though it be very hot, yet sets not the least
Stick of Wood a fire, if thrown into the same; nay that which is more, it may
by being put into a great hollow Cane, be carried from one place to the other,
so that every man may use it when he pleases; and by opening the Mouth of the
Cane, out of which the heat strikes, Boil a Pot with Meat, yet never hurt the
Cane in which the Fire is Enclosed.

Out of the Mountains Kie and Siuvu, in the Province of Peking, by the City
Pingeo, they Dig another sort of Coal, which they burn for ordinary Fuel.

On the Mountain Io, in the Province of Xensi, by the little City Chinyven, are
very bright Stones found, not unlike Diamonds.

The Province of Iunnan produces Rubies, Saphyrs, Agats, and the like Precious
Stones, called by a general Name Iemin.

In the County Kincheufu, of the Province of Huquang, and in the County
Queilingfu, in the Province of Quangsi, are very excellent Stones found, with
which the Chinese temper their Ink, as the European Painters their Colors.

In the County Nanhingfu is a black Stone, very like the Chinese Ink, with
which they write on Boards, as we do with Chalk: There is also a Stone which is
so hard, that the Inhabitants make Stone Axes and Knives thereof.

Out of the Mountain Tiexe, lying in the Province of Suchuen, by the Garrisoned
City Kienchang they Dig Stones, which melted in the fire produce Iron, very
good to make Swords and Faulchions of.

By the City Siaoxan is a Quarry, which furnishes all China with Freestone.
Gum Ci^.


In several places in China, especially in the fourth County Nieucheufu, in the
Province of Chekiang, is a kind of Gum, in the Chinese Tongue called Cie, which
drops out of the Trees, and is very like Gum or Oil of Turpentine: The Chinese
gather it in the Summer, and cleansing the same, Color it how they please; the
best is yellow like Gold, and the next black; before it is dried it yields a
malignant Damp, which makes the Faces of those which are not used to it, swell
and look pale for a time, but they soon recover again: It dries very leasurely
when any Chests or Cabinets are Varnished with the same, but when once dry, it
never melts again: What a curious and shining thing this Gum is, Europe has
long since seen by the Cabinets and Chests that are brought hither from China
and Iapan: The Chinese varnish all their curious Wood-Work with the same; as
also their Ships, Houses, Tables, Bed-steads, Closets, and all their Household
Utensils, to the great luster thereof. Trigaut gives us this following Account
of this Gum, viz.

In China is a certain Gum like Musk, pressed out of the Bark of a Tree, and
thick like Pitch, of which the Chinese make a Varnish, by them called Cie, and
by the Portuguese, Ciaro. With this Cie they Varnish their Tables, Presses, and
other Housholdstuff, as also their Ships and Houses, and Color it how they
please: The Work thus Varnished shines like Glass, and is very beautiful to the
Eye, and acceptable by reason of its smoothness, and continues many years. By
means of this Gum the Houses of the Chinese and Iapanners shine in such a
manner, that they dazzle the Eyes of the Beholders. With this also they
represent the color of all kind of Wood. And for this reason the Chinese, by
whom this Gum is used, account Table-clothes altogether superfluous; for if the
shining and Crystal-like Tables accidentally, by spilling of any Grease upon
them, are bereaved of their luster, they are restored to their former beauty,
by being washed over with warm Water, because nothing can soak through the hard
Gum. Besides this Gum there is an Oil, pressed out of the Fruit of another
Tree, not unlike the former; the use thereof is also one and the same, but
gives not so great a Gloss.

We have several kinds of Varnish amongst us, in imitation of the Chinese, but
far short of it, the true Preparation thereof being doubtless unknown to us, or
but imperfectly discovered.

Out of the Mountains in the eighth County Ienganfu in the Province of
Peters-Oyl.
Xensi, is dug a slimy Moisture, generally called Peters-Oyl, which the
Chinese use in their Lamps, and against Scabs.

In the Province of Suchuen is abundance of yellow Amber, which is gathered on
the Coast of Pomeren, and in other parts of the same Province another sort of a
reddish color.

Martinius speaks of great quantities of artificial Amber, made of the boiled
Gum of Pine-Trees, and sold by the Chinese; so exactly imitated, that it was
not to be distinguished from the best; neither is it a certain sign of true
Amber, to attract Chaff or other light things; for the falsifi'd and
artificial, if rubbed, has an attracting power as well as the natural.

In the Provinces of Iunnan they also have Amber which is somewhat redder than
the Pomeran; for yellow they have none.

The Salt which the Chinese have, is not only made in the Sea-bordering
Provinces, but there are also Inland Waters of which they make Salt without any
great trouble.

In the County Hokienfu in the Province of Peking, are large Fields, which
extending to the Seaside, are washed by the Sea Water, which leaves great
quantities of Salt upon the Banks.

All the Water of the Lake Ieu, lying in the County Pingyangfu in the Province
of Xansi, is as salt as Seawater, and Salt also made of it by the Inhabitants.

In the County Kingyangfu in the Province of Xensi, are two Pools of salt
Water, of which they make abundance of Salt.

In the Province of Iunnan, on the North-East side of the City Yaogan, is a
great Pit of salt Water, out of which is extracted exceeding white Salt, with
which the whole County Yaoganfu is furnished. The Pit is called Peyencing, that
is, Pit of white Salt. The first finding of this Salt is ascribed to the Sheep,
because they used to lick the Earth thereabouts, and scratch up lumps of Salt
with their Feet, till the Inhabitants at last observing the same, found salt
Water and Earth there.

China abounds with Salt in all places; so that besides the great plenty for
common use, the Salt-Trade brings great Revenue into the Emperor's Treasury,
there being an incredible number of People which Trade in that Commodity.

Every Province in which Salt is made, pays yearly a certain weight of Salt to
the Emperor for Tribute.

On the Mountains in the Province of Suchuen are Salt Pits, which supply all
the Inhabitants of that Province with Salt; which is a great testimony of God's
Providence to these People, considering this part of China lies remote from the
Sea, and could not be furnished with Salt from any other places, but with
exceeding great trouble.

These Pits are some of them a hundred Paces deep, as being on inhabited Hills
of salt Earth: The Mouth of one of them is not above three or four Handsbreadth
wide: They are searched with an Iron Instrument in form of a Hand, which being
let down in the Ground, by reason of its great weight and sharp Fingers,
presses through the same, then drawn up again shuts close, and brings up a
handful of Earth; which they do so long till they come to salt Earth and Water,
which is afterward pulled out with a Tub or Bucket, which has a Cover at the
top, and a Hole in the bottom, through which the Water running as the Vessel
goes down thrusts it open, but when it is full and pulled up by a Rope it falls
and shuts again: which salt Water being taken out and set over the Fire, its
watery part evaporates forth* and leaves white Salt in the bottom; yet is not
altogether so salt as that which is made of Seawater.

There are Salt Pits also in the County Queicheufu. And likewise in the
Territory Kiahingfu in the Province of Chekiang, are very great Salt Pits, in
the Fields near the Sea, where they make abundance of Salt. Also in the County
Hoaiganfu, not far from the City Hoaigain, and in several other places
bordering on the Sea.

In China only is that kind of fine Earth of which is made that rich Material
of those we call China-Dishes, and this Stuff is called Porcelane. Some falsely
affirm, That the Matter of which the Porcelane is made is prepared of pounded
Egg-shells, or Sea-Cockles, adding, That it must lie a hundred years under
Ground before it can be used. Others tell us, That the right Porcelane is made
of a hard chalky Earth, which is first beaten to Powder, and ground to Meal,
and then is thrown into Troughs made of gray Stone full of Water, and there
left to soak so long till it becomes a Pap; mean while a thin Skin comes over
it, of some of which they make Porcelane, as fine and clear as Crystal, which
on pain of Death may not be carried out of the Country, but must all be
brought to the Court, and delivered to the Emperor and his Council: The next
sort is made of the uppermost Stuff under this Skin; and this is the finest
Porcelane we have in Europe: and so the nearer this Mucilage is to the bottom
of the Troughs, still so much the courser is the Porcelane made thereof, the
bottom of all being not much better than our Earthen Ware. But Martinius,
Trigaut, and other Jesuits, who were Eyewitnesses, write with more
probability, That the Stuff of which they make their Porcelane, is a dry Earth,
like Chalk and (...) Sand, and (according to Trigaut) yellow.

This Earth is dug in the fourteenth County Hoeicheufu in the Province of
Nanking, and from thence carried in square Lumps or Cakes, each weighing about
three Catties, to the Province of Kiangsi, along the River Po. And in this
Province, at a Village called Sinktesinu, near the City Feuleang, in the fourth
County Iaocheufu, the best Porcelane in all China is made: for though there be
Earth in other places, of which the Porcelane might be made, yet it is no way
to be compared to that which is made in the Village.

It is to be observed, that Porcelane cannot be made in the forementioned
place, where there is such an abundance of Earth, either for want of Water, or
because the Water is not so proper for the making of it.

Those which dig the Earth carry it not themselves to the Province of Kiangsi,
but generally sell Cakes or Lumps thereof to other People, who maintain
themselves by carrying of them thither; yet not one Lump may be carried away
before it is marked with the Emperor's Arms, thereby to prevent the falsifying
of it.

The Porcelane Vessels are made after the same manner as our Potters make their
Earthen Ware. The Vessels, Plates or Dishes, as soon as formed, are Painted
with various Colors, as yellow, red, blue, or any other. That which is of a
Saffron color, and Painted with Shapes of Dragons, is sent to the Emperor and
his Council; and the red, yellow, and blue, is sold amongst the common People.

To color the Porcelane blue they general use a certain Weed, which in the
Southern Provinces is found in great abundance.

The Baking of these Vessels is after this manner: Being shaped, and having
stood a while in the Wind and Sun to dry, they are put into an Oven, which is
for fifteen days after made extraordinary hot, and both all that while, and for
fifteen days longer are stopped so close, that the least Air cannot get in or
out of it; then the Oven is opened, and the Vessels remaining therein left to
cool by degrees; for if the glowing Vessels should be taken out of the Oven and
put into the Air, they would crack to pieces like Glass; after the expiration
of thirty days the Furnace is opened in the presence of an Officer, appointed
by the Emperor for that purpose; who examining what is Baked, takes of every
sort the fifth piece for the Empeor, by virtue of an ancient Law. It Is said,
that of the pieces also of broken Porcelane, first beaten, and afterward
sifted, then mixed with Water and kneaded in a Lump, are new Vessels made, but
cannot be brought to their former luster.

It is observable, that though some use the fresh Lumps which are brought to
them, and make Porcelane of it, yet others, more curious, let them lie a while
till they grow as hard as a Stone. The Earth thus dried, when they intend to
use it, is beaten like the broken pieces of Porcelane, and also sifted and
mixed with Water, then kneaded into Lumps or Cakes, of which they make
Porcelane as of the fresh Earth.

Besides the goodness of the Stuff, and curious fashioning, the Porcelane
Vessels are of a high value, because they can endure extraordinary hot Liquors
in them without cracking; also the pieces, if joined with Iron, or small Copper
Wyre, hold any Moisture without leaking.

Through all China are People which are experienced in this Art, and carry a
curious small Drill, with a Diamond at the end thereof, with which they ^ake
the Holes in the Porcelane.

In China are also diverse sorts of Paper made, sometimes of Canes and the
Leaves thereof, and sometimes of Cotton, Silk and Hemp: The Paper made of
Cotton is not inferior in whiteness to the French Paper.

In the County Vuchanfu in the Province of Huquang, is abundance of Paper made
of Canes and the Leaves thereof, which grow there.

There is also good Paper made in the County Lucheufu, in the Province of
Kiangnan.

There are more ways of making Paper among the Chinese (as Trigaut witnesses)
than among us: The same Author affirms, that the Chinese Paper is very rotten,
apt to tear, and not durable; so that no Paper, whatsoever sort it be, can
compare to ours in Europe: But whereas he says, that it cannot bear on both
sides to be Written or Printed, it is a mere mistake, because several sorts of
Chinese Paper are found in the Netherlands, which not only by the Hollanders,
but the Chinese also are written on both sides without the least sinking. The
Chinese Paper is of several sizes, some two Foot and a half long, and two
broad, some six Foot long, and three broad, which sort is brought from China
into Holland.

China also in several places produces Sugar, (...), Honey; and in the
Mountains abundance of Saltpeter.

Of the Shape, Nature, and Complexion of the Chinese.
THe Chinese in Color and Complexion are like the People of Europe,
especially those of the Northern Provinces, for those in the Southern, by
reason of their Neighborhood to the Line and Heat of the Sun, are of a brown
Complexion.

The Hair of their Beards is stiff and short, and appears not till full
Manhood; so that a Chinese of thirty years, looks a^ Youthful as an European of
twenty.

The Color of the Hair, both of their Heads and Beards, is generally black,
and it is accounted a dishonor in China to wear long Hair.

Their Eyes are small, somewhat oblong, black, and standing out: their Noses
are small, and not high: their Ears of an indifferent bigness, in which the
Chinese, as also in their other Features differ little from the European,
though in some Provinces they have flat, and in a manner square Faces.

In the Province of Quantung and Quangsi, most people on every little Toe have
two Nails, which is also common amongst those of Cochin-China; and some say
that in former times they had six Toes on every Foot.

All the Women are of little Stature, white Skins, brown Eyes, and
extraordinary small Feet, in which last they account their chiefest Beauty to
consist; for though a Woman be never so fair, yet she is accounted homely if
she has great Feet; insomuch, that the Mothers Swathe and Roll up their
Daughters Feet from their Infancy, that by these Swathes (which they wear all
their Lifetime) they may prevent the natural growth of them: This Swathing of
their Feet often occasions in tender Bodies such a pain, that they sometimes
become lame of their Feet and decrepit; yet the Women generally Dance prettily,
and make strange gestures with their bare Arms.

Some will have it, that this Swathing was inven^ed by some politic and
jealous Person, that by this means they might be kept at home, and prevented
from walking the Streets, which in that Country ^edounds to the dishonor of
the Women, and disesteem of the Men.

But, as Martinius tells us, this Custom was derived from Taquia, an ancient
Empress of Che, who, though exceeding all other Women in Beauty, had
extraordinary small Feet, which extremely troubled her in going; her Women
hereupon in flattery imitated her, and also to make their Feet smaller Swathed
them; and this Custom to this day is of such Authority among them, that should
they behold a second Helen, they would look upon her as a Monster if she had
great Feet.

Others say, that Taquia was no Woman, but a Spirit in Female shape, with Goats
Feet; which, because she would not have them discovered, she kept continually
wrapped up; and that from thence it has also been a Custom for Women to cover
their Feet, which if they do not, it is accounted very ridiculous: Moreover, in
this they resemble Taquia, that their Feet seem so little in their Shoes, that
they appear no bigger than Goats Feet.

The Chinese, both Men and Women, before the Conquering of the Empire of China
by the Tartars, are said to have wore long Hair on their Heads, without ever
Shaving it, except Children, who till the fifteenth year of their Age Shaved
their Heads, only leaving a long Lock on their Crown; after that time they
suffered their Hair to grow without Shaving, till they came to twenty years of
age, (which was the time that Men putting on their Hat of Manhood, an ancient
Custom like that of the Toga Virilis amongst the Romans) and let it hang loose
over their Shoulders: In the twentieth year they tied up their Hair, and wore a
Cap or Hat over it made of Horse-hair, or Silk; but this Cap was not used by
the Women, who went only with their Hair tied up, and adorned with Gold,
Silver, Precious-stones, and all manner of curious Flowers, and the like.

But there has been since a great alteration in the Shaving and Wearing of
their Hair; for all those Chinese which were subdued by them, were forced to
Shave their Hair according to the Tartar fashion, only reserving one Lock
behind on their Heads, wherefore the Hollanders generally call them Shaven
Chinese, as those who refusing to submit to the Tartars, and to Shave off
their Hair, joined with the Rebel K^xinga, are called Unshaven Chinese: ^ut in
former times they took such a Pride in their long Hair, that they rather chose
to Die, than lose the least Lock thereof; nor was it only Pride but something
of Superstition that made them so concerned in long Hair, for they like the
Mahumetants entertained a simple Imagination, that they should be pulled up to
Heaven by their Hair. Nevertheless, the Priests used in ancient times to Shave
the Hair of their Heads and Beards every eighth day.

The Chinese also have a strange Opinion of themselves, accounting none equal
to them, and looking upon all Affairs of foraign Kingdoms and People as not
worthy their knowledge nor description; insomuch, that we find not any one
Country which they have frequented with their Ships, mentioned in their
Histories, when as they are very exact in the describing of those Countries
within their own Dominions: Moreover, all the Names with which they express
foraign places are ridiculous, and signifying either Barbarians, Slaves, or the
like, for they never take notice of the proper and true Names of Strangers; as
for example, they ridiculously name the Iapanners Vocu, which by them signifies
The Country of a Barba^ian Language; and the Tartars, Nucieu.

All the Northern Chinefes, or the Inhabitants of the seven Northern Provinces,
especially those of the Province of Peking, are Inferior to those of the
Southern Provinces in Learning, Arts, and other Exercises of Ingenuity, but are
Valianter and better Soldiers.

In like manner, the Southern Chinese are very Politic and Civil, and the
Northern Rough and Unpolished: As for the Inhabitants of the Province of Xensi,
they are very Civil and Courteous, yet they are as dull in Learning as the
other Northern Chinese. Those of the Province of Fokien are much inclined to
Riot and Lasciviousness, yet are they Politic, of great Understanding, and
subtle in the way of Merchandise, very full of Fraud: They are addicted to
Literature, and have many Learned Persons among them; yet they are by the other
Chinese accounted a People of a Salvage cruel Nature, as seeming to have
retained some of the antique Barbarism, because they were the last that
embraced the present Laws and Customs of the Chinese.

The Inhabitants of the little City Vu^iven, in the Province of Quangsi, are in
high credit amongst the Chinese for their Policy and Understanding; many of
them being chosen for Governors and Highpriests.

The City Xaohing, in the Province of Chekiang, sends forth the most Ingenious
and best Orators in all China; insomuch, that there is scarce a Governor but
has one of this City for his Council.

The Inhabitants of the eleventh County Vencheufu, in the Province of Chekiang,
have been of old much given to the abominable Sin of Sodomy, which is grown so
habitual among them, that neither Law nor shame restrains them from acting it
publicly.

Several Mountains lying in the twelfth County of Xincheufu, in the Province
Vulinman, or wild ^ple.
of Huquang, are inhabited by Wild and Salvage People called Vulinman:
Concerning the Original of these People, the Chinese Writers give us this
fabulous account.

King Kaosin Warring against a Robber named U, was driven by him to utmost
extremity, for the Robbers. Valor and Experience in War was such, that he often
Defeated King Kaosin, and Routed all his Forces; wherefore Kaosin caused to be
Proclaimed amongst his Soldiers, that he would give twenty thousand Ounces of
Silver and a City, with his youngest Daughter, to any one that would bring him
the General U's Head: While this Edict was in force, King Kaosin's Dog called
Puonho, ran into the Enemies Army, which lay at that time Encamped in a Wood,
and killing the General U, brought his Head to the King, who exceedingly
rejoiced at the Death of so great an Enemy, yet thought himself not obliged to
perform what the Proclamation had promised, as concluding it very unseemly for
a Beast to Marry a Woman: Which his Daughter hearing, urged the Sacredness of
the Edict, and of the King's Word, which ought not to be broke; and thereupon
she was Married to the Dog, by whom, in six years time she had six Sons and six
Daughters, who by Marrying one another, bred a Generation of Dog-like Natured
People.

But it is to be supposed, that this Fable was feigned by the Chinese, because
they accounted none to be Humane, which are not of their Country, or observe
their Laws.

Yet in the Journal of a Monk, written in the second Book of Navigation and
Travels, Collected by M. Gio Baptista Ramusio, we find this for the
confirmation of these Dogs.

The Tartars returning through the Wildernesses, came to a Country, in which
(as the Ruthens, which had been there, relate) they found a Generation of Wild
Women, who after they had been asked by several Interpreters what People they
were that Inhabited that Country, answered, That all the Women of that place
were of humane shape, but the Men like Dogs: And that upon this occasion,
whilst the Tartars stayed in this Country, the Dogs met together on one side
of the River, and leaped (being Winter) into the Water, and afterward roul'd
themselves in the Sand, which by the excessive cold, Froze upon them, and Armed
them with a kind of a Coat of Mail: This having done several times together,
the Tartars falling upon them, threw their Darts at them; but the Dogs running
amongst the midst of them, made a great slaughter among them, and drove the
Tartars out of the Country, and took Possession thereof. Thus far Baptista.

The Inhabitants of the eighth County Taiping, in the Province of Quangsi, are
by a Chinese Writer called Barbarians, because (having cast off the Chinese
Laws and Government) they go barefooted like Salvage People, and live without
Law, Rule, Order, or Decency, killing one another upon every slight occasion.

Also on the Mountains in the ninth County Cuncheufu, in the Province of
Kiangsi, there live many wild People, which (according to the Relation of the
Chinese Writers) live after a Salvage and Bestial manner.

Likewise on the Mountains in the Province of Queicheu inhabit a People, for
the most part Wild and untractable, for they observe not the Chinese Laws or
Customs, but live of themselves under several Governors of their own Elections:
They often Sally out upon the Chinese which live near them, sometimes forcing
them to a Peace, which at their pleasure they break again, never suffering any
that are not for their way of Living to come amongst them.

To reduce this Country to Reason, the Emperors have often sent Forces
thither, but with little success that ever was heard of.

Those of Queiyangfu, in the time of the Family Taiming, first applied
themselves to study the Learning and Customs of the Chinese, by which means
not a few of them have attained to the highest degree thereof.

The People of the second County Sucheufu, of the Province of Queicheu are
strong Limbed and Valiant, and withal, Courteous and Civil, yet have something
of Wild in their manner of Living; they go with their Hair loose, barefooted,
and the Soles of their Feet have contracted such a hard Callosity, that they
fear not to tread on the sharpest Stones, and most prickly Thorns.

Those of the third County, though somewhat of a Salvage Nature, yet they have
mixed therewith a kind of Clownish Civility.

The Mountaineers of the sixth County Tungganfu, in the Province of Queicheu,
were formerly the most Cruel and Barbarous People in all that Province, Proud
of themselves, Fraudulent, and having a Custom among them to kill their old
People; but have of late, by their conversing with the other Chinese, learnt
something of Morality.

The City Hinghoa, in the Province of Fokien, is famous for the Industriousness
of its Inhabitants, in Learning, Arts, and ingenious Faculties.

The Inhabitants of the seventh County Yancheufu, of the Province of Kiangnan,
are much inclined to Lasciviousness.

The Northern Mountaineers, as in the County of the Garrisoned City Putting, of
the Province of Queicheu, trouble not themselves with Learning, Manners, or
Civility, every one doing what they please, living without Laws or Government.

The Inhabitants of the Mountain near the Garrisoned City Lungli have by their
Conversing with the neighboring Chinese learned several of their Customs; yet
going always Armed delight in War and the noise of Arms.

Those of the Province of Kiangsi are politic and subtle, and many of them
attain to the highest degree of Literature, and thereby are raised to great
Preferments.

The Inhabitants of the City Sucheu in the Province of Nanking, are exceedingly
inclined to dainty and delicious Fare, and love the Art of Candying and
Preserving in Sugar.

All the Inhabitants of the ninth County Ningpofu in the Province of Chekiang,
are great lovers of salt Meats, whereupon this proverbial Sentence passes upon
them, That they cannot rot after Death, being so much sa^ted during Life.

The People of the Province of Iunnan, by reason of their Neighborhood to
India, participate with them in their Customs; and the main thing wherein they
differ from the rest of the Chinese is this, namely, that whereas in all parts
of China besides they Lock their Women up in their Houses, and suffer them not
to be spoken with or seen by any Man, or ever to come out of their Houses into
the Streets, here the Women walk abroad upon their occasions as in Europe. They
exceed the rest of the Chinese in Courage and Valor, being never daunted at
the Engaging of an Enemy, and training up their Elephants to War. They are
friendly, Courteous, and Civil to Strangers, and more tractable to embrace the
Christian Religion than any of the Chinese besides.

On the North-side of the fourth County Cuihungfu in the Province of Iunnan,
before the Tartars coming into China in the time of the Family Iuen, dwelt a
People called Kinchi, that is, Golden-Teeth, because they used to cover their
Teeth with thin Plates of Gold; which is also a Custom amongst those of the
eighth Garrisoned City in the same Province.

The Inhabitants of the twelfth County Xunningfu in the same Province, are very
barbarous and inhumane; some of them take pleasure to make their Teeth black;
others Paint several Images on their Faces, rubbing in their Skin, first
pierced with a Needle, a kind of black Color.

The Inhabitants of the first Garrisoned City Kiocing of the same Province, are
good Husbandmen, but very litigious, often spending in Law that which they
have labored for the whole year, and all for a trifle; yet they are not the
only People possessed with this fond humor, but may be paralelled in this
Nation, especially in some parts of Wales.

The People of the second Garrisoned City Yaogan, in the same Province, are
(according to the Chinese Writers) prodigiously strong, and therefore delight
more in War than Peace.

The Inhabitants of the third Garrisoned City Cioking in the same Province, are
valiant, prudent, and stout People; they Fight generally with Bows and Arrows.

Though the Inhabitants of the sixth Garrisoned City Likiang, Extracted from
the ancient'st Inhabitants of China, do not fully observe the Chinese Laws,
because of their nearness to other People, whose Customs they have learned, yet
nevertheless they partly observe those of the Chinese: They are very much
addicted to Drinking and Jollity, spending whole Days and Nights in Singing,
Dancing and Revelling; they are good Horsemen, and use Bows and Arrows.

It is scarce to be believed, how strictly the Women (I mean those of high
Quality, for the ordinary Women walk the Streets) are kept through all China,
from the natural jealousy of the People: Their Residences are made after such
a manner, that they cannot see nor be seen by others: They are seldom permitted
to go out, except on extraordinary occasions, and are carried in Sedans made
for that purpose, and so closely shut, that there is not the least Crevise
through which they may be seen. Moreover, they spend their time in breeding
little Dogs, Birds, and the like.

Characters and Languages.
THe Chinese have no Letters like the People of Europe, and other parts of the
World, which any way agree in a certain Order or Rule of an Alphabet, neither
have they any such thing as Vowels and Consonants, or other Literals that can
be joined to make Words of; but they have Characters, Signs, or Images, or what
you please to name them, in stead of the Letters of the Alphabet, for every
Word or Name which they speak has a certain Figure or Character, by which it
is expressed: This Figure consists in Strokes and Specks, which as they differ
in shape, so in signification one from another; they are joined without Art or
Method, as it were by accident expressing the Name or Thing which they design:
Therefore the Chinese use as many Figures or Characters as there are Things
which they would express.

The Chinese (says Trigaut) express not with any Letters of the Alphabet
their Language in Writing, as almost all other People on the Earth, but draw as
many Figures or Characters as there are Words and Things to signify; so that
if any one would Translate a Dictionary out of English into their Language, he
would need as many several Characters as there are Words. As to what concerns
the number of these Characters, though according to the greatness of any
Subject, the more of them are required, yet they have brought them all within
the compass of seventy or eighty thousand; all which stand written in order in
a Book called Haipien: besides which there is another much shorter (which
teaches to Read, Write, and Understand their Books) which at most contains not
above eight or ten thousand. If in their Reading they chance to meet with a
Word which they understand not, then they turn to their great Dictionary, like
one who learns the Latin or French Tongue; by which we may conclude, that the
more Characters the Chinese know, the more Learned they are accounted:
therefore it must be one of an exceeding Memory, that will be reckoned a
Scholar amongst them.

Kircher tells us, That at this day none are accounted amongst the number of
the eminently Learned, which have not attained to the perfect knowledge of
eighty thousand Characters, though any one that will learn to speak the
Language has enough of ten thousand: Neither do the Chinese themselves know
all these Characters, the vulgar Person learning no more than he thinks may
serve him in his way of Trading.

In like manner says Trigaut, He that knows ten thousand Characters, has
obtained those which are commonly used in Writing.

Martinius makes the learning of the Chinese Characters so hard, that to know
them thoroughly requires a whole Age, for he affirms, that he spent ten years in
the learning of them, and yet at the expiration of that time, he had attained
no farther knowledge of them, than to understand a small Prayer Book.

It is strange to consider, that the Chinese make the great distinction of
their vast number of Characters by no more than nine Specks, by adding or
leaving out any of which, another signification is produced: As for Exaample,
one straight Stroke thus -- signifies One; the same Stroke, cut through with
another like a Cross in this manner signifies Tzi, or Ten; another being added
to the bottom of the Cross signifies Thou, or Earth; and with a third on the
top Vam, that is, King; one Speck being added on the left-side of the uppermost
Stroke signifies Iu, or Gu, that is, A Pearl; and so all kinds of Minerals,
Plants, Animals, etc. are (...) by the different position of Specks and Lines.

But this Rule, says Semedo, is not always certain* for the Chinese not only
join several Lines unto one Figure, but make diverse of their Significations by
joining two or more whole Figures together; so that a square Figure which
signifies (...) Sun, joined to another, signifies the Moon, and being added to
a third of the same form, expresses Min, that is, (...): To signify a Door
they draw a Figure like it, which they call Muen; and to signify the Heart, a
Figure like a Heart: To express Melancholy, or Sadness, the^ put the Character
which expresses a Heart in the middle of that of a Door, as if the Heart found
it self oppressed in the entrance of a narrow Door: And because Sorrow has its
seat in the Heart, they always add the Figure of a Heart to all those
Characters with which they express any kind of sorrowful Object or
Consideration.

These Characters are generally used, not only in ^ll the fifteen Provinces of
the whole Empire of China, but also in Iapan, Corea, Cochinchina, Tungking,
Camboya, and Sionei, though every Country has a peculiar Language. By this
means the Iapanners, Cochin-Chineses, Chinese, Coreans, and Tungkingans, can
understand one another Books, as being all written in the forementioned
Characters; yet cannot speak with, nor understand one another: In like manner
as the Figures of Arithmetic are used all Europe over, and understood by all
the several Nations thereof, yet the words with which they are expressed differ
very much; for these Chinese Characters are signs of the things which they
signify, and are by all in general understood: therefore it is one thing to
know the Chinese Characters, and another to speak their Language; insomuch that
a Foreigner endu'd with a great Memory, may by often reading the Chinese Books,
attain to the highest degree of their Learning, though he cannot Discourse
with, nor understand them.

These Chinese Characters seem to be of the same Original with the People
themselves; for (according to some of their ancient Histories) they have been
in use amongst them three thousand seven hundred and thirty years. Many ascribe
the first Invention of them to the Emperor Fohi, who (...) to Reign Anno 2952.
before the Incarnation, and (according to Kircher) three hundred years before
the Flood. But it is to be observed, that the old Chinese Characters differed
much from the modern; for the first Chinese took not their significations from
joint Figures, but, from the representation of natural things, as Birds,
Beasts, Insects, Fishes, Herbs, Trees, Minerals, and the like; ^y which, put in
order, and joined several ways, the Chinese at first declared their Thoughts
and Apprehensions.

When they treated of fiery things, they used (...) and Dragons, which being
placed in several orders, had such and such significations; and in expressing
aerial things, they made Figures of Birds; and for watery, Fishes; for earthly
things* Beasts, Plants, Trees and Leaves; for Stars, Specks and Circles; and in
like manner for things of another nature.

The forms of the ancient Chinese Characters were of seventeen sorts: The
first, invented by the Emperor Fohi, consisted (according to their Chronicles)
of Serpents and Dragons; wherefore the Book which he writ of Astronomy is
called The Book of Dragons: In it are Serpents strangely twisted together, and
in several forms, after the manner of those things which they signify
therewith: But at this day few Chinese understand these Characters, Age having
worn out the knowledge of them.

The second sort are taken from (...) belonging to Hu^bandry, joined together,
and were first used by the Emperor Xin, in his Book of Agriculture, or
Husbandry.

The third sort consists in the placing of several Feathers of the Bird
Tunghoahang, which is by them accounted the best Bird that flies. It is said
that the Emperor Xanghoang used the^e Characters in his Book of Birds.

The fourth sort consists of Shell-fishes and Insects.

The fifth, of Roots and ^erbs.

The sixth, of the Feet of Birds, which the Emperor Choanghang used.

The seventh, being an Invention of the Emperor Iao, consists of Turtles.

The eighth, of Fowls.

The ninth and tenth, of Herbs.

The eleventh, of Representations of the Planets.

The twelfth and thirteenth were formerly called The useful Characters of Laws
and Constitutions.

The fourteenth consist of Characters expressing Rest, Joy, Knowledge, Light,
and Darkness.

The fifteenth, of Fishing.

The sixteenth cannot be read nor understood.

The seventeenth and l^st sort was used for Superscriptions on Letters, Deeds,
Bonds, and the like.

But the modern Chinese grown wiser by Experience, and finding a great
confusion and trouble in the representing of so many Beasts, Plants, etc.)
invented a far shorter way of joining Specks and Lines together.

THe Language of the Chinese is, for its antiquity, by many accounted for The
Language of the Chinese.
one of the seventy two Tongues of the Tower of Babel: But certain it is
(according to the testimony of their Books) that it has been in being for
three thousand six hundred years. It is not all one, but differing in the
several Kingdoms or Provinces which now make up that Empire.

Trigaut tells us, that ^very Province differs so much from another in their
Language, that they (...) understand one another, notwithstanding they use the
same Books (...) Characters.

The Inhabitants of the County Taipin in the Province of Quangsi, speak quite
another Language from the Chinese.

In like manner those of the seventh County Lipingfu of the Province of
Queicheu, speak a different Language, altogether unknown to the other Chinese.

In the Province of Fokien the Inhabitants use not one Dialect but every County
has a peculiar Speech, insomuch that the one cannot understand the other.

Those of the Province of Fokien, who speak a gross and ungraceful Language,
use in stead of N the Letter ^ for Nanking is by them called Lanking; the
Suburbs of Hoksieu or Focheu, Lanthai; which the Portuguese and Hollanders,
with whom they Trade, have followed.

Those of the second County Sucheufu in the Province of Queicheu, knew nothing
of any Letters formerly, though they expressed themselves by writing Figures on
Boards, but have lately learned the vulgar Characters.

Besides the several Dialects belonging properly to each Province, after the
reducing of them to one sole Empire, another Language was instituted, which was
made common through the whole Realm. This Language is by the Chinese named
Quonhoa or Quonthoa, that is, Court, or Pleading Tongue; because it is most
used at Court, by the Mandarins, Governors and Magistrates: It is also known by
the Name of The Mandarins Language, but is least of all used in the Province of
Fokien. This was done, because it happened oftentimes that all the Magistrates
were Foreigners or Strangers in the Province, where by the Emperors Order they
were placed, and that they might not be necessitated to learn a strange
Language, there was a general one Instituted in the whole Empire.

In this Language they not only try Causes, but all well bred People or
Strangers speak the same with the Natives in every Province, in the same manner
as the English, French, Italians, Germans, and other People use the Latin
Tongue through all Europe.

The Jesuits which are sent to China to promulgate the Christian Religion,
learn all of them this general Language, because those which belonged to each
several Province are neither useful nor elegant, nor spoken by People of
Quality, except in their Houses to their Servants, or in other Countries,
thereby to put them in mind of their Native Country. This Language is also
spoken by Women and Children, because long custom has conquered the difficulty
of learning it. Tradesmen speak the Language of their own Province; and though
they all understand the Mandarins Tongue, yet they speak it not.

This general Chinese Tongue is very brief and short, and though rich and
abounding in Characters above all other Languages, yet inferior to them in
scarcity of words; for the number of the words exceed not sixteen hundred, and
according to Semedo, not above three hundred twenty six. All the words end
almost in a Vowel, yet some few of them with M or N; and (which is remarkable
in this Language) there are no Dissyllables or Polysyllables, but all
Monosyllables, or words consisting of one syllable only, I mean all radical
and fundamental words, for Appellatives or Names of Places and Things, are
compounded of two or three words clapped together, as Tunghoafung of Fung, a
Bird, Hoa a Flower, and Tung the Name of the Flower: and herein it is
paralelled even by our English Tongue, whose fundamental words being originally
Saxon, are for the most part Monosyllable, as Tree, Stone, Hand, Eye, etc. It
has many Diphthongs, or double Vowels joined together in one syllable, I say
Vowels after our way of speaking, meaning the force of Vowels; for Vowels are
no used by the Chinese, but as every thing, so every word has its peculiar
Sign: wherefore* it may be asked, Are there so many Signs in so small a number
of words as the Chinese (...)? or, How can they with so few words express all
things which their thoughts comprehend? In answer hereof I say, That the
Chinese Language is very comprehensive, that is to say, it has few words, but
oftentimes one word signifies ten or twenty several things, which are not to be
distinguished but by the different sound and pronunciation in speaking, which
distinction is so small, that Strangers ^an scarce observe the same; insomuch
that one might say, this Language was rather Artificially invented, than
Naturally proceeding from the necessity of Discourse; therefore they that will
rightly understand the sense of the words, had need be as attentive to the Tone
in Speaking, as the Accent in Writing.

To make the Chinese Tongue the easier, (for it is very hard to learn) the
Jesuits have from the Method of Musical Notes, as Ut, Re, Mi, Fa, Sol, taught
to know the high and low Sounds which the Chinese observe in their Speaking:
To this purpose Jacob Pantoja first found out these five Signs, which written
over the Chinese words after the European manner, are thus expressed (...). And
by these five Marks of Sound, Foraigners learn the Language, though not without
great Pains and Study; partly, because of the manifold Characters of the words,
and partly, by reason of the difficulty of hitting upon the several Tones or
Sounds.

The first Sign of the five Sounds or Tones marked thus (...), agrees with Ut
in Music; and the Sound or Pronounciation is in the Chinese Tongue called Cho
Pim, as if they would say, The first agreeable Tone. The second Sign (...)
agrees with Re, in Chinese called Pim Xim, that is, A clear and even Voice. The
third Sign (...) agrees with Mi; this Sound in Chinese is called Xam Xim, that
is, High Voice. The fourth Sign (...) agrees with Fa, and is by the Chinese
named, Kiu Xim, that is, High Voice of the Goer. The fifth U agrees with Sol,
and is by the Chinese called Ge Xim, that is, Proper Voice of the Enterer.

According as any word written in European Letters is marked with these Signs,
it must be uttered in a different Voice or Sound, as it is written by the
Chinese with several Characters, and has also there its several
significations: As for example, the word Ia, written with European Letters,
according as it is marked with any' of the five Signs, signifies several
things, and must also be uttered with a difference of Sounds; for the Word or
Syllable Ia, with this Sign (...) signifies A Tooth; Ia^ with a strait Stroke,
A Voice; Ia with a sloaping Stroke toward the Left, Excellent; Ia with a
sloaping Stroke toward the Right, A Deafness; Ia with a Semicircle, He Goes.

In like manner, the Syllable Ko, is by the Chinese Ton'd ten several ways,
and each Tone has a peculiar signification; as also, each signification a
peculiar Mark, whereby it is distinguished from the other; so that no Language
in the whole world is so Univocal or containing so many several meanings under
one word as the Chinese; and the Marks that distinguish the significations of a
word by the Accent, are so many, that the difference of Sound can scarce be
discerned in all; insomuch, that not any one Book can be understood from a
Reader by the Auditor, an Ocular Inspection being absolutely necessary to
distinguish by the Marks the difference of the Sound, and by consequence, the
double sense of the words, which cannot be distinguished by the Ear; nay, that
which is more, it often happens in their Speaking, that when one cannot
understand the others sense, notwithstanding he speaks plain and distinctly, he
is not only necessitated to repeat his Discourse, but also to write it; and if
they chance not to have Pen or Paper, they do it with Water on a Table, or with
their Fingers in the Air, or express the meaning with the Hand of the Auditor:
This happens most amongst the Learned and Eloquent part of the People, who
study to speak more exact and quai^t than ordinary, according as they write in
their Books.

The reason of the Univocalness of this Language seems to proceed from nothing
else, but that these People from ^ll Ages have endeavored more to write well
than speak well, because their best Language to this day consists in Writing
and not in Speaking; therefore it also happens, that Messages are not delivered
by word of Mouth, but in Writing, though it be in one and the same City; for
though this Language be very scanty of words, nevertheless, it is the
pleasingest and most ingenious of all others; for whereas in any action we
cannot express the manner of doing but in several words, the Chinese often
comprehend it in one word: As for example, the word Nien, among them signifies
Taking hold with two Fingers; Tzo, Taking hold with all the Fingers: In like
manner, we make several uses of the word Are, when we say They are a Bed, are
at Table, are at the Tavern; but the Chinese express the being and manner of
being in one word; we also say, The Foot of a Man, the Foot of a Bird, the Foot
of a Beast, never omitting to add the word Foot: But the Chinese to express
the Foot of a Man, say, Kio, that of a Bird, Cua, that of a four footed Beast
Thy.

The Chinese, considering they have no Alphabet, are accustomed from their
Infancy to express themselves by this way of signed Sounds, and very much
wonder how we of Europe can write down their Words in Latin Letters, and
pronounce the^ so plainly.

They use not the Sound of the Letter R. which they cannot Pronounce, nor ever
put two Consonants together, without a Vowel between; so that to this day they
call the Franks, Falankes, by whom perhaps, they, as well as the Moors,
understand all the People of Europe, except the Greeks.

A^ for the Language of the Tartars it is much easier to learn, seeming in some
measure to agree with the Persian, and having some Characters or Letters like
the Arabic.

The Alphabet of this Language is said to consist of sixty several Letters,
which may the rather be, because some of them have the force of Consonant and
Vowel joined in one, as La, Le, Li, Lo, Lu; Pa, Pe, Pi, Po, Pu.

In Reading they descend down-wards like the Chinese, and proceed from the
Right to the Left side, as anciently the Hebrews and other Easterly Nations,
and at this day the Arabians and Chinese.

FINIS.
CHINA AIMOEY QUEMOEY

On these Islands which are now become a Kingdom used the famous Pirates: Yquen
and Kocksinga to Resort

map

IMPERIUM SINICUM Quindicupartitum
Imperium Sinicum in XV Regna seu Provincias distributum una cum genuino situ
Vrbium Metropolitanarum, Montium, Fluminum, Lacum, caeterarumque rerum
consideratione dignarum.

map of China and Korea


