Imprimatur,

Carolus Alston, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domesticis.
April 6. 1686.
The True Nature of The Divine Law, AND Of Disobedience thereunto: IN Nine
Discourses, Tending to show, In the One, a Loveliness; In the Other, a
Deformity.


By way of DIALOGUE BETWEEN Theophilus and Eubulus.

By SAMUEL DV-GARD, Sometime Fellow of Trinity-Colledge in Oxon; Now Rector of
Forton in Staffordshire.

Formam quidem ipsam, and tanquam faciem Honesti vides; quae, si oculis
cerneretur, mirabiles amores excitaret Sapientiae. Plato, apud Cic. Offic. l. 1.

Quis est tam dissimilis homini, qui non moveatur offensione Turpitudinis? Cic.
de Fin. l. 5.

London: Printed for Jos. Watts, at the Sign of the Angel in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVII.

To the Worshipful Edwin Skrymsher OF AQUALATE ESQVIRE.
SIR,
THE Relation, which I stand unto you in, having been made Signal, at the
first, by your very great Uprightness and Generosity, and ever since, fostered
by your no less Love and Bounty, I have often wished I could add one more
Ornament to it, by making it remarkable in its Gratitude. Could I thus do, that
Fidelity, at least, and Incorruptness in Patronage, which is the more your Own,
by being so little the Virtue of the Age, might, in hopes of like Success, be
by Others in like manner Practiced. But I am very sensible how far, in this
respect, my Power is short of my Desires: And yet I need not be overmuch
concerned that so it is; since a Conscionable Endeavor to discharge mine
Office is by You esteemed the best Requital: And, in this, I trust, I shall
never, to my Ability, be wanting. However, Sir, at the Persuasions of some,
whose Judgment I much esteem, (if their Kindness to me has not something
biased it,) I have presumed to offer these Discourses, (such as they be,) as a
public Acknowledgment of your many Favors. I can say little for them, but
that I meant them Piously; and for their Subjects sake, I do not altogether
Despair of their being accepted: Which, it may be, they the rather will be,
because they are, in part, the effect of that Sacred Function, in which your
free and unsought Munificence gave me the first Encouragements. Neither, by
being your Peculiar, would I have them Unserviceable to the good of Others more
at large; of which, yourself both have been, are, and yet further will be, so
Worthy an Instrument. It is too manifest, Sir, that the most do look upon the
Divine Laws as a Task, and have a secret Grudging while they Obey them; such as
a Slave perceives under a Burden, which he bears with Discontent, and would
fain throw off. I am therefore not unwilling to contribute that little which I
can, to the Curing of this Malady; by making out unto Men, that our Saviors
Commands have in them what may strongly allure our Love; as being the highest
Accomplishment and Happiness of our Nature; and thereupon should be desired and
delighted in: And that the Violation of these Commands is a thing Foul and
Odious, as casting the greatest Stain and Deformity upon Men; and should
therefore be shunned and abhorred. I must confess, there may seem but little
need of such Treatises as This; because our Nation abounds with so many, and so
very good ones; and, I fear, their Number, with some, takes away from their
Value. But, considering that there is a Sphere, in which some Discourses will
be more Active than others, though of greater Worth; and that Acquaintance,
Good Will and Curiosity, will sometimes bid Take up and Read, when otherwise the
Book would have lain closed and untouched; I could not tell, but it might be so
with This. And I would hope, that the Favor which I have found in these parts,
and Your Name prefixed, will, through Gods Blessing, make way for, and give a
more kindly Operation unto, the ensuing Dialogue. And while the Age is, at the
present, so hotly engaged in the Disputing and Controversial Way, possibly,
Sir, a quiet and peaceable Discourse, of things that highly concern all, may be
thought not Unseasonable; whether, as an Admonition to some, who, intent upon
what they should righty Think, are less mindful of what they should religiously
Do; Or, as a Refreshment to others, who, weary of Contention, and Fearful of
the Event, find their chief Rest in God, and his Righteous Laws. The Names
which carry on this Dialogue have their Honors in Sacred Writ; and do import
by their Signification very Worthy Persons. And such I was willing they should
be; THIS a Lover of God; THAT a Pious and Good Instructor; that their Words
might sway the more with myself, when I should think it was not I, but They,
that Spoke; and that, with Others also, who should please to Read them, they
might bear a greater Authority than from Me they could have had. And though, I
doubt, they are much short of what they should be, yet the less Knowing, if
Attentive, will find what they may be informed by; and the more Understanding,
if Religious, what they will not utterly dislike. But, Sir, whatever the
following Sheets will be to Others, to yourself they are no more than a bare
Signification of Respect; seeing they can add little to your Knowledge, which
is large and extensive; and are not wanted by your Practice, which few have the
Heart to reach unto. It is, I know, more easy to You to Do worthy Actions,
than pleasing to Hear of them, when done: But I cannot, in Gratitude, as I
serve at the Altar, but, amongst many Others, take notice of One, viz. The
Honorary Respect you have showed to the Church, in freely giving up your
Impropriate Tithes, as an Addition to her Maintenance. I hope it will be
returned into your Bosom with large Advantage; since, by those Few that have
prevailed with themselves to do the like, it has been found a sure way for the
being Blessed. And if more, who have the Power, durst make the Experiment, I
question not, but They also would find it so to be.

That you may long Live, and have an Increase of Happiness with the Increase of
your Years, is the Prayer of,

Honored SIR, Your most Obliged and Humble Servant, SAMUEL DU-GARD.

The Contents of the Nine following Discourses.
The Contents of the First Discourse.
THE Occasion of the Discourse, What is to be understood by the Divine Law. The
Difference between the Law of Old, and That which was given afterward. The
Laws, which enjoined Duties toward God were such, as we would in Right Reason
wish should be toward a Prince and Lawgiver. Concerning some Laws which might
seem to have no real Goodness in them, but Cruelty rather: And others which
seemed to proceed from the Will of God merely as Supreme, without any Reason,
and consequently, without any Love to his Creatures. Of the Precepts which
require Fear, and are enforced upon the account that God is Terrible. How these
can consist with Love, which casts out Fear. The Laws which a Rational Man
would desire for the Welfare of Society, are those which are enjoined by God.
Such likewise are those that respect ourselves. Why the Law is called The
Ministration of Death by St. Paul. What he means when he says, He was alive
without the Law once; but when the Commandment came, Sin revived, and he died.
And how the Mosaic Law is termed A Yoke, which neither we nor our Fathers were
able to bear. P. 1.

The Contents of the Second Discourse.
THE Inducements that Christians have to Love the Divine Law. Love was the
moving cause of our Lord's becoming our Lawgiver. The Greatness of our
Lawgivers Person. All the troublesome Ceremonies of the Old Law are done away
by the Laws of our Lord; and this, not by his Will alone, but by the admirable
manifestation of his Goodness and Wisdom. How the Jews urging the
Everlastingness of their Law is from hence answered; and how their way of
Speaking is corrected, when they say our Lawgiver has vilified and destroyed
their Laws. Only such Laws are enjoined by our Lord, as have in them an
Intrinsic Goodness, or else are for Ends absolutely Good, and such as are
discernable by every one. Though the Jews had some Inferior Laws suited to
their Temper and Climate, which did the better fit them for the observance of
those Laws which were Moral, yet we have not the less reason to Love the Laws
of our Lord because they are all Good, without any mixture of such Inferior
Laws, which may be agreeable to different Climates where Christians Live, and
which may promote the Precepts of our Lord, are not by those Precepts excluded.
Christian Laws are such also as will, in our Obedience, much comply with our
particular Way and Temper. The Moral Laws, which were given to the Jews, are by
our Lord more fully and clearly given. The Laws that respect ourselves are
properly belonging io the New Testament: At least, are there only directly and
openly enjoined. The Objection answered, that so far is the Christian Law from
being more clearly given, that it requires us to admit of some things relating
to Faith, which no one living can conceive how they should be. The
Reasonableness of making our Understandings to yield to our Faith. P. 35.

The Contents of the Third Discourse.
THE Severities of the Christian Laws are not unreasonable; neither do they
reduce us to such straights, as cannot be gone through without a great deal of
uneasiness, if at all. The Design of our Lord is not to beat down our Natural
Inclinations and Appetites, but to rectify them. Our Dispositions, if well
managed, not averse from a right Improvement. The Laws of Christ do not dash
the pleasure of Conversation, by threatening idle Words with the Day of
Judgment. The Loving of Enemies, while they persist to be injurious, is in
itself not unmeet, but highly equitable, in case the History of our Redemption
be true. Fasting and Abstinence not unreasonable; nor the parting with Estates
and Lives for the asserting of the Gospel. From the Laws of Christ we have a
fair way for the Pardon of all Sins. What the Law of Faith requires of us. How
much it is different from the Old Law. What the Law of Repentance is. Too many
make Faith and Repentance to stand in opposition to the other Laws of our Lord.
How the Laws being done away, which was Engraven on Stones, is to be
understood. Repentance for Sin, cannot without the greatest Absurdity be
wrested to the further and more safe committing of Sin. The Examples of the
Thief on the Cross, and of the Laborers in the Vineyard at the Eleventh Hour
considered, none of the Divine Laws unsuitable to one another. These Laws of
themselves are grievous unto none. As they have relation only to Civil Society,
and the welfare of Men in this World, they do far surpass those of the most
noted Lawgivers; they by no means do favor the Opinion, that Right of
Possession is Founded in Grace. And that it is Lawful to resist Sovereign
Princes in the Maintenance of True Religion. They make the Man truly beautiful
within. P. 66.

The Contents of the Fourth Discourse.
GEneral Motives relating to these Laws altogether. To the Conscionable
Observance of them Eternal Rewards are promised; yet Earthly ones are not
excluded. For the securing of our Obedience, Eternal Punishments are threatened
after Death to the neglect of these Laws. The Constituting such Punishments is
no more than what is meet to be done. Stronger Assistances are afforded for the
Performance of these Laws than under Moses there were. Most Loving Invitations
and Affectionate Expressions are joined with them. We have no reason to
complain, that there are not now under the Gospel-Law, those Visible
Expressions of Gods Power and Presence, as under the Old Law there were.
Particular Motives relating to these Laws singly and apart: Such as are wholly
peculiar to the Gospel, or else are there more clearly and convincingly urged
than ever they were before. It is impossible, there should be any True
Happiness without these Laws. From the inward Excellence of them, and those
admirable Motives annexed to them, there is a substantial Proof of their
Divinity and Truth. No Man has ever deserved to be so much honored among, Men
as our Lord has done. Those who faithfully give up their Names unto him, have
the Precedence of all others. How it comes to pass, that since the Law is so
good, Assistances so great, and Motives so taking, there should be so many
Disobedient Ones. P. 114.

The Contents of the Fifth Discourse.
THough the Generality of Men be Wicked, and, by occasion of these Laws being
given, shall suffer the greater Torments hereafter, yet it would not thereupon
have been better, that these Laws should not have been given. The impious folly
of those Men who are willing to flatter themselves with God's being so much a
God of Mercy as that he will not destroy them though they walk contrary to his
Laws. An Explication of, I am the Light of the World. Why Miracles were
confined to the first Ages of the Church. That Prophecy made good, viz. The
Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, etc. The great Goodness of God in making these
Laws to reach so wide as the whole World. His great Wisdom and Mercy in putting
these his Laws into Writing, and enjoining the frequent Reading and Preaching
of them. The Reasonableness that these Laws should endure without Abrogation or
Change so long as the World shall stand. The great expectation which was of
this our Lawgiver for so many Ages, and, in every respect, his answering of it,
may prevail much for Men's Obedience to his Laws. The Righteousness and Goodness
of these Laws will manifest themselves to those who are sincerely Obedient. P.
150.

The Contents of the Sixth Discourse.
NOt a few think themselves secure in their actings, if they can show, that
some good Men in Holy Writ, or some well accounted of since, have done the
like. Examples of Good Men to be imitated no further than they have the Laws of
Christ for their Rule and Warrant. They can of themselves lay no Obligation
upon us. The Holy Men we read of in Scripture, were not sent into the World to
be a Rule to all Others in the Things they acted. The Uncertainty of Examples
very great. Their Insufficiency. None of the Actions of our Blessed Lord, from
his Example merely, and without a Law, did lay any Obligation upon us to
Imitate them. The Laws of Christ reach to all Moral Actions. No Examples of
Goodness beyond what is included in those Laws. Inferences concerning the
Examples in Holy Writ. In those things where the Law of God is Silent, Prudence
is to be our Guide. Examples, though of themselves they lay no Obligation upon
us, are yet of use. Those which bear the Image of the Laws of Christ, are given
us for Incentives and Encouragements of our Obedience. When Divine Laws are
questioned as to their Sense, Examples, upon occasion, may be Interpretations
of them. By Examples we may be instructed to do our Duties in a decent and
becoming way. Decency added unto Sincerity may make its reward the greater.
Examples are Registered in Holy Scripture for the Honor of those, whose they
were. Our Condition the more sure, than it would have been, if we had had none
in whose Steps we might tread. By comparing Examples with our Rule, we shall
quickly find, whether they will hold Good for our Practice or no. P. 175.

The Contents of the Seventh Discourse.
COncerning the Divine Law, as taken in a larger Sense. Of the Historical part
of Scripture; particularly of the Creation. All other Opinions concerning the
Being of the World are cold and unaffecting. Of the Fall of Man. It gives Light
to many things; which otherwise we should never have known the reason of. The
sad effects of our Fall are in great measure corrected by God's Mercy, and made
Comfortable to us. Many things in the dark, and mingled with falsities in
profane Authors, we may from hence more clearly discern. Sacred History shows
forth God's immediate Hand; and plainly tells us, that he punished and
rewarded, for such and such reasons. Of the History of our Redemption. How
wonderful it is; and what a Sacredness runs through all the Circumstances of
our Lord's Conception, Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension. The
great evidence of these things. Of the Prophetical part of Scripture.
Especially of those Prophecies relating to our Blessed Savior. As Divine Truth
is eminently seen in all of them; so the quick and various workings of
Providence, for the fulfilling of some of them, are very delightful. The
Predictions of the Heathen Oracles much different from these. The Sibylline
Prophecies of suspected Credit. Of the Adhortative part of Holy Writ. God has
used the most Taking words for the prevailing with Men for Obedience. In the
Gospel there is nothing wanting, that may work upon the Soul of Man. Of the
Devotional part of Sacred Scripture. It consists of such Services as were fit
for Men to pay unto their God; and needed not Secrecy to shelter them from an
Honest Ear, or Chaste Eye. Devotion raised to a much greater perfection, by
having our Lord and the Holy Spirit so nearly concerned in it. Those persons
quite mistake what they read in Sacred Scripture, who find a pleasure therein
without any respect to the Divine Law, properly as such. What we are to think
of those, who are conscientiously Obedient to the Divine Law, but yet find not
that Delight therein, which Earthly things do frequently give them; and who
hereupon are very apt to interpret their Love to God's Precepts to be
unsincere, and such as will be rejected. The great reasonableness and Benefit
of Holy Meditation. P. 210.

The Contents of the Eighth Discourse.
DIsobedience is a Pollution. It brings Disorder into a Man. It tends to make
the Almighty to minister to his Creatures in the vilest Offices. How God cannot
be made to serve, How he may. He is pleased in Holy Writ to speak after the
manner of Men, that so He may condescend to our Understandings, and excite our
Affections. How He is made to serve in His Holy Name. How in His Works. The
Creation sensible of this Slavery, and God very much displeased with it.
Disobedience of an Extensive Nature. It affects a kind of Eternity. It Is highly
Disingenuous. God necessitates none to Disobedience. Why He will not force Men
into Obedience. Why he generally cuts them not off. P. 257.

The Contents of the Ninth Discourse.
THe Plea of those is vain, who say, they never sinned maliciously against the
Almighty; nor wished his Greatness and Power to be less. The Difference betwixt
Rebellion against God, and that against a Temporal Prince. Disobedience a
defilement in whomsoever it is. Not the same Pollution in all Sins. What the
Sins of Good Men are; and how known to be theirs. The Sins of wicked Men of a
deep Dye; wherein they differ from those of pious Men. The Difference between
wicked Men; How, of the worst sort, some are more open, some more secret, in
their Sins. How the Sins of the less evil sort are to be measured. The same
fairness of Converse not equally innocent unto many. A Sin may be a pardonable
one to some, when the very same, to the Eye and Opinion of Men, will not be so
to others. What we are to think of the Heinous Sins of Good Men, Registered in
Holy Scripture. No reason from them for wicked Men to think better of their own
Sins. God will not esteem the Sins of his Children, which are in themselves as
great as, and the same with, the Sins of other Men, to be therefore the less,
because they are committed by those who are his Children. How to make a
Judgment of our own Sins. P. 288.

ERRAT. Page 282. lin. 21. read them for him.

THE TRUE NATURE OF THE Divine-Law, AND OF DISOBEDIENCE thereunto, etc.
The Contents.
THE Occasion of the Discourse, What is to be understood by the Divine Law. The
Difference between the Law of Old, and That which was given afterward. The
Laws, which enjoined Duties toward God were such, as we would in Right Reason
wish should be toward a Prince and Lawgiver. Concerning some Laws which might
seem to have no real Goodness in them, but Cruelty rather: And others which
seemed to proceed from the Will of God merely as Supreme, without any Reason,
and consequently, without any Love to his Creatures. Of the Precepts which
require Fear; and are enforced upon the account that God is Terrible. How these
can consist with Love, which casts out Fear. The Laws which a Rational Man
would desire for the Welfare of Society, are those which are enjoined by God.
Such likewise are those that respect ourselves. Why the Law is called The
Ministration of Death by St. Paul. What he means when he says, He was alive
without the Law once; but when the Commandment came, Sin revived, and he died.
And how the Mosaic Law is termed A Yoke, which neither we nor our Fathers were
able to bear.

DISCOURSE the First.
THEOPHILUS. I Have often thought, Eubulus, that one of the greatest Pleasures
of a Man's Life is to be found there, where Two Faithful Friends enjoy one
another in Ingenuous and Profitable Discourses: Communicating what they find to
have been most taking with themselves; and by united Thoughts and Searches
discussing some Truths, which otherwise would not so well have been known.


EVBVLVS. I Suppose there are none whose Souls are any whit refined, but will
readily assent to what you say, Theophilus. And I am persuaded that though his
Expression be very high, he yet spoke with a true Sense of Discursive
Friendship, who said; Cum una mehercule Ambulatiuncula, atque uno Sermon
nostro, omnes fructus Provinciae non confero, Cic. I prefer one Walk, and one
Discourse of ours, before all the Honor and Income of my Province.


Theoph. What relish Honors and Incomes have with others, I know not, and am
little solicitous to know: But sure I am, I seem to myself not to want them,
while I have what I speak of; which, I see, is no less esteemed by You also.


Eubul. The Converse of a Faithful Friend is never otherwise than pleasant to
me: But then I judge it most to be valued, when by his Words I am made not only
the more knowing, but the better: Having a sacred kind of Warmth raised within
me, by which I am more enabled to DO those Duties which are incumbent on me,
and to SVFFER those Evils which are so frequent in the World; and which I must
not expect to be altogether freed from.


Theoph. I thank you for what you now say; because if I shall ask some such
Discourses from you, (which I from the first have designed to do,) you cannot
deny me. And I should account it a great Pleasure hereafter (when I possibly
shall walk these Fields alone,) to remember, that under this Tree I learned
such Knowledge; under that, was instructed in such a Virtue: Here, I discerned
how little these outward Things are to be trusted in; There, how reasonable it
is to submit to the Divine Will; and, in every place, that I both had, and
rightly made use of, an Understanding and True Friend.


Eubul. You may be confident, I will not deny you any thing which shall tend to
the promoting of such an Innocent and Virtuous Pleasure. And I the rather shall
yield to you in what you desire, because I am sure it will be mine own, more
than your, Advantage: Having sufficiently experienced, that many things well
spoken by others, have been Hints to you of deeper Enquiries, and more grateful
Discourses.


Theoph. If you have any such Opinion of my Freeness, (which I am endebted to
my Friend if he will kindly accept of,) I will promise that you shall not
complain as if it were less to you, than to others. And for a Proof hereof, I
will take the boldness to propose the Matter to be discoursed of: Which, unless
you shall think otherwise, shall be concerning The True Nature of the Divine
Laws; which, as I conceive, does consist, not merely in the Excellence which
they have in Themselves, but in another Excellence also, viz. That Loveliness
(if I may be allowed to use the word,) which they carry in them in respect of
us.


Eubul. Your Conception of their Nature is no more than just; and a better
Subject you cannot find out: Unto which I shall the more willingly speak what I
can, because, if we may make a Judgment of those Laws from the usual Practice
of Men, either there is not the Loveliness, you speak of, in them; or if there
be, (as certainly in the highest manner there is,) it is very much slighted.


Theoph. It Is too true that so it is. And therefore I hope it will by Him, who
sees in secret, be accounted as some Reverence and Respect showed unto them,
if, when they are so little observed abroad, we shall endeavor to search into
their Perfections in private: Especially, since for this End we shall do it,
that our Love to them may be the greater. And truly, Eubulus, the Royal
Psalmist's Expression of so great Love to the Divine Law gave the Occasion of
my now mentioning this Subject. For, reading those words, O how I love thy Law!
It is my Meditation all the day, methought I felt my Soul more than a little
touched with them: They seeming to proceed from a more than ordinary Affection
in that good King.


Eubul. I do not wonder it was so with You, who, I know, keep your Heart soft
and tender; and thereby fitted for right Impressions from the Holy Scriptures.
But your saying that those words seemed to proceed from a more than ordinary
Affection, does not reach the thing home. They not seemed only, but really did
come from an Heart full of Love to God's Laws.

And indeed, Theophilus, I think it no hard matter to discern a true Passion
from one that is so only in show. This later will betray itself in something or
other, which, by a Judicious Eye, will easily be perceived: While the other
carries its Evidences along with it; and, without scruple, is presently owned
as genuine and sincere.

And surely no true Affection can be more convincingly expressed than this
King's was to the Divine Precepts. His saying, O how I love thy Law! is to me
no less than if he had said, He could not declare how much he loved it. His
Love to it was greater than what his Words could arise unto: It being only
comprehensible to his Understanding, and the inward Sentiments of his Soul;
yea, almost too big for his Heart to contain. Thus much yet he could say, (if
that might any way show forth the greatness of his Love,) God's Law was his
Meditation all the day: His Thoughts were continually taken up in it.


Theoph. If I had questioned the greatness of the Psalmist's Love unto it, I
assure you, Eubulus, I should not have been so much affected with his Words.
For according to that Rule, Si vis me flere, dolendum est Primum ipsi tibi; A
Passion would not over quickly be stirred up in me by him, who I should think
was himself insensible.

But that we may not mistake one another in our following Discourse, it will be
requisite to know, what is here meant by the word Law; it being capable of more
than one Signification. Pray, therefore, Eubulus, let me have your sense of it.


Eubul. By the Law of God, I presume every one understands the Will of God,
which he in his Word has declared: But then, because part only of that, which
we now acknowledge to be the Word of God was then written, by the Law here is
meant the Law given by Moses; and that part of it especially which is Moral:
Although the Judicial for the Justice and Prudence of it; and the Ceremonial
for its Mysteriousness, are not wholly to be excluded from the Law we speak of;
nor yet whatever else is contained in Holy Writ.


Theoph. You rightly say, what the word Law imports as spoken by our Psalmist;
God's Will being written, at that time, no further than as it made up the
Jewish Economy. As it has been manifested since, it has relation to Men in a
far wider sense, wheresoever planted upon the Face of the Earth. Yea, even
those Laws of Moses, which are retained in the Evangelical Dispensation, cease
to bind as they were given by Moses, and are Obligatory now from another
Lawgiver Jesus Christ. But yet still they are to be acknowledged God's Laws;
and we may even now use these words, O how I love thy Law! Therefore, Eubulus,
I desire you will show me these things. 1. What the Inducements were to this so
great Love in David, and other holy Men of old, to the Divine Laws. 2. What the
Inducements are which we Christians have to love them.



Eubul. I see, Theophilus, the greater share of Discourse must lie upon me; but
you will have it so; and to my power I will obey you.

As to the Inducements, which David and other holy Men of old had to love the
Divine Laws, they seem to me to arise partly from its pleasing God to give
those Laws; and partly from the Excellency of the Laws themselves.

In relation to the former, I must confess that the Nature of Men seems
necessarily to require, that Laws should be given unto them. For it would have
been highly irrational on Men's part not to acknowledge Him as their Lord who
gave them a Being; and it would be a very great Dishonor unto God, should we
think that They, whom he had made a little lower than the Angels, should be
left unregarded and lawless.

But yet when Men had fallen from their Obedience, and had in great measure
sullied that Law which was impressed on their Natures, it was certainly a very
great Favor, that God, in stead of throwing upon them deserved Punishments,
should choose a Numerous People to be his Peculiar; and should himself repair
that Law, thus obliterated within, by writing it in Tables, that it might be
discerned by the Eye.

Consider, Theophilus, the Greatness of Him who gives this Law; how he needs
not the Services of any Creature; and also the Ingratitude of Man, how he
disobeyed the most righteous Law in Paradise; where all the Love and
Observance, which possibly he could show, would not have been too much.
Consider this, I say, and the Law, if it carry but any favor along with it,
may certainly, for the sake of Him who gave it, be justly esteemed and loved.

Neither is the Time, wherein it pleased God to give these Laws, unworthy of
our Notice. So much was the Welfare of Mankind esteemed to depend upon the
Writing of Laws, that many Nations, in after Ages, contended for the Dignity of
being the first Authors thereof. And Greece especially, among the Privileges
which she boasts to have held forth to the rest of the World, reckons this as
one of the the chief. But the Honor of having the first Written Laws belongs
to the Hebrews alone, in comparison of whom (as Josephus against Apion
proves,) the Grecian Legislators were but of yesterday; and this Honor is
much heightened by God's owning the immediate Relation of a King unto them,
while he wrote these Laws. Now the Benefit of Laws, and the Glory of having
These given so early, and by such an Hand, being well understood, and rightly
valued by our Psalmist, (who himself was a Ruler and a King,) might well engage
his Love to them.


Theoph. I acknowledge the Inducement from God's thus giving the Law, to be a
very fair one. Pray, Eubulus, go on to the other you mentioned, viz. The
Excellency of the Laws themselves.


Eubulus. Take it in that pious King's own words, Psalm. 19. The Law of the Lord
is perfect, converting the Soul: The Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise
the Simple. The Statuts of the Lord are righteous, rejoicing the Heart: The
Commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the Eyes. The Fear of the Lord is
clean, enduring for ever: The Judgments of the Lord are true, and righteous
altogether: More to be desired are they than Gold, yea than much fine Gold;
sweeter also than Honey, and the Honeycomb. Moreover, by them is thy Servant
warned; and in keeping of them there is great reward.


Theoph. This is a very high Character indeed of those Laws; if there be (as I
doubt not but there is,) Truth in the whole.


Eubul. There is Truth in every tittle; And this will appear if we shall look
upon the Laws which require Duties to Him who is the Lawgiver; or to Those,
from one to another, or to Themselves, whom these Laws are given unto.

Pray tell me, Theophilus, what would you in Right Reason, and according to a
perfect Harmony of Things, have the Duties toward a Prince and Lawgiver to be?


Theoph. I would desire they should be Fear, Love, and Gratitude; and these
shown upon Grounds every way good. There being nothing more comely, than that
Subjects should be withheld from offending, by Fear; moved to all Obedience,
by Love; and excited to Acknowledgments of Benefits and Protection, by
Gratitude. More than These I mention not; because to These all others, I
suppose, may be reduced; and are, in effect, no other than Expressions of them.


Eubul. All these you shall find to be according to your Wish.

Your first Duty of Fear is in Deuteronomy. 6.13. (as also in sundry places more,)
Thou shall Fear the Lord thy God, and serve Him; and swear by his Name. Their
Fear is to be such as not to scare them from him, but they are to approach unto
him, and to do him Service. And for the deciding of Controversies, and
establishing of Truth, they are to use his Name solemnly in an Oath.

And a right good Ground there is for such a Fear, from the Power and Justice
of God; such as can, and will, inflict Punishments on them when they wilfully
transgress; and this to the utmost of their Deserts. The Destruction of the Old
World for its Impiety; The Overwhelming of the Egyptians in the Red Sea; The
Earths opening her Mouth, and swallowing up Corah, Dathan, and Abiram; and
numerous other Instances of the like Nature, were hereof Testimonies
sufficient. So that this Law of Fearing God, as a Prince and Lawgiver,
manifests itself to be built on a sure and lasting Foundation.

Your second Duty of Love is commanded Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall Love the Lord thy
God, with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Strength. It
is not to be a faint, and an unconstant Love; but one that is strong, and will
not fail: For the Loving of God with all the Heart, and Soul, and Strength,
does not only import the greatest vigor of Love, but the greatest duration of
it also. It must not be toward him Now, and anon quite off him; but the
greatest Length it must have, as well as the greatest Height.

And the strong Inducements to this Duty were well known from the Creation of
the World, which in the greatest Goodness was effected; from the Continuance of
God's Favor when Man had fallen; and from the manifold Loving Kindnesses which
he had showed to his People in general, and to Good Men in particular. And
therefore this good King could burst forth in earnest Exhortations to others, O
Love the Lord, all ye his Saints, for the Lord preserves the Faithful.

For your third Duty, viz. Gratitude, which you would have to be showed to a
Lawgiver, are all those Injunctions and Incitements of Praising God, which are
scattered almost every where in the Holy Scriptures: And no other Design had
those Sacrifices which were unbloody, than that Men should with Thankfulness
acknowledge God as Supreme. It Is said, Levit. 7.12. If he offer it for a
Thanksgiving; as much as to say, Thankfulness is to be offered unto God.

And what more prevailing Motive could there be for the Obeying this Precept,
than that, whatever was possessed was of God's Bounty? It was He that gave unto
the Israelites all that they looked upon as their Wealth and Property: And
therefore they were to honor the Lord with their Substance, and with the
First Fruits of their Increase. That is, They were in Gratitude to render back
something of what he had bestowed upon them. Not that he needs any thing of that
which Men can return unto him; but that their Thankfulness may be expressed in
what manner they are able to do it.

And this their Gratitude might be the greater, in that God secured his Gifts
unto them by his Laws; allotting to every Tribe its proper Portion; and
distributing that Portion amongst the Heads of particular Families: That
Discords at first might not hinder their Possessions; and that Avarice and
Ambition might not afterward break into them. For what was thus divided by Lot
(the Disposal of which was wholly from God,) was not to be alienated to other
Tribes, nor to other Families of the same Tribe. The Property of the Land
remained firm; only the Use and Incomes of it might be sold for a season; which
yet might at any time be redeemed; and if it were not redeemed, it necessarily
reverted to the ancient Owners at the Year of Jubilee. And hereupon Industry was
encouraged, and Peace established; and they sat under their (in a most proper
sense,) Own Vines and Fig Trees, none making them afraid.

Nay, God had not only bestowed upon the Seed of Jacob all that they enjoyed;
but even They themselves were also wholly from Him. In Kindnesses from Men the
Man is supposed to have a Being before: And that we are Men, and have an
understanding Soul, is not properly the Gift of any Man to us. But God has (as
I may so speak,) given us Ourselves as well as other things; and so our
Gratitude to Him is to be so much higher than to others, by how much Life and
Being are better than Possessions: Yea, by how much what we enjoy are more his
Gifts unto us, than they can be the Gifts of any others. For the Propriety of
them is for ever his; and his Providence will never part with the Guidance and
Direction of them. And therefore though others should give them us, it is his
Bounty through their Hands.

How then might Those in the Judaick State love the Laws, which have immediate
Relation to God as a Lawgiver? How full of Reason are they? Is there not the
greatest Beauty in them? Which, could it be discerned by our outward Eyes, who
is it could see and not love them? And surely what appears truly beautiful to
the Eye of the Soul ( i. e. to clear and deliberate Thoughts,) will call no
less for love, but much more: Intellectual Beauty being much to be preferred
before that which is Sensible.

And if I may once more Paraphrase this Expression of the Psalmist, O how I
love thy Law! Methinks it implies thus much. Nothing in the World is there
that shall hinder me from loving it. I prefer it before all other things,
however esteemed they be by Men. Were it left to my choice, whether I would
have any of these Laws repealed; or whether I would fear, love, and be grateful
unto God or not, though no Punishments should be inflicted if I did not do it,
there should not be one Law the less for my Duty toward my God and Lawgiver.
Nor should any thing, how pleasant or advantageous soever it be, buy off my
Observance of his Laws: So dear is their Practice, and so delightful their
Speculation to me.


Theoph. I see and acknowledge the Excellence of these Laws, and do really
think them worthy the high Character which this Royal Person gave; and the
great Love which he expressed to them.

But, Eubulus, of those Laws, which in their Observance had relation to God
immediately, Some were such as might seem to have no real Goodness in them, but
Cruelty rather. E. G. The shedding so much Blood, of Men, in Circumcision; of
Beasts, in Sacrifice. Others, though not Cruel, might yet seem to proceed (and
are by many thought so to do,) from the Will of God as Supreme, without any
discernible Reason for their being enjoined, and consequently without any Love
to his Creatures: For what Love can be seen there, where no Reason can be
assigned, why such and such things are commanded or forbidden? And who is it
then that can love such Laws? Of this sort were those that forbad the wearing
of Linen and Woollen in the same Garment; The Ploughing with an Ox and an Ass
together; And the use of such and such Creatures for Food; and others not
unlike unto these.

And then further; The Laws, that require Fear, are such as are enforced upon
the account that God is Terrible; And where so great Terribleness is at the
bottom of these Laws, how could they be so much loved? For (as the Apostle
says,) Perfect Love casts out Fear: And where Laws do require so much Fear,
the Love to them must needs be the less.

Pray, Eubulus, tell me, Are these to be excepted from our Psalmist's Love? Or
if not, how can it be truly said, he loved them?


Eubul. For the satisfying of you in these things; and first for your first
Objection, (to wit, That of those Laws which in their Observance had relation
unto God immediately, some might seem to have no real Goodness in them, but
Cruelty rather; as the shedding so much Blood; of Men in Circumcision, and of
Beasts in Sacrifice,) it will not, I suppose, be unmeet that these things be
considered.

1. That the Law, which has so much love here expressed to it, is (as I before
hinted,) to be understood of the Moral Law chiefly. For this has a real and
intrinsic Goodness in it. It is just and good that God, as he is our God and
Lawgiver, should be feared, loved, and have Gratitude showed to him.

2. As to those other Laws of Circumcision and Sacrifices, though, in
themselves considered, they are not Morally good; yet, considered with relation
to all the good things which God was pleased to bestow to the upright
Observance of them; and with relation also to the more severe Commands which he
justly might have laid upon Men; they have been comparatively good; i. e. they
showed forth the Favor and Kindness of God unto Men. And might they not then
be loved for the far greater Severities that might have been enjoined? and for
the many and great Temporal Blessings, which Obedience to them had brought as
its Reward? Surely they might.

3. The Significations and Effects, which these Laws had, were excellent.

Circumcision was Instituted by God as a particular Mark, by which the Jews
were sealed to be his People. Thus Genesis 17.11. it is called The Token of the
Covenant betwixt God and Them; to the intent that He should be their God, and
They his People. And this possibly (as a Learned Person observes,) might be the
reason, why God would have this peculiar Mark or Sign to be impressed upon them
to their pain; and to be admitted and undergone with a kind of shamefacedness;
viz. That Nature might not seem to dictate it; nor merely the Commands of Men
to enjoin it; but that it might be owned to proceed from God; who by such an
unthought-of Mark among Men, would seal that People unto himself. And though
Circumcision, by some of the Seed of Abraham, (Ishmael, and Esau, and the Sons
of Ketura,) was introduced into some other Nations afterward, yet this hindered
not the true Stock of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and their Posterity, to be
Marked for God's Peculiar. Insomuch, that, by way of reproach, they called the
Nations round about them, the Uncircumcised; and were back again themselves,
through Hatred and Derision, termed Verpi, Curti, and Recutiti, the Circumcised.

Neither was Circumcision destitute of something that might signify Him to be
holy and good from whom it came. It denoted a Purity and Cleanness to those who
bore it. Therefore it is said Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord thy God will Circumcise
thine Heart, and the Heart of thy Seed to Love the Lord thy God. Of which
import of the word, that Instance Lev. 19.23. is an unquestionable proof: When
ye come into the Land, ye shall count the Fruit thereof as Uncircumcised. Three
years shall it be as Uncircumcised unto you; it shall not be eaten of; but in
the fourth year, all the Fruit thereof shall be Holy, to praise the Lord withal.

And might it not also, Theophilus, highly commend Circumcision, that it was so
appositely ordered by God for the continual bringing to their Memory the
Promise which he made unto Abraham? Now, that Promise was concerning his Seed:
Which Seed, in the chief Acceptance, is to be understood of Christ; who is
therefore, in Holy Scripture, called the Promised Seed. Of this Promise
Circumcision was a Seal; and might be justly thought to be made on That part of
the Body; that, as often as they did Circumcise their Children, they might be put
in Mind of Him, who, as to the Flesh, was to come from the Loins of Abraham.

Wherefore, though Circumcision, in itself considered, might seem to carry very
little of Mercy and Goodness in it, but the contrary rather; yet, as it thus
entitled them the Peculiar People of God; directed them to an internal Purity;
and betokened That Seed, in which They and all the Nations on Earth should be
blessed, it might justly have a great Expression of their Love.

Look we in the next place upon Sacrifices. I will not here enquire into their
first Rise; whether Men began them of their own accord, and God afterward
improved them unto Mysterious Ends: Or, whether they primarily sprung from a
Divine Command, with immediate respect to those Ends. It is enough to our
present purpose to say, That some of them, under Moses, did import a great
Friendship and Familiarity from God unto Man; and the keeping House, as it
were, with them on Earth. Thus the Altar was his Table; and what was offered
thereon was as his Meat. And other things in the Tabernacle first, and
afterward in the Temple, betokened a Dwelling House: As Spoons, Bowls, Covers,
a Candlestick and its Lamps; and suchlike.

Some other of these Sacrifices were, in many cases, An Expiation for Sins
against God: And, by the Blood of the Beast thus slain, the Life of the
Offender was spared. For the Law, according to the strictest Sanction, makes
Death the Punishment of even the least Disobedience; as that of Deuteronomy. 27.26.
does show. And this Blood of Bulls and Goats, was, by the Will and Mercy of the
Lawgiver, so far a Real Expiation for these Sins, as that it did, in the
Apostle's words, Sanctify to the purifying of the Flesh.

But then yet further; These Sacrifices were Typical also, and did prefigure
the precious Blood of Jesus Christ, which was to be a more Noble Expiation for
the Sins of the World; even those Sins, for which there were allowed no
Sacrifices under the Law; and this, not only to the purifying of the Flesh, but
to the purging of the Conscience from Dead Works, to serve the Living God. And
although we may think, that this was not understood generally by the Jews, who
expected a Messiah that should be a Glorious Prince upon Earth; yet that it
was, in great measure, understood by some more eminently Religious among them,
and particularly by our Psalmist, who has many Prophesies tending this way,
and applied, by the Holy Ghost, in the New Testament, to this very thing, we
have no reason to doubt. And so, though the shedding of Blood in Sacrifice
might seem to have nothing of good in it, (and indeed God himself is said not
to delight in the Blood of Bullocks and Lambs; which he could not be said to
do, had it any Essential Moral Goodness in it,) yet as these Sacrifices
betokened God's Dwelling among them; and by their being slain, the Lives of Men
were spared; and also his Blood presignified which should be shed for the Sins
of the World, it might well have this Expression, O, how I love thy Law!

Neither let the shedding of Blood be Objected by any, as a want of Mercy in
these Laws to those Brutal Creatures, whose Blood they required to be shed; and
disagreeing to that Title which in Holy Writ is given unto God; to wit, The
Preserver of Beast as well as of Man. There are, Theophilus, who, by all means,
will have these Creatures to be mere Machins, altogether destitute of Sense.
And, were it thus, there would, in reality, be no occasion to move any question
concerning these Laws, in this respect. But till Men are convinced that Brutes
are thus insensible, and that, notwithstanding all the signs of pain when they
are wounded, there yet really is no pain to them, (which will never be
generally believed; and none can be blamed if it be not,) this conceit will, in
the present case, stand in no stead at all. Nay, the falseness of it, may, from
what we but now said, be fully evidenced; viz. That the Blood of the Beast, as
being his Life, was to go for the Life of the Offender, (there being no
Remission without Blood, which is the Life,) and also, that thereby the Death
of Christ was Typified; a Nobler Expiation than the Death of Bulls and Goats;
neither of which could fairly be said, were there no real Death to the Beast.

But laying aside such an uncouth and extravagant Imagination, we may with
Sobriety, and on good Grounds, affirm; That God, who made the Creatures, might,
without infringing his Goodness, command what he pleased concerning them; for
they were his Property. And if he indulged unto Men such variety of them to be
slain for their Food, he might surely be allowed some sorts of them to be slain
for his own Worship. Especially, since this way, through his infinite Goodness,
they were more useful to Man's Welfare, than either while they were killed for
Food, or kept alive for Service. In other cases God had taken care by his Laws
for Mercy to be showed to them: And while they were slaughtered for such
excellent Ends, and made instrumental in the doing such signal Services both to
the Glory of God, and the Good of Men, the pain they suffered laid a great
Honor upon them, though they were below the Capacity of understanding it. Yea
further; so far merciful were these Laws to these Creatures, that only the
Blood of such was called for, as would otherwise possibly, some time or other,
have been killed for Men's use. And herein they were favorable to Men likewise;
in that they required not such Sacrifices as, for rareness, should be far and
wide sought after; nor such as by their fierceness might endanger those that
caught them; But homebred and quiet Oxen and Sheep; innocent, and not rare,
Turtle-Doves and Pigeons were those which God was pleased to order for Himself.


Theoph. You have taken away my Scruples as to those Laws which might seem to
carry something of Cruelty in them: I desire you would do the like for me in
relation to those Laws, which, though not Cruel, did seem to proceed from the
Will of God as he is Supreme; without any discernable Reason for their being
enjoined; and consequently without any Love to his Creatures: For Love is to be
found only in those Laws, where good Reason can be given why such and such
things are commanded or forbidden: And only those Laws are worthy to be loved
by Men.


Eubul. But that He, Theophilus, who is infinitely Wise, did give Laws without
Reason; and exerted his Will, as he was Supreme, with no respect to his Wisdom,
there is none, sure, can, with any show of Reason or Wisdom, imagine. And
though We, who are at such a distance from the Jewish Times, cannot presently
find why God enjoined such and such things, it will yet be rash to say, that
those who lived near the Days when these Laws were given, were ignorant of the
Reasons for which they were given.

If some of these Laws were made directly contrary to the vain Customs of the
Neighboring Nations, especially of the Zabii; and did secure the Israelites
from the Superstitions and Idolatries which those were guilty of, it was a good
Reason why they were enjoined. And this seems to have been done, Lev. 18.2, 3.
After the Doings of the Land of Egypt wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not do; and
after the Doings of the Land of Canaan, whither I bring you, shall ye not do:
Ye shall do MY Judgments, and keep MINE Ordinances; to wit, as being flatly
opposite to the Rites and Customs of Egypt and Canaan. And though some of those
things were neither good nor ill in themselves; yet, either as they were used
amiss by those Nations, or might open a Door to worse things in the Israelites,
God, who had espoused this People to Himself as to an Husband, might take away
all Occasions that might tempt them to Unfaithfulness toward him: And
therefore gave these Laws unto them. Neither is it altogether improbable, that,
in many of these Laws, there was a Mysterious Sense, which among some other
Reasons might have a place for one. For why might not Simplicity in Manners,
and a Freedom from Mixtures in Religion, be signified by not ploughing with an
Ox and an Ass together; and not wearing Woollen and Linen in the same Vesture?
And in some of those Creatures prohibited for Food, why might there not be a
Caution against those Human Vices which seemed to be Charactered in them? As
Pusillanimity in the Hare; Filthiness in the Swine; Ignorance in the Owl;
Rapine in the Hawk, and such like. It does not follow, because we cannot
instance, in the like manner, in all the rest of those Creatures which are
forbidden, that there is therefore no Ground for such Reason in those we have
mentioned. And though the People of the Jews were very dull and carnal, yet
that they was so dull and carnal as not to discern such a meaning in the
Prohibitions; and that therefore there were no such meaning in the
Prohibitions, is something strange to assert.

Besides, God possibly might, in some of these Laws, not give a Reason, that
they might the more surely be observed. For sometimes when the Reason of Laws is
known, some Men are apt to think, that if they can obtain the End without
keeping the Law, it is no matter if they break it. And this, one well
represents in the Law of Deuteronomy. 17.17. He shall not multiply Wives, that his
Heart turn not away: But Solomon said, I will multiply Wives, and mine Heart
shall not be turned away. But it is written afterward, That his Wives turned
away his Heart. God will not therefore, in some of his Laws, give an open
Reason for their being enjoined, because Men may thereby resign up their
Understandings to Him, and not frustrate his Commands by ways of their own. And
yet this may with Truth be said, That Those Laws, for which there is no
particular Reason given, and which, in themselves considered, do include no
real Goodness, God did, in great measure, order for the better promoting of
Obedience in general to those Laws, which are in their own Nature truly good,
and apparently include Reasons for their being observed. And this He did by
suting those subordinate Laws, in many Things, to the Temper of that People,
and the Times and Climate in which they lived: Who, had they not been
continually enured to Obedience in these smaller things, would have been
disobedient in those which were greater.

Yea, and some of these Laws of which no certain account can be given, might be
fitted for their Temper another way also. It has been noted, that as the Jews,
and some other Eastern Nations, were more than ordinary inclined to the
Leprosy, so the eating of Swines Flesh did much increase it. And if, in this
Instance, God was their Physician as well as Lawgiver, by making their Religion
instrumental to their Health, it will not be unreasonable to think that, in
some other things of the like Rank, he might be so too. In the Commands
concerning the Disease but now mentioned, it may seem he was. For it is hard to
give any other Reason why a Person, whose Flesh is covered all over with the
Leprosy, should be pronounced clean, and another, who had any raw, or
live-flesh not overspread with it, should be unclean, (Levit. 13.12.) unless it
were that the power of infection had ceased in the former, and did continue in
the later.

I doubt not, Theophilus, but our Psalmist and holy Men under Moses, saw more
things belonging to these Laws, than any now adays are able to instance in. But
these may take off the force of what you urged against them, as to their want
of Reasons, and, in that respect, as to their want of Excellencies.


Theoph. I willingly yield what indeed I cannot deny to these Laws: And desire
you will deal by my last Objection as you have done by the foregoing ones.


Eubul. If I forget not, it was this: That the Precepts, which require Fear,
are such as are enforced upon the account tbat God is Terrible; and where so
great Terribleness is at the bottom of these Laws, the Love to them must needs
be the Iess: For perfect Love casts out Fear.

I must confess that God, in the Old Testament, did often manifest himself in
such a manner as might throw a Terror into Men: And even at the giving of the
Law in Mount Sinai, there were Thundrings and Lightnings, and the Noise of the
Trumpet, and the Mountain smoking. All which might strike a Terror; and did
strike so great an one into the People, that they desired Moses to speak unto
them, and they would hear; but should God speak unto them, they should die.

But though this were so, yet we may truly say, That God chose this way, by
reason of the inflexible Nature of the People, whom more mild and gentle
Methods would not so well have prevailed upon. How often, in Scripture, are
they called A stiff-necked People? And therefore they were to be trained under
the Law as under a Schoolmaster; not being as yet fit for the highest things,
but, as it were, in the lowest Form. Their Duty of Fearing God they are to be
excited unto by Means that represented God Terrible, or they would not have
feared him at all.

Hereupon those that knew the great Love of God to his People, (who, rather
than He would lose Them, or They should cast Him off, would use the more severe
Methods for the keeping them in their Duty, and the fitting them for his
Favor,) might well love the Law that enjoined the Fearing of God, and the way
also that enforced it.

But yet the Methods which struck such Terror, God was pleased to use only
upon some special Occasions; and he often, if not always, intermixed with them
Means which were more gentle; that this Fear might not be the Fear of a Slave
or Captive to his Tyrant, but of a Subject to his Prince; who looks after those
under him with Care and Love, though he sometimes injects a Dread into them by
his Majesty. And this is very remarkable even in the giving of the Law, when,
as we said, God manifested his Terrors. The Preface to the Decalogue remembers
the Israelites of his great Kindnesses to them; I am the Lord that brought thee
out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage. And in the Second
Commandment, his visiting the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, unto
the third and fourth Generation of those that hate him, is abundantly
outweigh'd by his showing Mercy unto thousands in them that love him, and keep
his Commandments.

Some indeed there have been, who have not approved of any Prologue to be put
before Laws, or any persuasives to be mingled with them; it being the part of a
Lawgiver by Authority to Command, and not by arguments to persuade. But though
God has more Power than all other Lawgivers; and has a Will infinitely more
perfect than theirs; and consequently might give his Laws in the most
peremptory manner; yet he was pleased to make way for them into the Hearts of
his People, by Love as well as Fear; that as the careless might be affrighted,
so the more ingenuous might be allured; and none kept back from Obedience,
either by presumption or discouragement. I might instance in many places of
Scripture pertinent hereunto; but I will do it only in two, where God is said
to be Terrible. The former is in Deuteronomy. 10.17, 18. The Lord your God is God of
Gods, and Lord of Lords, a Mighty and Terrible God; But then the very next
words are; He does execute the Judgment of the Fatherless and the Widow, and
loves the Stranger in giving him Food and Raiment. The other place is in
Nehemiah, Chap. 1.5. O Lord of Heaven, the great and TERRIBLE God, that keeps
COVENANT and MERCY to them that Love him, and observe his Commandments. How is
his Terribleness here mitigated, yea, set off, and made Lovely by his Goodness
and Mercy? And what better Comment can we give of these Scriptures, (and many
others not unlike them,) than that of David, Psalm. 130.4. There is Mercy with
Thee, that thou may be Feared. Though there has been a Strong Wind that
rent the Mountains, and brake in pieces the Rocks; though an Earthquake there
were, and after that a Fire, yet God was not so much in any of these; or, at
least, delighted not so much to be in these, as in the still small Voice.

And this, I think, may be sufficient for your Objection; and also for the Laws
which require Duties to God as a Prince and Lawgiver. Better Laws, and better
grounds for their observance, could not be wished; and so they might well be
Loved.


Theoph. Pray, Eubulus, proceed to those Laws, which require Duties from Men,
one to another. Which, I well remember, you would have to be considered in the
next place, to those Laws which respected the Duties to God immediately.


Eubul. For the welfare of Society, a Rational Man would desire, that there
should be Honor and Respect showed unto Superiors, by those that are below
them; and that there should not be oppression and ill nature toward
Inferiors, from those that are above them; but that Righteousness and Kindness
should be exercised unto all.

Now these excellent things are all strictly enjoined by Gods Law.

The Duty of Honor and Respect to Superiors, the Fifth Command sufficiently
requires. Honor thy Father and thy Mother; i. e. all those who being in Place
or Authority above thee, are, in a larger Sense, Fathers and Mothers. And since
Authority and Dignity were first seated in, and did arise from, that which was
Paternal, I suppose that therefore Father and Mother are put for all Superiors.

And, under the Word Honor, are comprised all those Duties, which, in any
Circumstances, are, in right Reason, to be shown from meaner Persons to those
that are above them; which Circumstances may, upon occasion, be better
conceived, than here, at the present, discoursed of.

For Superiors not oppressing those who are Infeferiour, by using their Power
to the depriving them of what is theirs, the Tenth Commandment is, by a just
consequence, a strong Law. They are therein forbid to Covet any thing; much
less then are they to take by force that which is their Neighbors; and the
meaner sort, surely, may bear the Name of Neighbor to those who are higher.

But there is an express Precept, Levit. 25.17. You shall not oppress one
another; no not a Stranger; Chap. 22.17. No nor a Servant that is escaped from
an hard Master; Deuteronomy. 23.16. Nor shut thine Hand from him; nor thine Eye
against him, Chap. 15.7.9.

Yea, Excellent Laws were made for good Deeds to be done unto them. The Corners
of the Field were not to be fully Reaped; nor the Gleanings of the Vintage to
be gathered, but left for them, Levit. 18. Whatsoever grew every Seventh year
was not to be inned; and a Release was also then to be made of all Debts, i. e.
of all Debts owing by the Poor to the Rich. And lest a Man should, from the
thoughts of this years Release, be the more strait-handed to his poor Brother,
there is is a special caution given in this point, Deuteronomy. 15. Beware that there
be not a thought in thy wicked Heart, saying, the Seventh year, the year of
Release is at hand, and thine Eye be evil against thy poor Brother, thou shall
surely give him.

And, at the year of Jubilee, (which was every Fiftieth year,) there was an
Universal Freedom and Joy, every Man might return to his Possession; and every
Servant to his own Family. Yea, this year, as it expressed the greatest Mercy
and Gladness when it came, so it stretched forth Righteousness and Mercy to all
other the years. For thus it is, Lev. 25. According to the number of years
after the Jubilee, thou shall buy of thy Neighbor; and according to the number
of the Fruits he shall sell unto thee; according to the multitude of years,
thou shall increase the price thereof; and according to the fewness of years,
thou shall diminish the price thereof; ye shall not therefore oppress one
another; but thou shall fear the Lord thy God.

And then, in general, all Persons were upon occasion to show Love and
Kindnesses, and to have them showed back again to themselves. And by such Acts
as these; as also by the abstaining from Adulteries, Thefts, False-Testimonies,
and such like ill Actions, Society was to be kept up, and Righteousness and
Peace maintained.

It is, Theophilus, delightful to consider, how by Laws, even toward Beasts,
Birds, and Trees, God minded his People of a kind and good deportment one
toward another. The Ewe and her Lamb were not to killed both in one day, Levit
22.28. Neither was the Old Bird to be taken with her Eggs or Young, but in any
wise to be let go; that it might be well with them, Deuteronomy. 22.6. Such seeming
Cruelty must not be committed as to seethe a Kid in its Mothers Milk, Exodus
23.19. And the Fruit Trees (though in a Siege against an Enemy) must not be cut
down, but spared; and this, out of a kind of Gratitude, because they bring
forth for the Life of Man, Deuteronomy. 20.19. So every way do these Laws tend to the
planting of good Nature and sociable Virtues. And, surely, such Laws as these
might well have the Expression of Love toward them. Consider, Theophilus, a
Commonwealth well governed, (as That of the Jews was,) and all Happiness
accruing unto it, (as to That there did,) and tell me, if those Laws be not
worthy to be loved.

One Law indeed there was which the Jews afterward complained of, as bringing
them into great Straits and Troubles, viz. That which commanded their Ground
not to be Tilled, and their Increase not to be gathered by the Owners every
seventh year. For since Pecuniary Tributs were exacted of them, and their
Field-encreases were the Foundation of their Coin, they found themselves, when
their Crops were not brought home, to be, in great measure, disabled for the
answering such Taxations. And therefore when Alexander the Great at Jerusalem,
had learnt out of Daniel's Prophecy that the Persian Empire should be
overthrown by a Man that was a Greek, and thereupon, as persuaded that Himself
was the Person, had bid the Jews ask of him some great Boon, they signified to
him that a greater Privilege could not be granted them, than the being freed
from the seventh years Tribute; which Request they obtained of him.

But though this Law proved heavy to them, yet it was not from any defect in
the Institution, but from their Sins; By these they forfeited God's Favor, and
gave him cause to turn that Law into their Punishment, which he first made for
the exercise of Mercy among themselves, and for the manifesting of his own
Power and Goodness toward them. For thus we find it, Lev. 25.20, 21, 22. If ye
shall say, What shall we eat the seventh year? behold, we shall not sow, nor
gather in our increase; then I will command my Blessing upon you in the sixth
year, and it shall bring forth fruit for three years. And ye shall sow the
eighth year, and eat yet of old fruit the ninth year; until her fruits come in,
ye shall eat of the old store. If their Land failed of its Fertility, A
fruitful Land was turned into Barrenness for the Wickedness of them that dwelt
therein: According as it was expressly foretold, Lev. 26.20. If you will not
hearken unto me, your Land shall not yield her Increase, nor the Trees their
Fruit.

Hitherto of the Laws which respected the Jews from one another.

As to the Laws which related to Themselves in their own Persons, I will say
only this, (and it is enough to show an amiable Excellence in them,) viz. That
they are such as make a Man calm in his Breast, and strong in his Body. Thou
shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, supposes that a Man is to love Himself;
and the Supposition is built upon, and is as valid as a Law: A more benign Law
than which what Man is it can desire? He is hereby not to torture himself by
Anxious Cares and Envious Thoughts. He is engaged likewise not to impair his
Health by any manner of Excess; for, in doing either the one or the other, he
would not be his own Friend, nor love himself. And this has an excellent
tendency to Friendship abroad also. He, who loves himself so well as not to
envy others, will by others not be envied but loved. And He, who for his own
Welfare will be temperate and sober, is rightly fitted for the being faithful,
and for the having Trust reposed in him.

And thus, Theophilus, we have briefly run through these Laws. And if you
consider them as to the Moral part, they naturally tend to the establishing of
a People in Peace and Prosperity: And may therefore deservedly be loved. And if
you consider them altogether, they had some things from without, that might
preserve Men's Love toward them from growing Faint, viz. Gods especial promise
of Earthly Rewards, and his immediate Protection. If thou shall hearken unto
the Voice of the Lord, to observe and do all his Commandments, the Lord shall
command the blessing upon thee in thy Store Houses, and in all that thou
set thy Hand unto: And he shall bless thee in the Land which the Lord thy
God gives thee. He shall give thee Rain in due season to multiply thy Corn,
and thy Wine; so much that the Threshing shall reach unto the Vintage; and the
Vintage reach unto the Ploughing; and thou shall dwell safely in thy Land: And
so signal was this safety which they enjoyed, that when, for the Worshipping of
God, all the Males were frequently to repair to Jerusalem, though their Borders
were left Naked, and defenseless, yet never did their Enemies take that
opportunity either to invade, or any way molest them: According to that Word of
Exodus 34.24. Neither shall any man desire thy Land, when thou shall go up to
appear before the Lord thy God thrice in the year.

And lest their Love to these Laws should, from Earthly Prosperity, sink into
Carelessness, (as worldly Blessings make oftentimes even that Obedience to be
forgotten, for which they were sent as a Reward,) it was kept awake, and taught
to be Reverential by some miraculous things which attended these Laws. Such
were the Vrim and the Thummim on the Breastplate of the High Priest; which,
when consulted by meet Persons, on weighty concerns, did by a wonderful power
afford answers: The Ark of the Testimony from which Oracles were given by an
audible Voice. The Sacred Fire of the Altar, which falling, as it were, like a
Lion on the Sacrifices, presently consumed them. The appearance of a Cloud
sometimes on the Tabernacle, and afterward on the Temple; to which we may add
the open and remarkable effects of Gods Power manifest in Battles; and in
particular Revenges from Heaven upon presumptuous Sinners. God would not have
done so wondrously in relation to his Laws, had they not been of very high
account with him, and this might well keep up Life and Vigor in Considering
and Devout Men's Love toward them.

I have, Theophilus, in my speaking to these Laws, asked of you, what, in Right
Reason, and according to a perfect Harmony of Things, you would have the Duties
toward a Prince and Lawgiver to be. And I have ventured to say, that a
Rational Man, for the Welfare of Society, would wish for such and such Laws.
And this I think I might well do, without offering any injury to these Laws, by
making Human Reason to be the Judge of them. For they are rightly agreeable to
our Nature, and the true Sentiments thereof. But though they are so, and by all
must be acknowledged so to be, yet no Nation on Earth was so happy as to have
them so established as the Jews had. Hereupon it is said, Deuteronomy. 4.6. Keep ye
these Statutes, and do these Judgments, for this is your Wisdom and
Understanding in the sight of the Nations, which shall hear all these Statutes,
and say, Surely this great Nation is a Wise and Understanding People, for what
Nation is there so great, which has Statutes and Judgments so Righteous as all
this Law which I set before you this Day? And very observable it is, as to what
I have been speaking, viz. That in times of Captivity, when the Laws of the
Conquered are usually changed, if not wholly destroyed by the Conquerours,
these Laws found such favor abroad, that they were never as to any part of
them altered. And that the Jewish Nation lived to see the Periods of three
noted Monarchies succeeding one another; and, in an uninterrupted Line, did
itself continue still the same; flourishing and happy, unless when careless and
disobedient; cannot be ascribed to any thing but the Excellency of these Laws,
and Gods more than ordinary Blessing attending them.

All which things, Theophilus, being rightly weighed, may show forth the
Madness of Marcion, and some others of the Gnostick Crew, who impiously
pronounced the God of the Old Testamrnt to be an Evil One, Morose and Cruel,
and of a different Nature quite from him to whom the New Testament belongs.
Although greater Love is displayed by Christ than under Moses could be
discerned, yet that the Old Law proceeded from a Good God, who was Merciful and
Gracious, and who made those his Laws suitable to the Jewish Nation, and
pertinently significant of better things to come, all certainly, who will be
righteous and considerate in their Thoughts, must needs confess with a
Detestation and Abhorrence of such Marcionitish Blasphemy.


Theoph. But since all these Laws (whether relating to God or Men,) are so
Excellent, and so Worthy to be Loved, Why does St. Paul call them the
Ministration of Death? 2 Cor. 3.7. And why does he say, he was alive without
the Law once; but when the Commandment came, Sin Revived and he Dyed? Romans 7.9.
as if he were the worse for the Law; and might date his Death from it. Why,
lastly, does S. Peter call the Mosaic Institution a Yoke, which neither we nor
our Fathers were able to bear? Act. 15.10.


Eubul. In answer to your first Scripture, wherein the Law is called the
Ministration of Death; some understand it thus; not as if the Law brought no
Privileges with it, or rather Death; but so, as that all the promises, which
were made to the Obedience of the Law, were such as had relation to this Life
only; and were all terminated in Death. And therefore, it is observed, that the
Word Life, in all the Books of Moses, is never taken otherwise then for this
Temporal Life: And all the rewards are mentioned only under the Name of
Temporal Blessings, as may be seen in Deuteronomy. 28. and other places. Not (says a
Worthy Man of our own,) but that Eternal Rewards were in good measure Revealed
to some Excellent Persons of Old; and the frequenter afterward as the coming
of Christ drew nearer; but these Revelations though vouchsafed by God, under
the Law, did not properly belong to the Law; and, in strictness of Speaking,
were not of it. It might therefore be well called the Ministration of Death, in
case the Rewards belonging unto it had thus an end, and did cease in Death.

However the Law might justly have this Appellation, because, (as I before
mentioned,) in the primary Sanction of it, Death was the Punishment of
Disobedience. Cursed is every one, that continues not in all things which are
written in the Book of the Law to do them. And though God was pleased to
mitigate this Severity, in allowing Sacrifices to be an Expiation for some
Sins, yet the great Transgressions of the Law, how repentant soever the
Committers might be, found no such favor. Only lesser Offenses, and such as
proceeded from Imprudence rather than Design, were those for which Sacrifices
were indulged: Whilst, the Souls that did ought presumptuously, whether
Strangers, or born in the Land, were to be cut off from among the People, Numb.
15.30, 31. Which (as it may seem,) made David himself afterward (with respect
to his Adultery and Murder,) to say, Thou desire not Sacrifice, else would I
give it, Psalm. 51. There not being any Sacrifices provided for such Sins. And
hereupon the Law is called The Ministration of Death; when yet to those that
were Obedient, the Privileges it gave were many; and so, for those, as for the
Excellency, which, in itself, it had, might be loved.

That other Scripture, to wit, I was alive without the Law once; but when the
Commandment came Sin revived, and I died: We (if we take it as spoken in the
Person of the Apostle, and not rather, by a Figure, for others,) are not so to
understand it, as if he were the worse for the Law, and might date his Death
from it; But thus, While he looked upon himself, and his own Actions, without a
due Examination of them, according to the exactness of the Law, he might think
himself to be in very good plight, and free from danger. But when he compared
his Actions and Performances with the exceeding Accurateness of the Law, the
Actions, which before looked well, appeared sinful; and he saw his Danger and
Demerits to be very great. Whereas the Law in itself was holy; and the
Commandment holy, and just, and good, and so, for its own worth, might be loved.

Your last Scripture is this; viz. That the Mosaic Law is termed A Yoke, which
neither We nor our Fathers were able to bear.

To this it may be replied; That we are not to take these words in a strict
sense, as if the Apostles and Jews could not bear that Yoke, but thus, They
could not bear it without difficulty. For we know that they had born it, for
many Generations, from the time of Moses to that day.

Besides, Neither was it a Yoke absolutely considered. For God, in the giving
of these Laws, did (as a great Man interprets it,) (...), Acts 13.18. bear with
some of their Manners, which the use of those Times had taught them; and made
his Sanctions suitable, in many things, to their being under-age, as it were,
and too weak, as yet, for more perfect Institutions.

But it is therefore termed A Yoke, with reference to that Freedom, and those
very great Privileges which are brought unto us by Christ. In Comparison of
These, it is little better than a Bondage: When yet before, it was a great
Honor to the Jews; and such as They only had a share in: The Heathens, as they
were Heathens, having nothing to do in it.

You have, Theophilus, what at present I think may be replied to the Scriptures
you brought. Yourself could, possibly, to your own Satisfaction, better have
answered them: But if you are any way pleased with what I have said, and can
reap though but the least of that Spiritual Advantage, you, in the beginning of
our Discourse, spoke of, I shall be the less solicitous for the excusing of my
Failures.


DISCOURSE the Second.
The Contents.
THE Inducements that Christians have to Love the Divine Law. Love was the
moving cause of our Lords becoming our Lawgiver. The Greatness of our Lawgivers
Person. All the troublesome Ceremonies of the Old Law are done away by the Laws
of our Lord; and this, not by his Will alone, but by the admirable
manifestation of his Goodness and Wisdom. How the Jews urging the
Everlastingness of their Law is from hence answered; and how their way of
Speaking is Corrected, when they say our Lawgiver has vilified and destroyed
their Laws. Only such Laws are enjoined by our Lord, as have in them an
Intrinsic Goodness, or else are for Ends absolutely Good, and such as are
discernable by every one. Though the Jews had some Inferior Laws suited to
their Temper and Climate, which did the better fit them for the observance of
those Laws which were Moral, yet we have not the less reason to Love the Laws
of our Lord because they are all Good, without any mixture of such Inferior
Laws, Laws, which may be agreeable to different Climates where Christians Live,
and which may promote the Precepts of our Lord, are not by those Precepts
excluded. Christian Laws are such also as will, in our Obedience, much comply
with our particular Way and Temper. The Moral Laws which were given to the
Jews, are by our Lord more fully and clearly given. The Laws that respect
ourselves are properly belonging to the New Testament: At least, are there only
directly and openly enjoined. The Objection answered, that so far is the
Christian Law from being more clearly given, that it requires us to admit of
some things relating to Faith, which no one living can conceive how they should
be. The Reasonableness of making our Understandings to yield to our Faith.

THEOPHILUS. I Am very glad, Eubulus, I have once more your good Company; and
from the privacy of the place, the calmness of the Weather, and the leisure you
at present have, you will, I hope, go on, where Yesterday you left off: For I
have a great desire to hear the Inducements, which Christians have to Love the
Divine Law.


EVBVLVS. YOur desire shall be complied with; not because I think I can so much
inform you; but because those things, which we already know, are made more
Active upon us when we hear they are the Sentiments of others, as well as our
own.


Theoph. You will make whatever Truths, after this manner, shall be quickened in
me, to belong to yourself; as being Watered, at least, if not Planted by you.
Besides, since the things that lie only in our thoughts do not usually so much
affect us, as they do when we bring them out into Words, it is to be imagined,
that yourself will not be wholly destitute of benefit, while you are kind unto
me.


Eubul. Well then, with Prayers that it may be for the Ghostly Health of us
both, we will proceed.

The Inducements, that Christians have for the Loving the Divine Law, (which
are far greater than what the Jews had,) may, I presume, be collected from the
consideration of these things, viz. The Lawgiver; The Laws themselves, and
those Motives which are annexed unto them, for the securing of our Obedience.

As to what concerns the Lawgiver; it may very much contribute to the Love of
the Christian Law, That Love was the moving Cause of his becoming our Lawgiver.

The Punishment which Mankind, for the breach of the Command in Paradise, was
from Gods Justice to suffer, the Son of God was willing, in our Nature, to
undergo himself. And though God the Father, if he had so pleased might have
refused that any should bear the Punishment, besides those who had deserved it,
(for the Law, when it is Trangress'd, does require that the Offenders should
suffer in their own Persons, The Soul that Sins it shall dye,) yet he was
pleased to accept of his Son in our stead. Accounting the Reverence of his
Laws, which, by the Sins of Mankind had been Violated, to be sufficiently
maintained by his Death. But on this condition only would God accept of his Son
to dye in our Room, that the works of the Devil should be destroyed in us; and
that we (as was but meet for us to do,) should endeavor after Holiness of Life.

The Son of God therefore, that He might be our Propitiation, and that We might
not be altogether unfit to whom so great Favors should be shown, comes into
the World to establish and promote Sobriety, Righteousness, and Godliness among
Men. It pitied him to see those, whom he had Created in such an Eminent Rank of
Beings, to wander in Darkness; unable by all their Reasonings to find out those
things that nearliest concerned them; and recommending, upon uncertain grounds,
those that, in some faint measures, they did discern. He hereupon reduces them
into right Paths; giving them a true sight of their wretched Estate;
prescribing an Exact Rule to live by; and settling it on a strong and sure
Foundation* Not only as agreeable to Man's Reason, which, though sometimes right,
is often dim and erroneous; but as suitable to the Goodness of God, which is
absolutely perfect; as being the Dictate of his Wisdom, which cannot be
deceived; The resolution of his Will, which is most Holy; the Injunction of his
Authority, which is most unquestionable; and the only way to a true and lasting
Happiness. Whence it is easy to discern, that in infinite Love he gives his
Laws unto us. And the same Love, from which these Laws proceeded, did in an
eminent manner confirm them, and testify their being Divine. When he gave
them, he ascended into a Mount; and therein there was indeed some agreeableness
betwixt the giving of the Law by Moses, and by Him. But this Mount did not burn
with Fire; nor had it Blackness, and Darkness, and Tempest, as the other had,
to keep the People at a distance from him. Neither were his Miracles of the
severer kind; as those of Old, for the most part, were. He, by an Almighty
Power, restored several to Life; but none ever suffered Death by him. He gave
Health to more than a few; (for from him the Blind received their sight, the
Lame walked, the Lepers were cleansed,) but he never hurt the Bodies of any,
that it might well be said, He went about doing good. But such a sweet-natured
Establishment of his Laws we the less may wonder at, as being no more than what
might well be expected, when such infinite and unspeakable Love had brought him
into the World to give Laws. A very great Inducement sure, for us to love those
Laws which were bottomed on such a tender Affection to Mankind.


Theoph. It is pity, that any should be willing to overthrow this so great Love
in him who is our Lawgiver, by saying, that it cannot consist with the Divine
Justice to punish an Innocent Person in the place of the Guilty: That by an Act
of Dominion God laid Affliction upon our Lord, but no Punishment: That
therefore Christ was not a Propitiation for our Sins; and consequently, that
there is no such Love, as we talk of, at the bottom of these Laws.


Eubul. It is sad, Theophilus, that any should oppose a Truth so evident, and
advantageous. For is it possible, that any thing should be more plainly spoken
in Holy Writ, than that Christ suffered for our Sins, the Just for the Unjust?
That he came to give his Life a Ransom for many? That he is the Propitiation
for our Sins; and that in due time he Died for the Ungodly? And can any thing
be more manifest, than that our Lords dying in our stead was from his own Will?
and was the act of one who had a Power to do what he did; and of one who could
not sink under the Punishment, and also an act which is conducive to the best
Ends in the World, the illustrating of the infinite Justice of God in punishing
Sin; of his infinite Mercy in saving Sinners; and of his unspeakable Wisdom in
doing it in such a way, which the Contrivances of Men and Angels could never
have reached unto? And since God's Dominion is so much pleaded in this matter
for the avoiding the Name of Punishment, and making it to be only Affliction,
we may pertinently ask, Why by his Dominion he might not Punish an Innocent
Person offering himself in the place of the Offenders, as well as throw
Afflictions upon him, as great and acute as Punishment itself could be? And
what difference is there to the Persons Sense who thus suffers, betwixt
Afflictions and Punishments? Surely, These Men are very ill Asserters of the
Divine Justice, who, while they deny that God may punish the Innocent instead
of the Guilty, though from such admirable Motives but now mentioned, dare, at
the same time, make him to have laid the Torments of the Cross upon his beloved
Son, without respect to any offense or fault in the least. Which, how unworthy
a thought of God is it? And how little are they Friends to the Sacred Laws, who
thus deprive them of their great Ornament, the wonderful Love in which they
were founded!


Theoph. But leaving these Men (how Rational soever they would be thought,) cum
ratione sua insanire, if you have any thing more to say of this our Lawgiver,
pray, Eubulus, do it.


Eubul. This, I think, I may say truly; That the Old Mosaic Law, and the
Blessings accruing to the Jews thereby, were very much upon the Account of, and
in order unto, our Lawgivers Coming into the World. And whosoever, thoroughly
instructed in Christianity, will look into the Jewish State, and the Laws and
Customs of it, will without much difficulty find, that they were, for the most
part, Types and Representations of him who was to come. And they did betoken,
either the Excellency of his Person, or the Purity and Holiness of his Laws, or
the Way how he would be a Ransom for us, or the blessed Liberty we should have
under his Government; something or other relating unto him was signified by
them, as might easily be showed from their Priesthood, Sacrifices, Washings,
Jubiles; from the Land to which they were brought; from the Person that brought
them; from the Cities of Refuge, and such like. Which things do show forth the
Greatness of our Lawgiver, (though, while on Earth He, for most Gracious Ends,
was, in appearance, mean.) For what Man, ever before Him, was so Honored as to
have the State and Government of a great Nation, for so long a time, to be
formed as a Prophecy of Him? And though Greatness, as such, is rather fitted to
strike a Reverence than to allure Affections, yet it may allure them, when
Majesty and Love are equally mingled; and when our Lawgiver is Primarily, not
more so by his Greatness, than by his Tenderness toward Men.

The Apostle therefore to magnify the Gospel and the Laws thereof, speaks of
them as given and declared by the Son of God; God, says he, who at sundry
times, and in diverse manners, spoke in time past unto our Fathers by the
Prophets, has, in these last days, spoken unto us by his SON, whom he has
appointed Heir of all things; by whom he made the Heavens, Heb. 1.1, 2. As much
as to say, He has spoken to us in a more Eminent manner than ever yet he has
done unto any. And Chap. 2. he gives Precedence to his Laws before the Law
given on Mount Sinai, upon the Account that THAT was spoken by Angels, THESE by
the Lord. And by how much the greater the Person is that speaks, supposing the
things he speaks are in themselves Good, (as we shall show that His absolutely
are,) by so much the more should the things spoken have our Observance and
Esteem. This is my beloved Son, hear ye Him, said the Voice out of the Cloud at
the Transfiguration; when our Lawgiver did far exceed Moses in the Brightness
of his Face; and had Moses himself, with Elias, Attendants upon him. He it is,
that has the note of Excellence by S. John, Chap. 1.18. viz. Who is in the
Bosom of his Father. i. e. Who, as nearest unto him, knows his mind most of
any; Above All, he is to be heard. He alone is the Man, in whom, says God, I
am well pleased, (...), in whom I fully rest; having made known my Will unto
him, so as that a further notice of it is not to be expected; for to my full
satisfaction, it is by him declared unto Mankind.

Such considerations of our Lawgiver may well excite our esteem of his Laws;
and we have great reason to Love them for the Givers Sake: Since never any Laws
were so much Honored, from Love and Greatness, as these were.


Theoph. The things, which you have said, are of no mean Concern; and I wish,
that they were entertained abroad with such a Sense, as they ought to be: Good
Eubulus, proceed to the consideration of the Laws themselves.


Eubul. I will; and surely they well deserve our Love in these four respects.

1. In that all those Troublesome Ceremonies of the Old Law are done away; and
that, in so excellent a manner.

2. In that only such Laws are enjoined as have in them an intrinsic Goodness;
or else are for Ends absolutely good; and such as are discernable by every one.

3. In that those Moral Laws which were given to the Jews, are by our Lord more
fully and clearly given.

4. In that from these Laws we have a fair way for a pardon of all Sins.

1. In that all those Troublesome Ceremonies of the Old Law are done away; and
that, in so excellent a manner.

The Eighth Day does not now show us the Blood of our Children; nor give us an
occasion to pity them, from the pains they endured, by a Knife or sharp Stone.
And how great these Pains were, and what the Soreness, may be collected from
the Story of the Shechemites, whom Simeon and Levi were able to slay, Two Men,
a whole City. Those Numerous Washings, which, upon the Touching of Unclean
Things, (and those Unclean Things so many,) were to be performed, are now at an
end. There is now no being polluted for many Days, or, until the Evening,
separated from the Company of others; neither need we for every Sin of
Ignorance go with a Goat unto the Temple for Sacrifice: Which how many must
they have been, since too apt we are unawares to fall into Sin? Yea, a Period
is put to all those Sacrifices, which were continually offered up.

These things had indeed good Reasons (as has been said,) for their being
enjoined to the Jews. But it must be confessed that, as to their Number and
Nature, they were tedious and burdensome. There was something in the whole
Economy itself, that (in the Apostles word, Heb. 8.7.) was not (...), free
from blame. And though it served well for a time, yet Men, in after-Ages, when
their Understandings were adult, and their Reason improved, were capable of
better things than such (...), as St. Paul terms them, weak and beggarly
Elements.

Now, had God done them, or the more uneasy part of them, away, by his Will
only, without any visible Effects of his Wisdom in their being abolished, it
would have been a great Favor unto us. But that they All should cease, by
being improved into greater Excellencies: That Circumcision, as it marked the
Jews for Gods People, should be at an end, by all the Kingdoms of the World
becoming the Kingdoms of the Lord: That, as it imported Purity and Chastness,
it should be raised into the Spiritual Circumcision of the Heart, and the daily
cutting off (as it were,) all impure and corrupt Affections: That as it was a
sign of the Promised Seed, it should end in His Wonderfully being Born, who is
the Everlasting Perfection of it: That so many Allusions and Sprinklings should
terminate in the inward Cleanness of the Soul and Conscience; so as that there
should be no further need of such things to denote it: That extraordinary
Sacrifices should be finished by the Lamb of God's offering up himself once for
all; appeasing, by his precious Blood, his Fathers Wrath; satisfying his
Justice, and purging away our Sins: That ordinary Sacrifices should be no more,
through our Bodies and Souls being presented daily unto God a Living Sacrifice,
an holy, acceptable, and rational Service: That all those Ceremonies,
Theophilus, should in so admirable a manner be cancelled, is an high
Demonstration of Gods Wisdom, and the greatest Expression of his Love to us.
And therefore his Laws, so excellently freed from such Troublesome Rites, may
very much engage our Love.


Theoph. What you say, as it may much engage our Love to the Christian Law, so,
methinks, it affords a good Answer to the Jews, who urge that their Laws are,
in Holy Writ, styled Everlasting, and Ordinances for ever; and so cannot be
thought to cease so long as the World stands. And it also may correct their way
of speaking, when they say our Lord has vilified and destroyed those their
Laws.


Eubul. Pray go on, and show how in both.


Theoph. Some Things being said to be Everlasting and for ever, denotes only
their Duration so long till their Nature cannot extend them to a further
length. Thus Isai. 34.10. The Fire is said to burn for ever, which shall not be
quenched before it has consumed all the Matter in which it burns. So
likewise Deuteronomy. 15.17. A Servant is said to be a Servant for ever; i. e. So long
as till the Year of Jubilee should free him: Before that time he must not think
to leave his Master.

And not impertinent to what we are now speaking, was their way of dividing the
World into Two Ages; The one before the Messiah, the other after. The former
they called one for ever, (...), in Seculum; The later added to it, was for
ever and ever, (...), in Secula Seculorum.

Now, the Law as given by Moses was Everlasting as the word Everlasting may
import a Duration so long as the Nature thereof would well allow of, so long as
till the great Jubilee should be; (for so themselves style the Advent of the
Messiah, from Isai. 62.2, 3.) And an Ordinance for ever it was, as for ever had
relation to the First Age of the World: But was not to endure beyond what the
Nature thereof would well permit: Not for ever and ever, as taking in the Age
of the World under the Messiah.

And truly we may, in a manner, say, that the Law is not Vilified and Destroyed
by our Lord, any more, than a House is, when, from being rough and imperfect,
it is finished with the greatest Wisdom, and Adorned with the most Rich
Materials; Christianity being the Judaick Religion Heightened and Spiritualized.

Our Lawgiver himself says, He came not to Destroy the Law and the Prophets:
And his mentioning the Prophets together with the Law, seems unto me to be a
good explication of what I am now Speaking.

We do not, nor can we think, that, when Divine Prophecies are come to pass,
they are vilified and destroyed: Rather, say we, that they are completed; and
that the Completing them is the Honor and Crown of them.

If then our Lord has not destroyed, but by his Coming made good those
Prophecies which were of him; Why should it be said that he has Destroyed the
Ceremonial Law, rather than Fulfilled it? Especially, when That Law was, in
great measure, as a Type and Prophecy of Him.

It is not indeed any more to be so observed as to be reduced in Practice;
because He, whom it did Prefigure has been Present, and Lived among Us; just
as the expectation of a Prophecy cease when what was Predicted is come to
pass: But then it has its use still, as also the fulfilled Prophecy have; and
we are to look both upon the one and the other, with a great deal of Reverence
and Respect, As the Coming of our Blessed Lawgiver, and the Purity, and
Spiritualness of his Government, have Crowned and Completed Them; so They do
now stand as faithful and evident Witnesses of the Truth of his Coming, and of
the perfection of his Laws.


Eubul. You have well improved what I said; and were a Jew not obstinate in his
hatred to our Lord, he could not but be swayed by such considerations.


Theoph. But let not me hinder you from Speaking to the Second thing; to wit;
That such and only such Laws are enjoined by our Lawgiver, as have in them an
intrinsic Goodness; or else are for Ends absolutely Good; and such as are
discernable by every one.


Eubul. You hindered me not. To this therefore we say, That the Laws, which
relate unto God, are all of a Refined Nature; requiring that his Worship be
performed in Spirit and in Truth; and are such as show forth his Spiritualness,
his Purity, his Omniscience; and other his Glorious Attributes.

While we are Commanded to approach unto him with our Hearts, and to have them
clean, and incorrupt before him, the Law has an inward goodness in it, in that
it requires us to be Holy, as he, whom we serve, is Holy. And it nourishes in
us right apprehensions of God; that his Nature is not Gross and Bodily; but
that he is present with us, and is a discerner of our thoughts.

A thing which could not be said of some of those actions, which in Moses's Law
had Relation to Gods immediate Service. For wherein could the Spirituality of
Gods Nature be inferred from the Blood of Beasts, and their Flesh being offered
up unto him? How, could we from these Rites, in themselves considered, be
instructed in the Holiness, Goodness, and Mercy of God? These Acts of Worship
might seem to be of a Carnal and Gross Nature; and though there be places
enough, in the Old Testament, that speak forth God to be a Spiritual and
Immaterial Being; to be Holy and Good; yet from these parts of his Service,
looked upon in themselves alone, Men could not learn so much.


Theoph. But, Eubulus, there are Two Precepts of Christianity, respecting Gods
immediate Service, which may seem not to have any thing of internal Goodness in
them; and those are the Dipping or Sprinkling of Children with Water in
Baptism; and the Eating of Bread and Drinking of Wine in the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper: For what Affinity does there appear between true Goodness and the
Eating a Bit of Bread, and Sipping a little Wine? Between true Goodness and the
Sprinkling a little Water?


Eubul. I deny, not Theophilus, what you say; but then you must Remember the
whole that was said; viz. That only such Laws are enjoined, which have an
intrinsic Goodness in them; or else are for Ends absolutely Good; and such as
are discernable by every one.

By Baptism we are initiated into the Church of Christ, becoming Members to him
our Head; and have the guilt of Sin washed away; Baptism being instituted for
the Remission of Sins; Acts 2.38. And we are also thereby made partakers of the
benefits of Christ's Death, into which we are Baptized, Romans 3.6. In which Rite,
our Lawgiver (as in every thing he exceeded what was done before,) has
amplified his Seal, by making it applicable to both Sexes, when in Circumcision
it was impressed only upon one.

Thus also, the Eating of Bread and Drinking of Wine, in the Holy Sacrament,
are done in Remembrance of the Death and Passion of our Lord. And this
Remembrance of him is upon the Account that he has laid down his Life for
Mankind, and for ourselves in that Number. And so, as often as we do this
Worthily, and as we ought to do, we are afresh entitled to that Salvation
which by his Death he has purchased for us; and have God the Father Reconciled
unto us.

Now these are excellent Ends; and that to these Ends both Baptism and the
Lords Supper were instituted, we are expressly told in Holy Writ, without any
Clouds and Darkness; without so much as a word that may have a double or
doubtful signification; that whoever runs may read.

Which cannot be said of Sacrifices, and some other Significant Rites, among
the Jews; For although they were Types of our Lord (as has been said,) yet
they were not known so to be, by the generality of the People.

And truly, it does not a little Commend the Precepts of Baptism and the Lords
Supper, that, in these great Acts of our Faith, our Lawgiver is so far pleased
to condescend to our Senses as to make the things that may be Seen and Tasted,
to be the Conveighers of such inestimable Favors.

Water, and Bread, and Wine are indeed things of ordinary use: But, in so
being, they import these Divine Privileges to belong not to the Rich only, and
the Great, but to the Meaner Sort also. And very rightly suited they are to the
ends for which they were instituted. The Washing away of Sins is well signified
by the Cleansing of our Bodies with Water; And Christ's Wounded Body and Spilled
Blood are better represented by the lowly Elements of Bread broken, and Wine
poured out, than by more costly and rich Materials they would have been. For we
are to Remember him not as in a pompous and splendid, but in an humble and
afflicted Condition. Though mean, as a Bit of Bread and Sip of Wine may seem;
yet very apposite it is, that our Spiritual Food, by which we are nourished up
unto Eternal Life, should be conveyed to us in That which gives Nourishment
unto, and supports our Temporal Life in this World.

So that all those Precepts, which, in their observance, have an immediate
Relation unto Gods Service, are such as are Intrinsically Good; or else such,
as may be ranked with those that are, for the admirable Ends which, it is
plainly showed, they are ordained unto.

And further yet, Theophilus, Those Precepts which, throughout our whole
Conversation, look toward God, are such as are worthy to be practiced by
understanding Creatures, toward the most perfect of Beings. And it would not
be just to conceive a God in the World, who has deserved infinitely well of
Man, and not conceive such obedience to be due unto him. Such is the Believing
and Trusting in him; the submitting our Wills unto his; and the Doing all
things to his Glory, and such like. For by these He is owned to be a God of
Truth and Wisdom; a God of Power and Goodness; and to be All in all, the Great
and Holy One. And surely Those Laws cannot but be in themselves truly Good,
which so fashion the Hearts of Men, that they appositely shall answer to those
perfections which are in God; and thereby (as far as Man's Nature is capable,)
become partakers of them.

And how genuine a pleasure is it for a Soul thus to believe in Him, who cannot
be Deceived himself, and who will not Deceive us! Who has Revealed Truths
which have been hid from Ages: Truths, that include the greatest Wonder and
also the greatest Love! And were it not a Command that so we should do, what
would we be more Solicitous for, or what more seek after, than the Privilege
of Reposing Trust in one who never fails those, that with a Christian
confidence rely upon him? When we are, as of ourselves unable to see those
things which shall be for our good; and very forward to look to those things
that will be for our hurt, it sure is a Righteous Command that requires our
Wills to be Subordinate unto His, whose perfection it is to will only those
things which are best. And since the designs of Men so often create them
trouble; and nothing, that here they enjoy, can give them true satisfaction,
what can be a more noble End to all the Actions of Men, than that which is the
End, the Almighty proposes unto himself; and which gives him Eternal delight
in the obtaining it, viz. His Glory? If, as all our powers and faculties
proceed from him, we shall, in all things, improve them unto him, there will be
no cause for us to complain, that they are lost to Ourselves, by being found in
Him. But we shall be filled with that Glory, which we do so Administer unto.

And, lest the Goodness, which these Laws have in them, should be injured by an
undue Practice, they are to be obeyed in Righteousness, and no otherwise. Gods
Glory is to be our continual Aim, but we must not go about to promote it by a
Lie, or, any thing that is Evil. The keeping of our Souls is to be committed
unto God; but it must be in Well-doing. And the like is there for all others
Laws; which both shows, and establishes, their Goodness.

Neither are those Laws, which more nearly respect Men of a different Make from
the other; we, by these, are enjoined the Exercise of Righteousness, Mercy, and
Kindness. And what would a Man wish should by others be Practiced to himself,
and his Friend dear as himself, sooner than these? These do not, from any thing
we possess, wring out the Tears of the Orphans and Widow. No Stone is there to
cry out of the Wall, nor Beam to answer it out of the Timber. We by them are
taught to rejoice at the Welfare of others, as if it were the Fruit of our
Prayers: To esteem the Blessings, which we ourselves do enjoy, to be the
greater, because thereby we are enabled to do the more good. By them also a
True Relish is preserved in our Meats and Drinks; and they are made to hold out
Health and Long Life unto us, by freeing us from those Surfeits and Excesses,
which would turn the most pleasant and wholesome things nto Bitterness and
Poison. In a Word, these Laws (how many, or of what sort soever they be,) are
such as perfect our Natures, and capacitate us for a better World when this is
done: For, a Man, without the Practice of these, would be altogether as far
from reaching to the Glory of a Saint, as a Beast is from being improved into
the Excellencies of a Man. And (Theophilus,) they (which is not to be
forgotten,) have nothing of dark Ceremony annexed, to be observed with the same
Care as we do the substance of the Duties themselves. Wherefore, upon these
accounts also, we have very great Inducements to Love the Divine Laws.


Theoph I can easily grant, that, from the Intrinsic Goodness of these Laws,
there is a very strong inducement to Love them; But is it, Eubulus, so great an
one, that these Laws which have an Intrinsic Goodness should Alone be
enjoined? I therefore ask this, because, I remember, you said, that the sitting
some inferior Laws to the Temper of the Jewish Nation, did the better fit that
People for the observance of those Laws which were in their own Nature Moral.


Eubul. It is a very great Inducement to our Love, that those Laws alone should
be enjoined, which have an Intrinsic Goodness in them. For now, as our whole
Duty is reasonable, so we have it in a little room; and may the better
understand, and do it; which would not so well be done, by reason of the vast
Number of Laws, if all People, wheresoever scattered, should have had some
suited to their Dispositions, which are so Various.

The giving of the Christian Laws, and of the Mosaic, was very different.
Those by Moses, were only, or chiefly, to the Jews. God having then his
Tabernacle in Salem, and his dwelling place in Sion; and among Them alone, of
all the Inhabitants of the Earth, He chose to place his Name.

And, over and above, as he was their God, so (as was before said,) at the
giving of these Laws, he was their Temporal Prince. And therefore the Nation
being one People, he might the better suit some Laws to their Temper. Which in
much* Wisdom he did; in the Judicial Law apparently; and not less in the
Ceremonial; making That which did so much Typifie the future Kingdom of the
Messiah, to hit also the Constitution of their Climate; which inclined them
much to a Variety of Rites, and a Ceremonious way of Worship.

Yet not so did God suit his Laws to their Tempers, as, in every thing, to
Close with them. But, he, in a manner, did cultivate that People; keeping them
in Action by the Number and Diversity of Laws; and bringing them under, as it
were, by Curbs and Bridles; whereas, otherwise, they would have been
extravagant, and, more than they were (though that enough;) a Stiff-necked
People. Thus were the Laws in many things suited to their Tempers, not to Sooth
but Govern them.

But now, the Christian Laws are given, not to one Nation alone, but to the
whole World; whether Greek or Jew, Barbarian, or Scythian, Bond or Free. And
therefore, it cannot be expected, that Laws should be fitted to every Nation
and Climate, any otherwise, than as they are very agreeable to the Nature and
Souls of Men, who are willing rightly to discern things, and to act
accordingly. And what multiplicity of Ceremonies and outward Restraints in
Judea did, more Rational Considerations and Spiritual Motives are now, in the
wide World, to effect.

But yet those Laws, which may be agreeable to the different Climates where
Christians Live, and which may promote the better observation of those
Excellent Precepts of our Lawgiver, are not to be excluded. Yea, God, since he
has ceased to exercise a Theocracy on Earth, has left a Power in the Hand of
his Church for the constituting such Rites and Ceremonies as shall fulfill the
Apostle's Rule, Let all things be done decently, and in order. And since our
Affections are apt to languish, where our senses are no way exercised, it will
be but requisite for her to exert that Power and Prudence, which God has
endowed her with, in appointing such outward Gestures, and other seemly Usages,
as may meetly establish a Decency in our Worship, and be instrumental to the
raising of our Hearts Heavenwards. And, I may say, God has allowed this unto
his Church, as something Correspondent to his own Power in the Jewish State, of
appointing Religious Rites for the better carrying on of his more Sacred
Service.

And then, for Civil Magistrates, he has vested them also with a Power of
making Laws; and therein of using or refusing the Judicial Law of Moses, or any
part of it, so far forth as it shall be more or less useful to the Weal
Public, and the securing those Duties both to God and Men, which the Sacred
Precepts do Command. Which Laws of Princes, their respective Subjects are, by
the Divine Law, enjoined Conscionably to obey.

Now these, whether Ecclesiastical, or Civil Constitutions, may be varied
according as the Climate and Disposition of Nations do vary. And thereby the
number of Sacred Laws is the less, and their observance the more facile and
certain; and the Honor also of Governors is the firmlier established, in
their being made so Instrumental for the Good of Society, wherever they bear
rule.


Theoph. You Will pardon me, Eubulus, that, by interposing sometimes, I delay your
progress: Though, truly I have little reason to repent of my Fault, since, in
the things I doubt of, you set me on better ground, than, for ought I know, I
am, in many things, which I seem to be more sure of. The Divine Laws may well
claim our Love, not only in that they are all truly Good, and very suitable to
Human Nature, but also in that they, having none other of a Lower rank mixed
with them, are the more surely and easily known; and do likewise afford so good
a Scope for Governors to Signalize their Prudence in constituting such Laws,
which, not unagreeable to the Law of God, shall be most agreeable to the Temper
of those who are under them.


Eubul. As they do allow the exercise of Prudence to Governors, so do they
also to private Men, in Ten Thousand actions of their Lives, which are not
commanded nor forbidden by the Law of God; That, following their own
Inclinations, and doing as shall seem to them best, they may have the greater
content and satisfaction therefrom.

This, in our private actions, is that Liberty which by our Lawgiver is
indulged us; and is usually termed Christian Liberty. As our Actions have
relation to the public, and are Subject to the Laws of Superiors, it is
Christian Liberty to have a power of obeying those Superiors in what they
Command, (how various soever their Commands are,) whether in a different, or in
the same Nation; so far forth as they shall not be contrary to the Divine Laws.
And this may be called Christian Liberty in opposition to the Mosaic
straitness; which required the Jews, and all who should be Proselyted unto
them, to practice those Laws, whether Ritual or Civil, and none other to the
omission of those.

And though some of those were not to be exercised out of the Land of Judea,
where their Temple stood; and so, were forborne of old by the Jews in Babylon,
and, at this day, are not observed by them in their dispersions up and down the
World; yet it was, and is, esteemed their Calamity, thus to be hindered by
distance of place from the use of them.

And one thing more there is, Theophilus, (which I take to be of no mean
Concern,) That the Christian Laws, though they be all suitable to our Natures,
as we are Men, yet are such also, as, in our obedience, will much comply with
our particular Way and Temper. If we are of disposition inclining to Sadness
and Melancholy, they will allow us to be most Conversant in the Duties of
Mortification; of Fearing God; of Sorrowing for Sin; of Renouncing the World
and the Vanities thereof. If we are of Temper more Lively and Cheerful; the
more Cheerful Duties, of Rejoicing in Gods Mercies, of Praising him in his
Works, of doing him Service in public Justice, and other Virtues Instrumental
to the welfare of Society, will be permitted unto us. And our Lawgiver (so
Gracious is he,) will accept us, in either of these ways; and account his other
Laws not to be disobeyed, though they be not so frequently drawn out into
Practice.

Whence, the Christian Laws, although in the Body of them they have none, that
are made for the particular Tempers of Nations, as the Jewish Law had for
theirs, do yet, in all these ways, allow a Compliance with Temper and
Constitutions; and may well be very much Loved upon this account; but cannot,
in any Reason, be found fault with, as if they did not allow any such thing.


Theoph. I thank you for what you have said; as being instructed well, and not
a little cheered from your discourse: But will say no more; because I long for
the Third thing which renders the Christian Law Worthy to be Loved;

Viz. That those Moral Laws which were given to the Jews, are by our Lawgiver
more Fully and Clearly given.


Eubul. Since you are so desirous of it, I will not keep you in Suspense.

As delivered by Christ, their Scope and Intent is more plainly discerned. He
has vindicated them from the ill Interpretation of the Pharisees; and has
placed their Dignity and Excellence, not in the Outward Observance alone, which
the Jews did chiefly aim at, but in the Heart especially, without which
External Performances are little worth. And therefore, in the beginning of his
Sermon upon the Mount, He endeavors rightly to instruct the Heart and Soul, by
acquainting those who are his Followers, That They are blessed who are poor in
Spirit; who are meek; who hunger and thirst after righteousness; who are pure
in Heart, etc. Which Expressions denote, that the Mind should be rightly
framed; and that They, who give up their Names unto him, must have their Souls
brought into order, and adorned.

He tells them, that They are the Salt of the Earth, and will be good for
nothing unless they endeavor to season others by their exemplary Conversation.
Matthew. 5.13. They are the Light of the World, and so they must shine before
others, that their good Works may be seen, and God glorified. V. 16. He extends
the Commandment of doing no Murder, even to the not being angry with another
without a cause. V. 22. The Precept of not committing Adultery, he makes reach
even to the forbidding of Lustful Looks and Desires. V. 28. He forbids all
Divorces, unless in the case of Fornication. V. 32. He restored Marriage to its
Primitive Perfection by prohibiting Polygamy, Matthew. 19.5. They Two shall be
one Flesh, Emphatically, They Two, as exclusive of more; which we learn from V.
9. of the same Chapter, Whosoever shall put away his Wife except it be for
Fornication, and shall marry another, commits Adultery. For, how weak would
it have been to pronounce it Adultery for a Man to marry after a Divorce, if
the adding one Wife to another before a Divorce should be no Adultery? And if
it shall be said, that our Lord orders it as a punishment to him, who puts away
his Wife, not to marry another; but permits those to marry more than one, who
put away none; it may be replied, That surely the Punishment might little be
feared, because it might be so easily avoided. For who need care, whether he
married or not, after the putting away a Wife, if he might marry as many as he
would before? And we cannot think that He, who is the Wisdom of God, should
ground any Law upon so sandy a Foundation. He disallows of Swearing, how true
soever, in ordinary Conversation, Verse. 34. He prohibits all Revenge, in that
we are not to resist an Adversary so, as to pay an Injury for an Injury, V. 39.
He commands Love to be showed even to Enemies, Blessings to be given to those
that curse us, V. 44. And truly this Command, and the foregoing one, may seem
to be added by our Savior as not having the Law of Nature for its Foundation,
according to which the Decalogue was framed; but being built upon that Love
which our Savior afterward did show, when he died for his Enemies. For the
Law of Nature may seem to allow of this, Vt no cui quis noceat, nisi lacessitus
injuria, Cic. But, when injured, he may requite it. When we do Alms, we must
not have respect unto our own Glory, but only to the Glory of God, and the Good
of the Miserable. Chap. 6. V. 1. When we Pray and Fast, both must be done with
a devout secrecy, that God in both may be chiefly looked unto, and the Eye of
Men not cared for. V. 16. We are commanded, while on Earth, to have our Hearts
in Heaven; To lay up Treasures there, by laying them out here, in Charitable
and Virtuous Deeds. V. 19. We are forbid to be anxiously concerned for any
things of this World, though never so necessary; but are, with a devout
submission, to depend upon God, and to lay all our cares upon him. V. 25. We
are commanded not to judge others, nor to be Censorious toward them; but are
to think no evil of them; to put the best Interpretation upon their Actions,
and to look with a strict Eye upon ourselves only. Chap. 7.1, 2. Yea, in all
our behavior toward others, to observe that excellent Rule of doing to Them
whatsoever we would that They should do unto us. What Precepts can there be
more full and clear than these are? Can the Decalogue be better interpreted
than by them? Is there not in them a more perfect and spiritual Sense, than can
be presently discerned in the Old Law? If, as David says, Thy Law is pure,
therefore thy Servant loves it; what Heights of Love must the purity of these
Laws raise up in us? More largely, and clearer by far, are our Duties toward
God, and our Neighbors, here delivered; far more Reason then have we to love
them.

If we consider the Laws which immediately respect a man's self, we shall find,
that they are much more fully given unto us, than under the Old Law they were.

It has been observed by some, that in Moses's Law, strictly considered there
are no Precepts to be found that immediately respect a Man's self. And it may
seem to be so far true, viz. That there are hardly any there, but what are
included in, and deducible from those, that primarily look another way. And
therefore, if we will rightly consider things, the Laws that respect ourselves
are more properly belonging to the New Testament; at least, are there more
directly and openly enjoined; Such are the Precepts, If our Right Hand offend
us, to cut it off; If our Right Eye, to pluck it out. Such also are other
Precepts tending toward Mortification; The preserving not only our Bodies free
from Intemperance, but the keeping them under, that we may be pure and clean,
both in Body and Soul. The bearing of Afflictions and Injuries with a patient
and quiet Spirit, and others not unlike unto these.

Whoever shall look into the Laws given us as we are Christians, must needs
confess, whether they respect God, our Neighbor, or ourselves, that they are,
at least, much more fully and clearly given than before they were: If yet some
of the greatest purity and Excellence be not added; and so we have a great
Enducement, on this Consideration also, to Love them.


Theoph. By this their Clearness, Fullness, and Perfection, they are fitted for
the greatest extension of our Faculties, and the most Heroic Endeavors both
of our Souls and Bodies. Yea, could we rise to the highest pitch of Virtue that
Mortality is capable of, we should find room in them, for even yet Nobler
Seize; and those, such as would require our still pressing forwards, till
the last Moment of our Lives. Whence, how answerable are they to that Sacred
Infinity which is in God! To whom we can at no time say, All these things have
we done, what lack we yet? What Humility may they not nourish in us, whose
Perfection we still fall short of! What Care and Watchfulness that our
Obedience may be approved! What Prayers to God that his Goodness may help us in
our Perseverance; and his Mercy pardon us in our Failures!

But yet, Eubulus, I wish that what you have said were owned by all, as a
Truth. Some there are, (whose Auditor I much against my will have been,) who
have said these following things, which are direct objections against your
Discourse.

Viz. That so far is the Christian Law from being more clearly given, that it
requires us to admit of some things relating to Faith, that no one Living can
conceive how they should be. And so our understandings, which are the sole
Judges of other things, are so far from being relied on here, that they must be
wholly laid aside.

2. Granting that the Precepts of Christianity are very full, and enjoined to a
greater Spirituality than in Older Time, yet the Severities of them are
unreasonable to us, as we are Men; reducing us to such streights, as cannot be
gone through without a great deal of uneasiness, if at all. And though there be
none who will not commend a pure Air, yet if it be so pure as not to be
breathed in without much difficulty, there is no reason it should be over
Delighted in and Loved.


Eubul. I know there are some, who, in good earnest, dare thus urge against the
Laws of our Lord; but they are Men of corrupt minds; and by their ill Lives are
swayed to talk after this manner; lest they should appear to have Opinions any
whit better than their Practice. A shame it is, that any in a Christian
Commonwealth, where Christianity affords so many outward benefits to them,
should, without severe punishment, be permitted to speak against the Laws of
Christ. But when such a vile Liberty is so much usurped, it will be but meet,
with Truth, to defend these Laws. And I will (with your leave,) endeavor to do
it the more largely, that I myself may have the more in readiness, what to
reply, upon occasion, to this sort of Men.


Theoph. Be that your design then, so that I share with you in the benefit.


Eubul. In answer therefore, to their first Objection, (viz. That so far is the
Christian Law from being more clearly given, that it requires us to admit of
some things relating unto Faith, that no one Living can conceive how they
should be. And so, our understandings, which are the sole Judges of other
things, are so far from being relied on here, that they must be wholly laid
aside,) we say;

That however the matter of our Faith is beyond our reach, yet the Precept of
believing is plain; and and what our Faith is to be, we are very clearly
instructed in Holy Writ.

And what absurdity will it be, if, at the thoughts of some Mysteries, (the Son
of God being Conceived by the Holy Ghost and Born of a Virgin, and such like,)
we cease with that Blessed Virgin to enquire, How these things can be? and make
our Understandings yield to our Faith; as She did, when she quietly rested with
no more than those Words, Behold the Handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me
according to thy Word. And wherein will it misbecome us, if, in the thoughts of
the Hypostatick Union of the Infinite and Eternal God with our Frail and Mortal
Nature, we cry with St. Paul, (...), O the Depth of the Riches both of the
Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How are his ways past our finding out! This is not
to throw away our Understandings, but only to reduce them to the Obedience of
Faith; which will be their perfection.

The Gospel, Theophilus, does teach us the Obedience of the whole Man; All the
Members of the Body are to become the Members of Christ, by being conformed to
his Laws; and also all the faculties of the Soul are to own his Sovereignty.

The Will is to be pliant and ready to what he enjoins; and the Affections are
to be regulated into the being Holy and Obedient. And do we think that the
Understanding is to be lawless, and yield no Obedience? But what Obedience can
it show other than a Submission to the Boundless, and Inconceivable Wisdom and
Knowledge of God, confessing that itself is weak and dimsighted in Comparison
thereof?

Certainly it is but meet to think, that God is a Being, which is far above our
Conceptions; and that he can do what our understandings cannot measure; and so
it is not un-becoming us to acknowledge some things in Christ as the Objects of
our Faith, which yet our Understandings cannot fathom. For our Blessed Lord is,
in the greatest height, the Wisdom of his Father; So, as that the Holy Angels
(...), do only desire, with a Reverential stooping, to look into these things,
as being fit for Admiration, and beyond their Knowledge; and therefore they may
well surpass the most acute and largest Conceptions of Men.

There is indeed a very great Room for Reason in our Holy Religion; which
claims admittance into the Hearts of Men, by Arguments as great and strong, as
any considering Man would desire: There being no rational grounds to think,
that the Evangelists and Apostles did publish Falsehoods in their Writings; but
the greatest reason for our belief, that what they have Written is True and
Divine.

But then, when by Reason we have admitted of the Truth and Divinity of the
Scriptures, we are not to imagine, that we can comprehend every particular thing
therein contained, with the same Understanding by which we conceive the Truth
of the Scriptures in general. And yet the same Reason, by which we admit of the
Truth of the Holy Scriptures in general, does prove very fully the Truth of all
Particulars therein contained, though we cannot understand them.

Yea, yet further; Every, even the most difficult Mystery there, gives us so
much the use of our Reason and Understanding, as to think that it is but
Reasonable, the Chief of the Ways and Methods of God (for such the Nature of
our Lord, his Conception, Life, Death, and Resurrection, are) should be above
our weak Capacities. Which may show, methinks, very well, the Arrogance of some
Men, who, to make the Law of Faith the more easy, would bring all the
Mysteries of the Gospel down to the Level of Human Conceptions: And the
Profaneness of others, who would make the Height of these Mysteries to be the
Disparagement and Blemish of the Holy Laws: Or, in a Word, who will not Believe
the one, that they may not Practice the other.

I would not compare these great Mysteries with small things: But yet to these
Men I may say, that every thing in Nature which they look upon, and know that
it is if I should ask them how it comes to be so, they mul^ (...) that they are
Ignorant of it. How comes a little un-colour'd Moisture in the same Turf to be
formed into Herbs of different Qualities and Shapes? That it is so, they see
plainly; but the How of it (if I may so speak,) they understand not. And it
would be a Madness to deny, that there are such Herbs, because they cannot
conceive how they came to be so.

And is it not a strange piece of Obstinacy, That when these Men are baffled in
Ten thousand things, which they see, before their Eyes, to have a real Being,
they will deny these spiritual Mysteries, merely because they cannot comprehend
how they should be; when yet they have the greatest Arguments to convince them
that they are? May not God exceed their Understandings in things relating to
Heaven, as much as in things belonging unto Earth? And if the things which are
seen are, in great measure, in the Dark to them, shall they contradict those
things which are not seen, merely because they cannot equal them with their
Thoughts? Because Christ is not (...) Anatomized, (as it were,) Naked, and open
unto Men, as Men are unto Him, shall they therefore have no Faith in him?

But, as I said before; Although the Things we are to believe are high, (who
can thoroughly know them?) yet the Law that bids us believe is Clear and
Intelligible: And it may very well deserve our Love, because there are none of
these Mysteries, which we are to believe, but what our Welfare and Happiness
are Founded in; and what are instrumental to the Birth and Exercise of those
excellent Virtues, which the other Laws of our Lord do enjoin: Yea, so far as
they are Revealed unto us, they are to be Rested in, not Pryed into. And we
shall not think amiss, if we persuade ourselves, they shall hereafter be more
fully manifested unto us, as a Reward of the Obedience of our Understandings
here.

You Will excuse me, Theophilus, that I have been so long on this Answer; though
truly, I could not well help it, since the Objection (or rather Objectors,)
seemed to require it.


Theoph. You shall have your pardon on one Condition, that you will be guilty
of the like fault in Answering the next.


Eubul. It is very likely I may. However I shall not be over Solicitous;
because I have my pardon before Hand.

But it begins to be late. Every thing is bending Homewards, and minds us of
what we likewise are to do. The next Evening will, I hope, allow us that Hour,
which this denies us.


DISCOURSE the Third.
The Contents.
THE Severities of the Christian Laws are not unreasonable; neither do they
reduce us to such straights, as cannot be gone through without a great deal of
uneasiness, if at all. The Design of our Lord is not to beat down our Natural
Inclinations and Appetites, but to rectify them. Our Dispositions, if well
managed, not averse from a right Improvement. The Laws of Christ do not dash
the pleasure of Conversation, by threatening idle Words with the Day of
Judgment. The Loving of Enemies, while they persist to be injurious, is in
itself not unmeet, but highly equitable, in case the History of our Redemption
be true. Fasting and Abstinence not unreasonable; nor the parting with Estates
and Lives for the asserting of the Gospel. From the Laws of Christ we have a
fair way for the Pardon of all Sins. What the Law of Faith require of us. How
much it is different from the Old Law. What the Law of Repentance is. Too many
make Faith and Repentance to stand in opposition to the other Laws of our Lord.
How the Laws being done away, which was Engraven on Stones, is to be
understood. Repentance for Sin, cannot without the greatest Absurdity be
wrested to the further and more safe committing of Sin. The Examples of the
Thief on the Cross, and of the Laborers in the Vineyard at the Eleventh Hour,
considered. None of the Divine Laws unsuitable to one another. These Laws of
themselves are grievous unto none. As they have relation only to Civil Society,
and the welfare of Men in this World, they do far surpass those of the most
noted Lawgivers, They by no means do favor the Opinion, that Right of
Possession is Founded in Grace. And that it is Lawful to resist Sovereign
Princes in the Maintenance of True Religion. They make the Man truly beautiful
within.

EVBVLVS. AFter that store of Visitants, in whose obliging Conversation, your
Afternoon, I hear, has been spent; I had thought, Theophilus, that your
Evening Retirement would have been forgot, if not wholly hindered; and I began
to be content, that my Walk must, to Night, be lonely.


THEOPHILUS. NO, Eubulus, I did not intend to leave you so; you see I am at
liberty; and though I am much Delighted with the Company of Temperate and
Ingenious Friends, (as these to Day were,) yet I could not forget, when they
were gone, that Eubulus would be here. I am, I confess, much taken with that
pleasantness, which arises from a number of good Friends together; but I more
enjoy myself with One alone; if that One be like my Eubulus. The Other smooth
my Forehead into Smiles; This, I will say, does me good at Heart.

And therefore permit me without further Ceremony, to put you in Mind of what
will be so Grateful unto me. Viz. Your vindicating of the Divine Laws against
those who say,

That granting the Precepts of Christianity are very full, and enjoined to a
greater Spirituality than in olden Time, yet the Severities of them are
unreasonable to Us, as we are Men, reducing us to such Straights, as cannot be
gone through without a great deal of Uneasiness, if at all. And though there be
(you say,) none who will not commend a pure Air, yet if it be so thin and pure
as not to be breathed in without much difficulty, there is no Reason it should
be over-delighted in and loved.


Eubul. With Acknowledgments of your kind Expressions to me, which I wish I
could deserve, but am very sensible I do not, I would, in reference to the
Objection of these Men, know, what those Severities, those Straights are, which
they mean as unreasonable; so should we the more clearly answer them.


Theoph. I remember I heard these things particularly mentioned by them: Viz.

That the Laws of Christ beat down those Inclinations and Appetites which are
Natural unto us.

That they dash the Pleasure of Conversation, by threatening every word that is
impertinent, or awry, with the dreadful Day of Judgment, Matthew. 12.36. Which,
instead of Cheerfulness in a Man's self, and Courtesy to his Friends, may in
Him excite an anxious Fearfulness, and toward them a silent or morose
Deportment.

That they require the Loving of Enemies, even while they persist to be
injurious; which, they say, deprives us of that sense of Honor and Courage,
which, as we are Men, should belong to us; and makes way also for new and
greater Injuries to be done us.

That they enjoin the Macerating the Body with Fasting and Abstinence; which,
what is it but the making a Man cruel to his own Flesh?

Yea, that they bind us to part with our Estates and Lives for the asserting
the Gospel, when merely some outward Compliance, and a Denial of some few
things only, and this no otherwise than in show for a time, would preserve us:
Which is an hard saying, and who, say they, can bear it?


Eubul. Truly, I think, this is the whole, they can object; and with how little
Reason they do it, I shall, I trust, sufficiently show.

As to the first, viz. That the Laws of Christ beat down those Inclinations and
Appetites which are Natural to us, (which Objection may seem to have some kind
of share in all the other,) we say,

That Inclinations and Appetites may be considered either as belonging to
Nature in a pure and perfect State, or, as it is corrupted and depraved; (for
deeply corrupted our Nature is, and was observed so to be by the Heathen wise
Men, though they were ignorant of the cause why it was so) Now the Laws of
Christ do not oppose Men's Inclinations and Appetites, considering Nature in its
perfect State; but do then only correct and curb them, when, by reason of the
Corruption of our Nature, they are crooked and irregular, and lanch out into
Vicious Excesses.

In a word, The Design of our Lord, in his Laws, is, to reduce us, as much as
possible, to our Primitive Perfection: Not, in a Stoical manner, to beat down
our Appetites, out to rectify them, that they may be truly commendable in
themselves, and may convince us of the Equity of the Commands of Christ, by
giving an Eternal Pleasure and Satisfaction unto us. For if any Man do his
Will, he shall quickly find, that his Commands are not grievous, but that all
his Ways are Pleasantness, and all his Paths are Peace.

If it shall be urged, That our Natures are here incapable of such a Perfection
as is talked of, and therefore that the Laws which enjoin it are unreasonable;
we may reply,

That our Natures, as now they are, are capable of far greater Perfection and
Regularity, than these, who thus plead, are willing to admit of. And we may
say, that even now there are Inclinations of two sorts; Those that arise from
Nature, and Those that we ourselves do, in a great measure, make. Nature
requires but what is enough; but ill Desires, heightened by ill Customs, require
for Luxury and Excess. Now, Temperance amidst our Earthly Enjoyments;
Contentation in the State which God has placed us in; A Readiness to part with
something of our Abundance, for the good of those that need; A Charity in
interpreting their Actions well; And a neglecting of Vainglory, and such like
things as these, are not such impossible things to be performed; Nay, the
contrary shall perhaps bring more Difficulties and Pains, than the Observance
of these Laws shall.

For we must not forget, that there is such a thing as Reason, which is no less
Natural unto us than any Inclinations or Appetites we have; yea, it may justly
claim the Precedence of them. They being, in a great measure, common unto Us
and Beasts; but This the Peculiar of Men only. And what is the use of this
thing called Reason, which is so Natural unto us, but this, viz. To regulate
our Appetites and Inclinations when they grow exorbitant, and to give us the
great Satisfaction of having acted like Men?

So that, in an impartial Consideration of things, it will be found to be more
agreeable to Nature to repress our sensitive Appetites and Inclinations by
Reason, than to give them their swinge without Reason: The Rational part in Man
being far the more Noble.

Now, Reason cannot but approve of, and close with, these Excellent and Refined
Laws of our Lord. Nay, our Inclinations themselves, would we but seriously set
ourselves to the bringing them into order, might, in some time, be duly brought
into it.

And, truly, it has been very well observed of the Constitutions of particular
Persons, (and we therein may give Praise to him that made us,) that as every
Temperament does, some way or other, evilly dispose the Man, so his being thus
disposed sets him at the greater distance from another Evil. As the being prone
to Fearfulness removes him far from the opposite Evil of Presumptuousness. Nay,
he is hereby rendered something inclined to that Good, which lies next to his
Disposition; the All-wise God so ordering it, that defects are not wholly
destitute of something at Hand to make them up. Thus, the being Choleric
enclines the Man to Zealousness, Melancholy bends him toward Devotion. The
being Phlegmatic borders him upon Perseverance. A Proneness to Anger prompts
him to Activeness. So that if we ourselves will but be prudent and resolute in
bringing the ill inclinations of our Nature, or of our particular
Constitutions, into Order, according to the Laws of our Lord, we shall find it
a work not so intolerably hard, as some would make it, and would have others
believe it to be.

And as thus our Dispositions, if well managed, are not averse from a right
Improvement; so our Affections and Desires, if they be but removed from an
Object less good to one that is more Excellent, (and this may oftentimes easily
be done,) they may retain the same earnestness, and find more rational
Gratifications: Yea, sometimes the Work is less; and it is only the bringing the
Affection something lower, or raising it a little higher, and the Object need
not be changed.

We see, how much Use and Exercise will prevail upon Men's Bodies, to make them
Supple and Pliant unto those Motions, which Nature, of itself, is unacquainted
with; and shall the Soul of Man not be able to correct Natural, but Corrupt
Inclinations? Let us take but as much pains with our Souls, as some have done
with their Bodies, and I doubt not, but (through Gods Grace,) we shall make
them as pliable to the Motions of Goodness and Virtue, as some Men's Joints and
Limbs are to those Motions which at the first they were so unapt unto.

It was, as I Remember, in the Objection you brought, That These Laws are
unreasonable to us as we are Men; whereas, Theophilus, as we are Men, they, in
a peculiar manner, are fitted for Us, and for no Beings beside. Those that are
Brutal, by their being destitute of understanding, are below them: And those
that are Heavenly ( viz. Blessed Angels and Saints) seem to be above them;
whose Appetites, wholly bent to the love of Holiness, can never be guilty of
excess. Their Pleasures admit of no Temperance nor Restrictions; but the more
high, and exerted they be, the more refined and excellent they are. But we are
of a middle Nature, between the Brutal and the Heavenly; and partake something
of both. Our Pleasures are dangerous; our Appetites are very apt to be
excessive; and we have Understanding to moderate and repress them; and
therefore we are carefully to do it, that from such Voluntary Restraints we may
be Virtuous, and have praise both with God and Men.

And indeed, a curbing of the Appetites of Nature, even these Men themselves,
however they object it against the Laws of Christ, will, upon more considerate
thoughts, like well of and commend.

They cannot but approve of the Fidelity of those to each other, whom the
Marriage-Bond has united; and they would detest a Spurious Issue to be brought
forth by those whom they have by Wedlock enclosed to themselves alone: But this
could not be, but by some restraint put upon those Appetites which are Natural.

And shall they be willing to admit of such Restraints for the good of the
Community, and for their own satisfaction also; and shall they find fault with
them in Religion?

And if the Holy Laws of Christ shall not only make us fit to live among Men,
by putting a Bridle on those Inclinations, as to the outward Act; but shall
also render us well-pleasing in the sight of God, by keeping up Chastity in the
Heart, and a Cleanness in the Soul; shall any be so devoid of Reason, as to
urge this as an Argument against the Laws of Christ, and not rather be willing
to esteem it the Honor of these Laws, and the great Credit of those who give
Obedience to them?

This they may be sure of, that the prohibiting some Inclinations, even as to
their most inward Motions, however it may seem severe, is yet in reality the
facilitating of our Obedience, as to the whole of it. For, how easy is it for
him to abstain from Adultery, who dares not lust? The Laws would have been
difficult indeed, if they had forbidden the Effects, and, at the same time,
allowed the Appetites.

Yea, I might yet further say, That there is in our Nature a Principle of
Modesty and Shamefacedness, which does as much resist unclean and carnal
Actings, as our Inclinations may seem to promote them. And he who keeps under
his Appetite, does not offer so great a Violence to his Nature, as he does,
who, by giving the Reins to his sensual Desires, brings Shame and a Blush.

Disgrace before Men sits more uneasy upon the libidinous Actor, than the
restraining of his Appetite would have done. This later would have been but his
private pain (if his pain,) for a time; the other lasts the longer for being
public, and strikes a greater torment into him by being so.

Yea, though the unclean Person should escape Cognizance of Men, yet his own
Thoughts would upbraid him, as having acted poorly, and below the Excellence of
a Man.

I have, Theophilus, been as earnest and long upon this Subject, as if these
Men had been present with us; and I wish they had been so, if what we have said
might have had any good effect upon them. I am sure, could we regulate their
Wills, it would be no difficult thing to convince their Understandings, That
the Laws of our Lord are, in respect of Natural Inclinations and Appetites,
very reasonable, yea, truly excellent.


Theoph. Well it would be, that, if these Men will not, by a right managing of
their Appetites, be Virtuous, they were of that Rank of Creatures, which, by an
uncontrolled yielding to their Inclinations, are not Vicious.


Eubul. But let us proceed to another unreasonable thing, which they object
against the Christian Laws: viz. That they dash the pleasure of Conversation,
by threatening every Word that is impertinent, or awry, with the dreadful day of
Judgment, Matt 12.36. which, instead of Cheerfulness in a Man's self, and
Courtesy to his Friends, may in Him excite an Anxious Fearfulness, and toward
Them a silent or Morose deportment.

It is, Theophilus, a very great mistake concerning idle Words, to think, that
an innocent Cheerfulness, and a kind and Courteous Converse, is struck at by
our Lord. No, were there nothing else, his Example might teach us to interpret
him otherwise. He came not, as John the Baptist, in a rough and severe manner,
But Eating and Drinking, i. e. in an Amicable, Friendly, and Sociable way;
Having the Law of kindness in his Mouth; and obliging Men unto him by his
Verbal Expressions, as well as doing them good by his outward Actions.

There are two Interpretations of our Lawgivers Speech concerning idle Words.
One is, That, by them, all such Words are meant, as are Un-profitable both to
those that speak them, and those whom they are spoken unto.

The other Interpretation is this, That all Evil, False, and reviling Words,
are primarily meant. The occasion of our Lords speaking them, being from the
Pharisees, saying, That he cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of the
Devils. Hereupon we are told, that (...) Idle Word is sometimes read (...) Evil
Word. And though the Word (...) should be the truer Reading, yet still it would
be but little different; for (...) signifies Vain; and Vain is, in
Scripture-meaning, the same with False.

But, Theophilus, take whether of these Interpretations, you will; I cannot see
how the pleasure of Conversation will thereby be beaten down. He would deserve
to be excluded from all Friendly Society, who should censure innocent Freedom,
and cheerful Talk, in the number of idle Words. If in the midst of worldly
cares and trouble, they refresh and recreate the Speakers and Hearers, how can
they be said to be useless to both? Nay, if they Administer to the Virtues of
Courteousness and Affability, of Kindness and Friendship, the account of them,
at the last day, we may hope, will be joyful; And so, the Anxious Fearfulness,
and the Silent or Morose Deportment (which was talked of,) may be laid aside.

It is very fit, that the Best Member, which a Man has, should be under a Law;
and I readily yield, that by Idle Words, the Filthiness, and Foolish Talking,
and Jestings that are not convenient; and likewise, all Malicious and Perverse
Speaking, are utterly forbidden. But by the Prohibition of these, and by the
Tongues being brought under a Law, Conversation is very much promoted; which,
were there no Government over the Mouth, would be shrewdly Wounded, if not
quite overthrown. An Ingenious Person would choose the greatest Solitude rather
than Company, should he there find Tongues let loose to Idle Impertinencies; or
employed in nothing but Obscenities, or Scurrilous and Unsavory Reflections.

Neither will Conversation be lessened, or rendered less pleasing, by the
intermixtion of matters that are more Serious and Profitable: And these are
reckoned, by the most ingenious of all the Poets, the best Enjoyments of
Society. Sermo oritur non de villis, domibusque alienis; Nec been necne Lepos
Saltet. We talk not, says he, of other Folks business and affairs; nor yet
enquire, whether such an one Danceth well or no; Sed quod magis ad nos
pertinet, and nescire malum est, agitamus; but, what more concerns us, and
which it would ill become us to be ignorant of, That is our Discourse. As
whether Riches or Virtue make Men Happy: Whether Honesty or Profit should be
the ground of Friendship: What is the Nature of Goodness; and wherein it is,
that the chief Good consists, Christianity well allows of such Discourse, and
affords a large Field for it. And surely, the Heavens or the Earth, the effects
of Providence at large, or those things that more immediately relate to our own
or Neighbors advantage, may seem little obliged to us, if they cannot engage
us from idle or disingenuous Speeches.

Some, (Theophilus,) for the avoiding of Idle Words have addicted themselves,
in all Companies, to the talk of Religion; and sometimes (not to the pleasure of
all,) have been forward to declare their own particular Evidences, and the
secret Favors of God to their Souls: Thinking it, possibly, no more than their
duty so to do. But, surely, the former is not necessary: Let your Speech be
seasoned with Salt, implies, (as one well Comments it,) that as our Meat should
have a Relish from Salt, so our Speech should have the Savor of Religion. But
that it should be wholly of Religion, is not any more necessary than that our
Meat should be wholly Salt. And for the later, I may say, That Spiritual
Evidences, and the Secret Favors which God may have vouch-safed to us, should
have a kind of Modesty attending them, which should forbid the seeking after
Auditors and Spectators. He, that said Cerne, Dionysia, fastum deposui, See,
Dionysia, I have no Pride left, was perchance the more Proud from his Boasted
Humility.

Such joyful Sentiments of Gods Mercy and Love should, in some respect, imitate
godly Sorrow and holy Fasting; causing the Man to enter into his Closet, that
he may not appear unto Men to rejoice; Satisfied with his Eye alone, who puts
such Gladness into the Heart: Or else imparting it to one, or some Christian
Friends only, where he shall not be thought to appear (...), some great one,
dearer unto God than other Men.

And thus, Theophilus, you see, what little reason there is for the finding
fault with our Saviors Laws, as if by forbidding idle Words, they overturned
all the pleasure of Society. They rather provide, that Conversation shall have
the more pleasure, by all foolish, impertinent, deceitful, and opprobrious
Talks being discarded from it; and by such excellent and useful variety of
Discourses being afforded, as shall be befitting Men to use. In a word, they
allow us to be Innocently Cheerful, but not Extravagantly Merry; and command
our Conversation to be Religious, yet free from Affectedness and Indiscretion.


Theoph. I see, we have reason to use some of our words in Thankfulness to our
Lawgiver, who has indulged us such a Freedom, as by them to exercise all the
cheerful Virtues, that nourish and commend a sociable Conversation. Whoever it
is, that loves the innocent Enjoyments of Acquaintance and Friends; the kind
Expressions which they use to each other; the grateful Entertainment of
profitable and ingenious Discourses, (and who is it, that loves them not?) must
also love the Laws of our Lord, which banish all those words that shall any way
corrupt or sower so great a Pleasure. And whosoever shall find fault with these
Laws, as if they enjoined a moroseness of Temper, either do not understand
them, or else are for such a licentious and ill-natured way of Converse, as
even an Honest Heathen would condemn.


Eubul. The next unreasonable Thing is the Loving of Enemies, even while they
persist to be injurious; which, they say, deprives us of that sense of Honor
and Courage, which, as we are Men, should belong unto us; and makes way also
for new and greater Injuries to be done us.

But that the Loving of Enemies, even when they persist to be injurious, is not
so unreasonable a thing, may hence appear; Because some of the better sort of
Heathens, who had Nature chiefly their Guide, have gone a good step toward it;
and do commend the withholding of Revenge, as very honorable in those that do
it, and do urge many good Arguments for it. Nempe hoc indocti, They are the
ignorant sort, that would vent their spleen upon their Enemies: But Chrysippus
non dicit idem, Learned Chrysippus is of another mind, and mild Thales, and
wise Socrates, Qui partem acceptae saeva inter vincla cieutae, Accusatori
nollet dare: Who, though, by false Accusations, thrown into Prison, and
condemned to end his Life by drinking Poison, would yet, could he have done it,
not have given his Accuser a part with him, Juv. Sat. 13. So that if it be
Unreasonable, it is not altogether the fault of Christianity; and they, in some
measure, must condemn Those, who have been accounted Wise Men in the World, and
the great Promoters of Virtue, before they can find fault with the Laws of our
Lord.

And, indeed, when the visible things of the World do all join together (as
they manifestly do,) in a kind of mutual Concord, for the promoting the welfare
of Men; (The Sun and Stars not shining to themselves; The Earth not bringing
forth Herbs and Fruit upon her own Account; nor the Beasts and Fowls feeding
merely for their own Lives; but all of these, either immediately or mediately,
for Man's use and Service.) And also when Men are born into the World more
impotent (as truly they are,) than any other Creatures; naked altogether and
helpless, for a longer time, than what brings many other things to their full
Growth and Perfection; and this, that they may owe their being nursed up to the
Tenderness and Care of others, it may seem to do more than hint, That, as
Friendship and Good Will is highly to be maintained amongst us, so when, by any
Persons, they are broken, the Breach is not to be continued; but (by friendly
yieldings, and the being affected with pity toward the Distemper of Men's
Minds, as we usually are toward the Diseases of their Bodies,) is presently to
be closed up. For shall the good of Men, which is so carried on by all things
else, be neglected by ourselves? Or shall the Passion of a Man, which may
quickly wear off, prevail more for our Disrespect, than the Dignity of Human
Nature shall for our kindness to him?

But, suppose that a Retaliation of Injuries be not naturally against Justice;
yet, certainly, these Men, who urge the unreasonableness of Loving Enemies,
cannot but grant, that, in case the History of our Redemption be true, it is
but just and equitable, that our Enemies, while they are Enemies, should be
Loved.

For, while we were Enemies to Christ, he dyed for us; while we had provoked
God to throw his Wrath upon us; a Wrath which would have been greater than we
could have born; our Blessed Lord, in pity to us, came from Heaven to Save us.

And when We, merely by being Loved as Enemies, are preserved from destruction,
shall We think it such an unreasonable thing to bear a Loving respect toward
Those who are our Enemies? Especially, when the greatest Trespasses which they
can commit against us, are nothing in Comparison of those which we have
committed against God; and which are forgiven us by Him.

Besides, as Christ has born our Image by taking upon him our Nature, so there
is none of our Enemies but retain in their Nature, as they are Men, the Honor
that our Lord has done us; and, in some sort, do wear his Image. And can we,
if we rightly weigh things, show any thing but Love there, where is a
Resemblance of the Son of Man, who has showed the greatest Love to us?

And though Injuries be done us by Those, who bear the likeness of Him that
never did wrong to any Man, yet so far should those Injuries be from hindering
of our Love, that they should rather put us in Mind of those great Sins against
God, which we daily must be forgiven: And so should quicken us to do that to
our Brethren, which God in far greater measures, through the Death of Christ,
does unto us.

Whence, supposing that there is Truth in Christ's being our Savior, the loving
of Enemies, even while they persist to be injurious, is not an unreasonable,
but an equitable, thing. And that Christ's coming into the World to save us, is
a certain Truth we have the highest reason to believe.

But yet, whereas they further say, That the thus loving of Enemies does take
away that Honor and Courage, which should belong to us as Men, we reply;

That it contributes much to our Honor and Courage: For he that forgives an
Injury, is always, in the Act of forgiving, Superior unto him who is forgiven.
And, in not permitting the Miscarriages of others to disorder his Passions, he
does maintain a Greatness of Spirit, which some others, who are presently for
Revenge and drawing of Swords, are far short of. Minuti semper and infirmi est
animi, exiguique voluptas Vltio, is a true saying of the Satyrist: It is the
part of a mean Soul to be looking after Revenge, and taking pleasure in it.

And that Honor which is so much talked of, and, most an end, so much stood
upon, what is it usually but a Reputation among the vainer, and most
injudicious sort of Men? And what pitifully mean Matters shall engage some in
long and costly Lawsuits, and others in the venturing their Lives, upon the
Account of this empty Reputation and Honor?

Let a Man show himself to be such, who can value an Ingenuous and Christian
Carriage toward him; and who can resent the contrary, but yet will not permit
any unworthiness of others to get the upper-hand of his Reason and Charity: Let
him manifest to all about him, that he is a Lover of Men; that he desires their
good, much more than he stomachs the wrongs they have done him: That he is more
inclinable* (if they will give him leave,) to show Kindness to them, than to
act any thing of Revenge: That he leaves all Revenge unto God, whom it belongs
unto; and yet earnestly prays, that God will not execute it: Let him do all
these things, and he will gain more Honor with those that are the most
understanding, sober and good, (from whom alone Honor deserves to be termed
so,) than the Man ever shall, who rages at every petty Injury, and breathes
nothing but Threatening and Revenge.

Yea, and lastly, instead of those new and greater Injuries, which, from such a
behavior toward Enemies, are said to have a fairer way made to fall upon him,
there will be, in all likelihood, the quite contrary effect.

For who is he, that will be forward to injure the Man, who, he sees, is
willing to be a Friend to all? And, if he has injured him already, when he
considers he has injured so much Goodness, how will he cast (as it were,) the
first Stone at himself; be troubled at his fault, and endeavor to repair it,
by a Submissive and Relenting Carriage?

But if the Offender be Stubborn, and not so easily brought down, yet the
Offended Man's Christian and Charitable Deportment, without interruption
continued, will surely at last melt him. To this end is that Precept, and the
Reason of it, Romans 12.20. If thine Enemy Hunger, Feed him; if he Thirst, give
him Drink; for, in so doing, thou shall heap Coals of Fire upon his Head. It is
a way of Speech alluding unto those who are Melters of Metals; when a Metal is
very hard they not only put Fire under it, but heap Coals upon it, and by this
means, though hard to be Melted it be, yet at last it yields to the Fire.

So when to an Enemy, though of an obstinate and most hardened Temper, a
Christian Love shall still be shown; and kindnesses, upon good occasions, be
heaped upon his Head, He must be harder than Iron or Brass who will not be
sensible of them, and suffer his Evil to be overcome with Good.


Theoph. He would deserve that Those, who are Enemies to him, should for ever
go on so to be; and that others, not his Enemies, should very little esteem
him, who, after such Considerations as these, shall say, That it is
unreasonable to Love Enemies, even while they are such.


Eubul. But let us go to the Fourth thing, which they object against these
Laws, viz. That they require the Macerating of the Body with Fasting and
Abstinence; which, what is it, but the making a Man Cruel to his own Flesh?

I freely acknowledge, Theophilus, That Fasting is a Christian Duty; and that
when our Lord says, when thou Fastest enter into thy Closet, though it be not
in the plain form of a Command, Thou shall Fast, yet it is not hereby the less
a Command. And the reason is, because our Savior, from the frequent Practice
of Fasting, and the great Credit which this Duty among the Jews was in, did
suppose it to be a Duty. And by his Precepts for the right performance of it,
he may well be presumed to enjoin the thing. And therefore in his Sermon he
ranks it with Prayer and Alms: Which Duties (and I may say, which Sermon too,
as to every part of it,) concern the Practice of Christians, so long as the
World stands.

But, wherein, Theophilus, is it that the harshness of this Law of Fasting lies?

If our Bodies are apt (as too apt they are,) from constant Feeding, not to
serve, but to rebel against the better part of us, our Souls; is it so
unreasonable a thing to withdraw for a time their wonted Nourishment; that from
them our Prayers and Praises may not be Drowsy: And our better thoughts not
Clogged?

Or, if out of a Sense of our own Unworthiness, we shall sometimes lay aside all
our enjoyments; refusing to Eat the Fat, and Drink the Sweet; that, in the
sight of God, we may acknowledge ourselves less than the least of his Mercies;
(which sure by reason of our continual Failings we too truly are,) what sober
Man can condemn us for so doing?

Or, lastly, if we shall make a suitable Expression of Repentance for some
Sins, which have chiefly proceeded from the Body, by exercising upon it an holy
Revenge, and denying it, for a season, the things which are pleasant; They must
be very unreasonable Men, who will say, That we do more than what is meet to be
done.

The Religions even of the Heathens have not been without their Abstinences, as
their Votivae noctes do testify; and their Wise Men have addicted themselves
thereunto. Hence Lucilius is by Seneca exhorted to fare sometimes so hard,
Liberaliora ut sint alimenta Carceris, That the Diet of a Prison should exceed
his. Nay, Epicurus himself (whom these Objectors against Christianity are so
willing to have their Master,) had his certain days, quibus malign famem
extingueret, nec toto ass pasceretur. Which things surely may teach These Men
not to condemn our Holy Religion, by reason of the Abstinence which it enjoins;
especially since this Abstinence is used for Ends so much higher than the
other, and such as are truly excellent.

So distant, Theophilus, are the Laws of Christ from the Imputation of Cruelty
on the account of Fasting, that they allow us, ordinarily, the moderate Use,
and, on Festival Days, whether Civil or Sacred, the more plentiful Enjoyment of
Gods good Creatures, so far as they shall minister to an Innocent or Religious
Cheerfulness of Body and Soul. Nay, even in the very exercise of Fasting, our
Bodies are not to be enfeebled, (as some Religious Men's of old were, whose
Excesses this way will rather be forgiven than rewarded,) but only made such as
they ought to be, obedient to the Soul and to God. Yea, we thereby contribute
to their Health and Welfare; which, by fullness of Bread, and excess of Wine,
are too often destroyed. And, what is the chief thing of all, we, by so doing,
provide that they shall hereafter, to their endless Happiness, be Spiritual
Bodies. If this be cruelty to ourselves, I know not, Theophilus, what will be
kindness. This is certain, that amidst such Acts of Mortification, there
arises a secret, but very great, Content and Satisfaction. He who has truly
tried, knows it to be so.

And then, for the Last Fault that they find with these Laws, viz. That they
bind us to part with our Estates and Lives for the asserting our Religion, when
merely some outward Compliance, and a denying of some few things only, and this
no otherwise than in show for a time, would preserve us; which, say they, is a
hard saying, and who can bear it? We answer;

That we very seldom are brought to these Extremities; our holy Religion
ordinarily providing, that from the sweetness of Nature, which it teaches us
to nourish amongst Men, we should enjoy both Estates and Lives with Peace and
Safety.

But then, Theophilus, when our Lives and Welfare are, in the usual course of
the World, so well by our Lawgiver designed; and Blessings in his Gospel are
made known unto us, so much better than Life, and all the Enjoyments of it; Can
it seem so hard a saying, that, in a seldom and special Exigence, we should, to
the loss of Estate and even of Life itself, confess this Lawgiver, and bear
witness to this Gospel?

Should our Lord have done so great things for us, and permitted us to affirm
or deny them, as, from hopes or fears in this World, we should see good, He
himself would have been much wanting to the Religion he taught, and we might
with some reason have questioned the Truth of it, when its Author was so little
concerned for the Esteem, and Honor, it should have among Men. So that, in a
right estimate of things, upon supposition that the Christian Religion is true,
our Lord could not, in Justice and Wisdom have done less, than required the
parting with Estate and Life for the maintaining of it.

And These Men, Theophilus, however they stand so much upon their Lives and
Incomes in this particular, will yet be forward enough to venture them for the
vindicating of their own Truth and Right; or for the asserting the Reputation
of a Friend; in things, on either Hand, mean enough. And they will think, that, in
Generosity, they are bound thus to do. Why then should they so much shrink of
their Courage, for the sober and deliberate maintaining of Truth, and
Privileges, that so highly concern them; and of the Honor of their Lord, who
has been, and is, a Friend, beyond what the Friendship of all Men in the
World, were it amassed together, could amount unto? Indeed, were there an end
of all Happiness and Being, when this Life should end, we could the less blame
Men, if they, upon no Accounts, would part with their Lives; and, upon very
few, let go their Estates. But when Christianity holds out a better
Inheritance, and a better Life unto those, who shall be willing to become Poor,
or to Dye for the Sake of Christ, and his Gospel, there is more encouragement
to hazard, yea, to lose all, in this cause, than in the best cause the World
affords beside.

But, whereas it is urged, that when a mere outward Compliance, and a Denial
only of some few things; and this, no otherwise than in Show for a Time, would
preserve us, we are then unreasonably required to suffer; I would ask, What way
there is to Confess our Lord and Assert our Religion before Men, besides that
of outward Gestures and Words? For the Heart, Men cannot discern; and the
Thoughts are beyond their Search. Where therefore, there is an External
Compliance with those that are Enemies to Christ, and we Say as they Say; and
Do as they Do; we deny Christ before Men, as fully as we know how to do.

And surely the denying of only some things in our Holy Religion, cannot be
thought to be made amends for, by other things being retained. For, by the same
reason, that One part of Christianity is denied, any Other part, or All, may in
the like manner be so too.

Neither, let any one imagine that there can be a denying of Christ, which
shall be only the Work of the Nerves and Muscles, (as once a Jew said his
confessing of Christ was,) the Heart, in the mean time, not consenting, and
thereby continuing Sound. For the Heart must needs be Faulty and False, when it
shall suffer the Mouth to speak Deceitful Things. Our Lords undissembled
bearing of Poverty and Want, Scandals and Reproaches; and his most Faithful
Suffering of the most Bitter and Accursed Death for our Welfare, does certainly
deserve, that, when good occasion requires, we should openly and fairly undergo
the loss of Earthly Enjoyments, and of Life itself, for his Honor: and, with
the last drop of our Blood, bear witness to that Religion, for the Confirmation
of which he shed his own most precious Blood. This is the way for us to fill up
that which is behind of the Sufferings of Christ, in our Flesh. For none of his
Sufferings for our Expiation are behind; Those he has wholly undergone
himself, and no Man could join with him in them: But a room for our Testimony
to the Truth of his Gospel he has left; and herein we can share with him in
his Sufferings. And this let us do, willing to lose some few years to come,
(which, were we free from Troubles, we, upon the Account of Mortality, could
not be sure of,) rather than cast a blot upon all the years of our Life past.
Yea, disesteeming this whole short Life, and all the Pleasures and Profits of
it, in Comparison of that Crown and Bliss, which are prepared for those who are
faithful unto Death. Though, truly, our Lord is very desirous that our Lives
should be saved, rather than destroyed, if, by any honest and upright means,
they so can be. And therefore he allows, yea commands us, if we be persecuted
in one City, to flee unto another; and, if with Integrity we can preserve our
Lives, by no means to lose them.

However, let not this Command of our Lord, which requires us to part with
Estates and Lives rather than deny him, be faulted as too rigid and hard, while
the Rewards are so much beyond the Pains; and while so many of Those, who have
thus suffered, have had such Assistances and Joys afforded them, even in the
midst of their Sufferings, that a Man would almost wish for their Sorrows,
could he but have their Joys together with them. From all which it may appear,
Theophilus, that the Air (as was objected,) is not too pure to be breathed in;
and that they are not unreasonable Heights of Duty which are required of us.

Neither may it disturb us, that this our Work is not, without difficulty, to
be begun, and, in like manner, for some time, to be carried on by us. For it
is, in a sort, a Privilege which Angels have not, to testify unto Pains, yea
even unto Death itself, the Sincerity of Obedience. Which Testification of
Sincerity, although it arises from an Imperfection of Human Nature, will yet
be very acceptable unto God; possibly, no less than that of the Holy Ones
Above, which is wholly free from all such Conflicts.

And, while the chief Intent of our Lawgiver is to make us Pious toward God,
Composed in our own Breasts, Loving unto others, and Loved again by them;
Perfect as our Father in Heaven is perfect, who makes his Sun to rise on the
Evil and on the Good; and meting only the same measure to others, which has
first been meted, by the Love and Compassion of our Lord, unto us; we must, one
would think, use very much Violence to the better Inclinations of our Souls, if
we do not entirely love these Laws.

As for mine own part, Theophilus, (will you give me leave to speak my Heart
freely to you?) my Love is so great to them, that, methinks, I would obey them
all, not so much because I am commanded to do it, as because they are every way
in themselves so worthy to be loved. I could wish, that they were even one with
my Soul; and that all my Thoughts and Actions might proceed not more from Life,
than from Them. And, so far would I be from questioning the goodness of them,
that I would as soon doubt, whether it were good to Live and be Happy. So dear
are they unto me; yea, so much better than Life itself.


Theoph. I am much prevailed upon by the Reasons you have given; and your last
Affectionate Words add so much a further weight to those Reasons, that they
appear to me not to be more the Issues of your Brain than of your Heart. And
therefore you may, on good Grounds, presume, that they will be convincing to
others, when they have first been so to yourself.

But, though I acknowledge the Laws of our Lord to require most reasonable
things of us; and do find that they truly have an high place in my Esteem and
Love; yet I Will confess to you, Eubulus, much dejected I am sometimes, when I
reflect upon my many Failures. Resolve, indeed, I do, for the greatest Care and
Circumspection, but yet my Sins do daily increase upon me; and what will it
boot me to love these Laws, when every day I transgress them? To own them so
admirably fitted for the perfecting of our Nature, and the refining of our
Practice, when I see mine own Nature so imperfect under them, and my Practcie
so impure in Comparison of them?


Eubul. What you now say, Theophilus, makes way for, and will best be answered,
by the Consideration of the Fourth thing, viz.

That from these Laws we have a fair way for the Pardon of all Sins.

Most perfect these Laws are, (as you have heard,) but by reason of that
weakness, which is within us, and those many strong Temptations, which are
without, they are not like to be perfectly obeyed. All that we can do, is, as
it were, a great way off to behold and admire that perfection, which we cannot
of ourselves attain unto; and to grieve, that we daily and hourly, some way or
other have Sinned against it.

But yet there is hope in Israel concerning this thing, Our Blessed Lord
knowing our frame and make; and seeing that our strength and abilities are but
small, has added two other Laws of Faith and Repentance, in which we may find
some cheering, in respect of those many Breaches of the Divine Laws, which lie
as a weight upon our Souls.

That of Faith requires thus much of us.

That we believe in Christ as a Savior, who, by his precious Blood for us
Shed, has appeased Gods Wrath, and obtained Remission for all the Sins of Men;
and for ours, in that number. And from the mighty importance of this Law, and
the infinite benefits it affords unto us, the whole Gospel, and all the Laws
thereof, are, in a comprehensive Word, called the Law of Faith.

And, in this respect, it is much different from the Old Law. Perfect Obedience
was required by That, and because perfection of Obedience is necessarily
grounded upon a perfection of Nature, the Law seems therefore to have been
the Rule, not of our Works only, but of our Nature also; which at the Creation
was committed pure into our Hands.

But this Law of Faith, by reason of Human Natures having been perfect in
Christ, and having Done also, without the least failure, whatsoever was
Incumbent on the Representative of Mankind to do; and, as united with the
Divine Nature, having suffered likewise what Punishment was Due to the Sins of
Men; this Law, I say, of Faith does Command that we should not rely upon any
Righteousness of our own? not yet Despair for any Sin, whether belonging to our
Nature, or more particularly to our own Persons; but should have our Eyes upon
Him, who alone, by his Merits, has purchased Salvation for us.

The Law of Repentance is this, viz.

That we truly be sorry for what Sins soever we commit; and do heartily
endeavor an amendment of Life. And this shall be available, through the Death
of Christ, for our Pardon.

Repentance shall not, Theophilus, be unto Sins, after the same manner, as
Sacrifices in Moses Law were. Not the small Sins only shall be done away, but
the great ones also shall no less. For he who has called us unto Repentance,
has been a propitiation for all the Sins of Mankind alike; for those of a
deeper Dye, as well as those of a lighter Stain: And his Blood is, against the
greatest Offenses, and the smallest Infirmities, equally Efficacious. Of Old,
if a Man had unwillingly Killed his Brother, and was truly sorry for it, the
avenger of Blood was, notwithstanding, allowed to Slay him, if he could
overtake him before he reached to the City of Refuge. The Sin here (if it were
not rather an unhappiness,) was so far imputed, as That he must dye for it, if
another could run faster than he; which might happen to be a thing beyond his
power to prevent: And though this might stir up a dread of willful Murder, and
a tender care to preserve the Lives of others, by signifying the Blood of Man
to be of so great account, that even He, who shed it against his will, was not
to be esteemed wholly innocent; it yet might seem to be very severe. But, under
Christ's Laws, the Sins which we truly repent of, shall not be reckoned to our
account, merely for some accidental Occurrences, which we could not by any
foresight put by. Much less shall an unavoidable Ignorance, or Error, without
a Sin, bring punishment upon us. No Sin is there, which Repentance will not
obtain Forgiveness for, except one alone, and that is The Sin against the Holy
Ghost, which will never be forgiven, neither in this World, nor in that which
is to come; neither under the Jewish State, nor the Gospel Dispensation. And
yet even This Sin (if now it can be committed, when the miraculous
Demonstration of the Spirit is ceased,) is not impardonable in Men so, as if
Repentance, were it there, could not prevail for Remission: But it is therefore
impardonable, because it is attended with an impenitent Obdurateness, and a
perverse Obstinacy against the Means of Salvation, so graciously and evidently
set forth unto them.

Those words to Simon Magus, Acts 8.22. Repent of this thy Wickedness, if
perhaps the Thought of thine Heart may be forgiven thee, show not that St.
Peter doubted whether the fault would be remitted, though there should be true
Repentance; but that the doubt was, whether the Repentance would be true or no.
Or rather, that way of speech imports the Apostle not as one that doubts, but
as one that encourages a Sinner in a most difficult case to repent. And Esau's
finding no place of Repentance, (Heb. 12.17.) though he sought it carefully
with Tears, does by no means signify that either himself did not repent, or
that his true Repentance would not be accepted with God; (much less that any
truly repentant under the Gospel may, in some cases, fail of Forgiveness of his
Sins;) But that he found no such Repentance in his Father Isaac, as to reverse
the Blessing, which, through mistake, (but by God's especial Providence so
ordering it,) he had given to Jacob the younger Brother.

The Denying Repentance, as some Christian Doctors in ancient Times did, to
those who sinned after Baptism, did very ill commend the Administration of
Baptism unto Infants; who might seem thereby to be put into a more dangerous
estate, than, had they not known the Font, they would have been; and it was a
Severity which had no true warrant from our Lord, or his Apostles. And though
the Primitive Church did not admit Adulterers, Idolaters, and Murderers to
Repentance; and also did utterly refuse Those, on their Deathbed, as
unpardonable Offenders, who had lived wickedly all their Lives; yet she called
them unpardonable, not because God would not forgive them, but because it was
in his Power alone to do it: There being no way (as she thought,) left for
pardon, through the Ministry of Ecclesiastic Persons, to be had. Or, at least,
since Absolution would have been, in some sort, a warranting of the pardon, she
thought it better not to grant it, in such hazardous cases, than not to
satisfy herself in the doing it. But yet she never thought, how great soever
the Sin or Sins were, that there would not certainly be a place for pardon,
where there was a true and worthy Repentance.

And now, Theophilus, who would not be cheered amidst his dejectedness for
Sins, from such merciful Laws, as these are? Who would not love the Laws, which
allow such easy Terms for Pardon and Happiness? If our Lawgiver had required
some great thing of us, would we not have done it? How much more, when he
commands such equal and reasonable things as these are?


Thooph. You have much quieted my Fears: And those Clouds which sometimes hang
upon my Soul, are, in great measure, blown away. Only, methinks, I am more than
ordinarily concerned at my Sins, since they have been committed against that
God, who, from my poor Repentance, is ready to forgive me. And, by my believing
in Him, who has done what Mankind should have done; and suffered, what they
should have suffered; I account myself the more obliged, and am, indeed, the
more inclined, to obey his Righteous Laws; and, if occasion were, even to
suffer for his Sake.


Eubul. You say very well, and by your Words do contribute to the right
Conception of Faith, and Repentance. For there are some, who make These to
stand in opposition to the other Laws of our Lord; which they, throughout their
Lives, do the less scruple to break, because a Pardon is so easy to be had.


Theoph. What you speak, I have, with much concern, observed in more than a
few. Some are very willing to think, since their Own Righteousness is not to be
relied upon, but Christ's Merits alone to be trusted in, that therefore, if they
do but Believe, it is no matter how they Live. And, as if Obedience were not a
necessary thing, they have urged those Words of the Apostle, viz. That the Law,
which was Engraven in Stones, is done away; which, say they, must be meant of
the Moral Law; That alone being it, which was Written in the Tables of Stone.

And then, for Repentance; if they Exercise that, many years hence; yea, though
it be but a little before their Death, they will persuade themselves it is time
enough. The Thief while on the Cross; and the Laborers at the Eleventh Hour
were accepted.


Eubul. But, Theophilus, how little would the Excellence of the Laws of Faith
and Repentance be, if they should make way for such unworthy Practice? And to
what purpose are there so many other Laws given by the Son of God, if the
Observance of them be of so little Moment? Surely, unless the Enemy of God and
all Goodness, be taken into Consultation, it can never be thought, that, when
Mankind was miserable by reason of their Sin, Christ Jesus should in such a
wonderful manner leave the Glory of Heaven and Shed his most precious Blood, to
this End, viz. That they might without fear and danger, commit Sin; and with
the greater assurance and confidence continue in it.

They willingly are ignorant, that Christ Dyed to Vindicate the Authority of
the Divine Law, which they had Violated; and that therefore it was afterward
more carefully to be obeyed.

They are very ready not to rely upon their own Righteousness, but they little
consider that the not Relying upon it, does suppose that Righteousness there is
to be, on which they must not rely; and that they should be as careful to
practice it, as they are forward not to rely upon it. Otherwise, it would be
the Practicing of Wickedness, rather than their not Relying on their own
Righteousness; which are as far different, as the being humbly Religious, is
from the being audaciously Profane.

Nor, does their Trusting in Christ's Merits as having done and suffered what
they were to do and suffer, procure them a Pardon of their Sins, so, as they
may still persist to be Sinful. All Sins shall be pardoned, for which, under
the Law strictly considered, there was no Hope; but not absolutely pardoned,
without any further Consideration or Condition. The great benefit of Faith is
this; to wit, That instead of perfect Obedience, our sincere Endeavors shall
be accepted. And where These are, what Defects soever there be in us, they
shall all be made up by the Merits of Christ, who is our Righteousness. But no
benefit is there to be expected, if we endeavor not at all, or be unsincere in
our Endeavors.

The Apostle's words, That the Law which was engraven in Stones is done away,
are to be understood of the Law as it was part of the Covenant with the Jews,
not as it was a Rule for all Men. In that it was the Law of Nature, and written
in the Hearts of Men, before it was written in Tables, it still obliges, and
for ever will oblige, to Obedience. Nor can any one, unless he has bidden a
Farewell to all Reason, imagine that our Lord would bring the Moral Law into the
Gospel, delivering it in greater plainness, and raising it to an higher
Perfection, that, after all, Men's Obedience thereunto should not be necessary;
or that Faith in Him, who came to destroy the Works of the Devil, should give a
Liberty to the practicing those Works.

To be short; Faith, though but a single word it be, is yet an highly
comprehensive one, and includes mighty things in it; Such as, in good sort, do
correspond to the infinite and wonderful Love which has been shown to Mankind.
It implies a Knowledge of the great Mystery of our Redemption: A Closing with
the Will of God, which is holy and good: A sober and right use of Reason: A
Courageous asserting of our Holy Religion against all Oppositions: An unfeigned
Love both to God and to Men, with a deep sense of our Unworthiness, and
Affectionate Acknowledgment of our owing all to the Divine Bounty. Who are they
then can think, that if they do but believe, it is no matter how they live? And
from which of all these Actions (which make up the very Being of Faith,) is
there so much as the least Countenance to a loose Conversation? Nay, there
cannot be stronger Obligations to a Sober, Righteous* and Godly Life, than
These are; and in the exercise of them, this Sober, Righteous, and Godly Life
does consist.

And how, Theophilus, can any wrest Repentance for Sin to the further and more
safe committing of Sin? Shall the Example of the Thief on the Cross, which was
written for Men's Comfort, administer to their Presumption? They consider not
the Eminency of that poor Malefactor's Faith, from which his Repentance did
spring. It is not altogether improbable, that this was the first Opportunity he
had of believing in Christ. However, the time of his believing, and hoping for
Mercy, was very remarkable. That when our Lord was in Torments as well as he,
and was destitute of all Earthly Supports, He Then should be sought unto: When
he was forsaken of his Disciples, derided by the Soldiers, and reviled by the
other Thief, as one justly suffering; That Then he should be acknowledged as a
Lord; That Then he should be owned, and his Mercy thus begged, Lord, have Mercy
upon me when thou come in thy Kingdom, was a more than ordinary Act of Faith,
and a Repentance very much heightened from the time in which it was begun and
finished.

But can These, who have been Baptized into Christ's Death, and have given up
their Names unto him, as soon almost as they were born, and this, with Solemn
Vows of Fighting Manfully under his Banner, against the World, the Flesh and
the Devil; Can These say, That some of the Last Days of their Life are the
First Opportunities they have had of that Faith, which must give Life to their
Repentance? Should they say it, the many outward Calls they have had by God's
blessed Word read and heard; the many inward Calls of his Holy Spirit, moving
them to their Duty; the many Checks of Conscience they have felt in their
sinful and unchristian Practices, would be ready to contradict them to their
Face.

And then, for the Time, (though they should be as near their End as the Thief
was,) the case with These and with Him is very different.

No Hour is there now, but, in it, it may be said, That Christ is risen from
the Dead; Ascended into Heaven; has given Gifts unto Men; and has had all
Power given unto him; and of these things we have had as great Proofs as can
reasonably be desired: Which makes the Encouragements of turning unto Christ
now, to be far greater, than in that sad and dismal State of his Passion on the
Cross they were.

Unless These Men could be put in the same Circumstances with the Thief; or in
some not altogether unlike unto his; which cannot likely be, (while they shall
thus from the means of Salvation, contrive for their Sins;) there will be small
hopes for them in their late Repentance.

As for Those, who wrought in the Vineyard no sooner than the Eleventh Hour,
and yet were rewarded alike with the Earliest, it is to be understood of those
who were called no sooner, as is evident from Matthew. 20.6.7. About the Eleventh
Hour he went out, and found others standing idle: And says unto them, why
stand you idle? They say unto him, because no Man bath Hired us; where by
Hiring we are to understand Calling; which Calling may have respect either unto
single Persons, or else Nations.

Those Persons who have not heard of the Gospel; or have not had opportunities
of understanding the Mysteries and Precepts of it, if, as soon as they are
acquainted with them, and are invited to give their Names unto Christ, they
shall sincerely do it; though it be in respect of their Lives, as the Eleventh
Hour to the Day, they shall not be refused.

And the like may be said of Nations, even at the later end of the World; They
shall be as dear in the sight of God as those which have had earlier calls.

But the Receiving a Penny at the Ninth and Eleventh Hour is not to be
understood of Them, who, having been Baptized in their Infancy, and outwardly
professing Christianity all along, have deferred the practice of it till their
last years.

For, they were (as I may so speak,) Hired at the first Hour; and have idled it
ever since. And their Idleness is to be esteemed much different from that of
the other. The other wrought not, because as yet they had no Employment, nor
place in the Vineyard; But These had Employment and Place in it, and were
Unfaithful and Truanty: And so may expect Punishment for their early and
continued neglect, while the other shall have a full Reward for their late
Labor; late indeed, yet as early as their Call.

I will not say, but the late Obedience of those who have been early called,
may sometimes be sincere; and, in Mercy, accepted by God. But the Scripture
accounts of it as a thing not ordinary, and, as it were, out of the usual
course. Let us except that one instance of the Thief on the Cross, which is to
be looked upon as a special and un-common Example, (and therefore it stands by
itself in the whole Book of God:) And we shall find the Gospel to promise, in
the usual Current of it, Eternal Rewards to that Obedience only, which has
Perseverance joined with it; and which lasts unto, not begins at, the end of
Life. He that endures to the end shall be saved; and, be thou faithful unto
Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life.

Such considerations as these, Theophilus, for the true Conception of Faith and
Repentance, are requisite abroad, where so many either do not understand them
rightly, or else, are willing, by false arguings, to make them serve for quite
other than Christian Ends. And to Us they may be of use, at least so far, as to
stir up our Grief, that the favor of our Lord in the Pardoning of Sins, should
by any be abused to their greater Condemnation.


Theoph. They not only incline me to grieve for these miserable Men, who are so
much their own Enemies; but do also give me a pleasure in conceiving these
instances of Holy Writ (mentioned by you,) more fully, and to better advantage,
than before I did. That knowledge being most, of all others, delightful to me,
and satisfactory, which arises from the Laws of our Lord; or which is
instrumental to the better understanding and practicing of them.


Eubul. I am sure, These Laws of Faith and Repentance are well worthy our Love,
as for the Excellence of their Effects, so for the Sacredness of their Matter.
What an inward pleasure is it to conceive the Son of God, leaving the Glory of
Heaven, to live upon Earth, and become one among the Sons of Men! How may it
engage all the Powers of the Soul into a Divine Love, while we contemplate him
in in the Garden, sweating, as it were, great drops of Blood; and shedding
afterward the remainder thereof upon the Cross, amidst bitter pains for our
Sake! This is, indeed, in itself, matter of the sadest kind; But, in respect of
Us, what Wonder and Joy may it not excite! But then, if we by Faith look upon
our Lord as he is Ascended into Heaven, to prepare Mansions for us; and as he
shall come again in the Clouds with great Glory, that where He is, there We may
be also; with what an Holy Splendor will our understandings be entertained!
Men are usually taken with great things; State, and Grandeur, though such in
appearance only, draw the Eyes of the most; if really such they be, and do
carry in them true Worth, (as here they eminently do,) they engage the Hearts
also of the Wise and the Good.

Truly, our Faith, from the Sweet and Admirable matter it is fraught with, may
well work by Love; Love, not only to God and Men, but even to the Law likewise
by which it is enjoined.

Such Majesty, as is included in our Faith, is not, I confess, to be found in
Repentance; which consists chiefly in those Actions, that are Humble and Lowly.
But how comely is it that an offending Soul should be humbled before an
offended God; who, at such Submission and Sorrow, condescends, and accepts it
with the greatest Love! A Face which has so Holy a Sadness in it, and is wet
with such Religious Tears, cannot but appear amiable: Yea, even to the Person
who thus repents, there arises a secret Satisfaction in the midst of Sorrow;
and it is none of the least Chearings to him, that he can grieve, in earnest,
for his Sins against so gracious a Father.

And thus much, Theophilus, may suffice for the Consideration of the Laws
themselves: And if (like Those, who walking over pleasant Fields and flowery
Meads, as not content alone with Delights in the Way, will look back, and bring
into one prospect, what successively, and by parts, did so much please them,)
we shall turn our Eyes back upon these Laws, and behold them in the Bulk, which
singly were so excellent, they will afford us a new Delight in the Review.
There is none of them that is unsuty and disagreeing to another. They are not
like that Face, whose Features by themselves were beauteous, but united were
uncomely; but they are such, as increase each others Luster, and show a
Symmetry altogether Divine.


Theoph. It is so, Eubulus. When I consider the Laws which require Duties to
God, I am the more in love with those which enjoin my Behavior toward Men.
And when I weigh those that relate to others and myself, those toward God
appear more advantageously to me; and I presently am excited to put them into
practice, by reverencing, loving, and praising Him, who has given such Laws
unto us. Every particular Precept toward God, toward Men, toward myself,
enkindles my Affection toward the rest; and they Altogether, do highly set
off, and commend to my Love, every Particular.

And this our Love to the Divine Law is not like our Love in many other cases;
which, when we recollect ourselves, and betake us to serious Thoughts, goes
less. For the gaining Acceptance and esteem, no need is there of those
Artifices that the Religious Institutions, among the Heathens, had; which from
Hieroglyphics, Fables, pompous and diverse Superstitions, were served up rather
to the Imaginative Faculty, than to the Understanding; and made to please not
the Wise so much, as the Multitude. The Christian Laws fear not the most
piercing and critical Eyes looking into them; They discovering the greatest
Excellency to him, who has the quickest Sight, and profoundest Judgment,
joined with an Upright Mind. And therefore our Love to them gets new Strength
from Consideration, as having Right Reason for a Foundation; from which, like
an House built upon a Rock, it may stand strongly, and not be cast down nor
abated, for any Wind or Waters that may come against it.


Eubul. And truly, Theophilus, I find it a very great Inducement for the
raising our Love to these Laws, that They, of themselves, are grievous unto
none; but, as the Manna was, are, in a sort, fitted to every Palate, unless to
those that are grievously vitiated. Who is it, that ever had just cause to
repent he had yielded Obedience to them? To whom, in the exercise, do they not
bring Content and Satisfaction? If at any time they seem to create Trouble to a
Man, it is rather because others trangress them, than because he himself
observes them: A thing which cannot be said of other Laws. Some of those which
are profitable for the Community, are not so for some particular Men; who, for
the public Good, must be content to bear some private Inconveniences; and
some, advantageous to a few Persons, may not be so to a Nation in general.

Neither is there any thing, in its own Nature truly Good, which is omitted in
their Injunctions; nor any thing, in its own Nature truly Evil, forgotten in
their Prohibitions. Nor can there be any the least occasion (as in the wisest
Human Constitutions sometimes there is,) for second Thoughts to add any thing
unto, or alter any thing in them.

Yea, Theophilus, if we consider the Laws of our Lord, as they have relation
only to Civil Society, and the Welfare of Men in this World, how far do they
surpass those of the most noted Lawgivers!

We find not among his Laws any that look like that of Solon; which required
that All, in Public Seditions, should run and join with the juster Part; and
ordered that, if any did not so, be should for ever after be infamous. For,
when specious Pretenses should make (as very often they do,) the Worst Side, to
the Many, look fairer than that which is is really the Better, and every one
must of necessity take his Sword into his Hand; what a Flame would there,
hereby, be blown up in a Commonwealth, without any probable means left of
quenching it, but by large Effusion of Blood! So that Plutarch might well call
this a singular and altogether New Law; nor would the good Intent outweigh the
sad Consequences of it, had it upon occasion been faithfully put in practice.

He does not institute, with Lycurgus, That Youth from Hardships of Education
should be inured to Thieve for their Meat; and should be commended, if they
could do it cunningly, and without being found out: An ill Foundation surely
for Honesty in greater Matters to be built upon, when they should be Men.

Neither does he, with Plato in his Republic, take away a Fatherly Affection
and Filial Duty, by indulging a Community of Women. Nor has he any Law like
that of Aristotle in his Politics, which enjoins That Lame and Deformed
Children should be cast out, and not suffered to live.

And, as none of our Lords Laws are, in themselves, evil, or of bad consequence
to Society, (as these now mentioned, and others that might be mentioned, are;)
so, if any Law of his shall, by Craft, and an ill Mind, be made injurious unto
any, there are other Laws, which come in for a right bounding of such a Law;
and do allow no room for Guile and Fraud to work upon. If any shall, on purpose
to our wrong, make use of the Law that requires, If a Man smite us on one
Cheek, to turn the other; or of that which bids us Give to every one that
asks of us; and, of him, that takes away our Goods, not to ask them again,
(which Laws are, in a signal manner, designed for the establishing of Peace and
Charity,) there are Laws that secure these to a Rational Practice, by telling
these Men, That Whatsoever they would, (i. e. in Right Reason would,) that Men
should do unto them, they themselves should do the same to others: And by
allowing ourselves to call the Serpents Wisdom to the Doves Innocence. Had
there been such Provision made, by the Athenian Lawgiver, for the right
limiting of his Law, which required the Cancelling of all Obligations and Debts
past, That, which was well intended for the Relief of the Poor, had not proved
so great an Oppression to others, as it did. The Fraud of many had been
prevented; and the Reputation of his own Justice had not been hurt.

Neither do our Saviors Laws fit us only for one State of Life, and render us
altogether unapt to another; as it is observed Lycurgus's did. They tended
chiefly to make the Lacedaemonians able for War; and were so ill constituted for
Peace, that when That People were free from Enemies abroad, they quickly
declined at home; not so much by the ^reach of good Laws, as by the Want of
them.

Indeed, the Laws of Christ do chiefly promote and establish Peace; and do
admirably provide against those Vices that are the attendants of Peace; as
Luxury, Sloth, Wantonness, and such like; but yet, they no less instruct us to
a right Deportment in Troublesome Times. And, moreover, when a Righteous Cause
puts a Sword into a Christian's Hand, they teach him a Valor beyond that of
other Men. A Valor which shall not owe itself to a Passion, that overwhelms
consideration; but which shall be firm, and well-grounded; from an assured hope
that God will either give success unto him here, or will reward him after Death.

Whence Machiavel surely had small reason to reflect upon the Christian Laws,
as those, which, by teaching so much Meekness, and Patience, indisposed Men for
great undertakings; which, according to him, could not be accomplished without
something of Cruelty. And he ill-affirm'd the Religions of Old to fit Men better
for mighty Actions, as accustoming them, by the Multitude of Sacrifices, to
Blood and Destruction.

Indeed, if high Enterprises did necessarily include a share of Inhumanity in
them, what this Man says might the better be attended unto. But if those
actions only are truly Noble, in which Courage is regulated by Reason, and
adorned with Justice and Temperance, how false and disingenuous an Imputation
he fastens on the Laws of Christianity, I need not say.


Theoph. The Laws of our Lord are indeed so constituted, as that they highly
promote the Welfare of Society in this World, by establishing all those public
Virtues, without which the public Good could not subsist. The more deplorable
than it is, that any, who are Christians, should, from any words of our Lord or
his Apostles, take up and nourish Opinions that tend to the disturbance of
Government and Society. Two Opinions especially there are, that do it; which
too many have been, and are, very ready to entertain, the one is,

That whatever Right a Man has to what he enjoys, he has it only by inward
Holiness and Virtue: Or, in a Word, That all Dominion is founded in Grace; and
this they infer from 1 Cor. 3.31, 32. All are yours; whether the World, things
present, or things to come, all are yours. And hence if they have an high
Opinion of their own Sanctity, and a very low one of some other Men's, they can
easily persuade themselves to take as their own, what the other have no just
Title unto. By which means, Righteousness and Honesty, which are the great
Establishers of Society, are, as to these Persons, destroyed; and consequently
Society itself disturbed.

The other Opinion (which for its illness may well be ranked with the now
mentioned,) is this, That Sovereign Princes may be Resisted, in the Defense and
Maintenance of True Religion; as being that which is dearer than Life, and must
by no means be with parted. And hence, (besides when Religion is really struck
at,) if any Persons be disaffected to their Prince, it is easy to pretend,
that he is no friend to Religion; that he cares not which way it goes; and,
unless timely means be used, all will be lost: And so Wars and Fightings arise,
and the public welfare is miserably discomposed.


Eubul. Whether through Weakness, or an Evil Heart, these Opinions are
embraced, I am sure, the Laws of our Lord are no way chargeable with them.

If we look upon the Apostle's Words, from which the former Opinion is taken,
to wit, All things are yours; there are these things indeed, which much make
for the Honor, as well as the Benefit of Pious Men. All things are theirs, so,
as that with a Christian Liberty they may use them, without esteeming any of
them unclean. All things are theirs, after such a manner, as that if they
should absolutely stand in need of them, God would order them, by his Almighty
Power, for their Service. Lastly, all things are so theirs, that, in
probability God would not suffer his Sun to shine, nor his Rain to fall on the
Evil, were there not Good Men in the World to value his Providence and Love.
But then this is the whole, that those Words will bear. To say, that God has
given the Saints the Right of Possession, and authorized them to Ingross all
the World to themselves, is notoriously false. For, as the Economy of the
World now stands, God does dispose of the possession of things, in those ways,
which all Civil Nations do give consent unto, or the particular Laws of Nations
allow of; whether they be Inheritances by Descent; or the Gift of others to us;
or Purchased by our Money; or Acquired by our Labor: Where any of these are,
there is a Right, as being God's Gifts to us by those Methods; and the
depriving us of them by Fraud or Force, would be downright Injustice.

Add to this, that the Right of Possession, in these ways, is discernable and
certain, while the founding it in Grace and Holiness gives no sure Light unto
us at all. For how shall we know, who are the Good? We see Impiety can wear as
good a Face sometimes as the truest Virtue; and Men's Hypocrisy may cheat not
only others by a specious show, but even themselves too. There is nothing (I
may say,) more in the dark than true Goodness; we cannot be infallible in
pronouncing it in another, because his Heart and Thoughts, in which it
peculiarly resides, cannot be seen by us: And our own Hearts are so deceitful,
that they oftentimes no less lie hid to ourselves, than they do to others. And
therefore, if Grace and Holiness, which they will have to be the Ground of
Dominion and Possession, is so uncertain, That Right, which from those is so
much talked of, must needs be as uncertain.

But suppose, that such and such should be known undoubtedly to be Religious
and Gracious Persons; I would ask, Have they all the same Right to enjoy every
thing, or have they not? If they have, there will this absurdity follow, viz.
That every one cannot at the same time use what every one has a Right unto;
and Quarrels may arise, who shall have the Precedence in them. If they have not
all the same Right, how comes equal Grace in many, to give an unequal Title? A
narrower to one than to another? Or, if it shall evidently prove, (as it
evidently will,) that Human Laws or Customs, and not Grace, do make a
Distinction of Property, why should some others, whom those Laws or Customs
have by no means condemned, be denied the benefit of Property from them?

Further yet, God may possibly bestow these outward good things upon a wicked
Man, as Encouragements to a better course of Life: Sometimes he may throw them
upon him as a Scourge; and sometimes he may think good to reward with the
Blessings of the Earth, some good Actions in him; when yet his Crimes will not
suffer him to have hereafter a place in Heaven. And in which of all these
cases, have not wicked Men a Right to their Estates from God, as well as from
Men? Will any good Man think, that he has any Title to those outward
Possessions, which God has conferred to draw Men unto Virtue? Or will he
arrogate to himself as Blessings what God has made Curses to others? Or
lastly, shall the good things which God has given, as Rewards for some
commendable Actions, be thought much of, envied, and claimed, when, it may be,
they are all the Recompenses which ever shall be given? And what wicked Man is
there to whom his Estate may not belong in one of these ways? And surely to
deprive him of it upon the account of Grace in ourselves, or Corrupt Nature in
him, would be Impiety and Presumption toward God, and Injustice and Dishonesty
toward Man. So unreasonable, and contrary to the Law of Righteousness is this
first Opinion.

And is it, Theophilus, any otherwise with the second? I do not know any Laws
in the New Testament, that are more express and direct than those against the
Resisting of Sovereign Princes. Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers;
for there is no Power but of God: Whosoever resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God; and they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation,
Romans 13. And, were it that upon the account of Religion we might resist, why
should the Holy Ghost so peremptorily forbid Resistance under an Emperor, who
he certainly knew would be a grievous Persecutor of the Gospel?

But if we look at the first progress of Christianity into the World, the case
will be evident. The Gospel was not forcibly to enter the Territories of any
Prince; but, by its own Excellence, accompanied with cogent Arguments, and
humble Persuasions, was to have admittance. For indeed it was against the
Nature of that which consists chiefly in Love, to thrust itself upon the
World by Acts of Hostility and Violence. And if so, can we reasonably think,
that, when it is admitted, it is to maintain itself by the Sword, against
those, through whose Favor and Kindness it was first received? This would be
to make it by continuance to put on quite a different Nature from what it
primarily had. And, were it to be such, Princes could the less be blamed, if
they should be scrupulous in giving within their Dominions a place to that,
which, at last, might not allow a place to themselves there. But surely
Christ's Kingdom, in its proper Nature, is as little of this World as ever it
was, and so his Servants are as little to fight now, as they were, when He was
upon the Earth.

It is a very remarkable place in St. Peter, 2 Epist. 2.10, 11. where it is
said, That God will chiefly reserve those unto the Day of Judgment, who are not
afraid to speak evil of Dignities: And that the holy Angels, which are greater
in Power and Might, bring not railing Accusations against them; which must
needs be understood of evil Princes: For what occasion may there seem for
railing Accusations against those Princes, that are Pious and Good? Now, if the
blessed Angels, with respect to God's Ordinance in them, will speak with a kind
of Heavenly Modesty and Deference concerning them, is it lawful for us, think
we, not only to let loose our Tongues in a bitter and inveighing manner, but to
lift up our Hands in Treasons and Rebellions against them? And if those shall
be reserved unto the Great Day, for more than ordinary Damnation, who do only
speak evil of Dignities, what Flames will be thought hot enough for those, who
dare with Swords make Resistance?

Our Religion is justly more dear unto us than our Lives; but that it is so, is
to be shown by the Obedience which it enjoins, rather than by the Force which
it condemns. For to assert the Gospel by breaking the Precepts of it, is the
being true to it in the ways of Falseness; which is no better than bringing the
Devils Aid into the Cause of God.


Theoph. Allow me yet, Eubulus, to ask thus much, Must we sit still and suffer?


Eubul. Rather stand we still, Theophilus, and see the Salvation of the Lord.
He shall not be the less safe, who contains himself in those bounds which God
has appointed him: And to seek further would be to find a Sin and a Blot,
rather than a Deliverance. He, who by his Wisdom and Goodness has sent our
Religion into the World, has Power enough to preserve it as he himself
pleases. And they who say, that no security is left to the Christian Religion,
if the resisting the Higher Powers, upon the account thereof, be denied, have
no strength in what they say, unless they can remove God and his Providence out
of the World; Who will not suffer the Gates of Hell to prevail against his
Church. Where there shall be a faithful serving of him, and the Arms of the
Church, Prayers and Tears, shall be well managed, we need not fear, but we
shall be safe unde the Protection of the Almighty.

So sweetly peaceable, Theophilus, are the Laws of Christ, and so utterly
averse from whatever shall destroy the Welfare either of Princes or Subjects:
Particularly from the Opinions we have been speaking to; which their Owners may
be ashamed of, as being very great Wrongs to the Name of Christianity.


Theoph. God grant they may be honestly ashamed of them; so will there be more
upright Neighbors, and more loyal Subjects.


Eubul. One thing, Theophilus, is proper to these Laws alone; They extend even
to the Heart and Thoughts, ordering and correcting those inward Powers and
Faculties, which the Eye and Cognizance of Men cannot reach unto: That, what
the best among Men appear to be outwardly, they are no less bound to be within.
Insomuch that were every Breast transparent, (as that Noble Roman wished his to
be,) through which the secretest Motions of the Thoughts might be seen, the
fairest outside would be but mean in comparison of that excellent Order, and
exact Harmony, which, from the right Observance of these Laws, would be there
discerned.

But it is time, Theophilus, to wish you a Goodnight; and what remains we will
reserve till the Morrow's Evening.


Theoph. Mine Ears have been all along wholly yours, Eubulus; and mine Appetite
is so far from being appeased by hearing, that it is very much quickened. I will
only wish, That your Sleep may be as refreshing to you, as your Discourse has
been to me.


DISCOURSE the Fourth.
The Contents.
GEneral Motives relating to these Laws altogether. To the Conscionable
Observance of them Eternal Rewards are promised; yet Earthly ones are not
excluded. For the securing of our Obedience Eternal Punishments are threatened
after Death to the neglect of these Laws. The Constituting such Punishments is
no more than what is meet to be done. Stronger Assistances are afforded for the
Performance of these Laws than under Moses there were. Most Loving Invitations
and Affectionate Expressions are joined with them. We have no reason to
complain, that there are not now under the Gospel-Law, those Visible
Expressions of Gods Power and Presence, as under the Old Law there were.
Particular Motives relating to these Laws singly and apart: Such as are wholly
peculiar to the Gospel, or else are there more clearly and convincingly urged
than ever they were before. It is impossible, there should be any True
Happiness without these Laws. From the inward Excellence of them, and those
admirable Motives annexed to them, there is a substantial Proof of their
Divinity and Truth. No Man has ever deserved to be so much honored among Men
as our Lord has done. Those who faithfully give up their Names unto him, have
the Precedence of all others. How it comes to pass, that since the Law is so
good, Assistances so great, and Motives so taking, there should be so many
Disobedient Ones.

THEOPHILUS. YOU are once more well met, Eubulus! Though, even after I parted
with you last Night, I was not altogether absent from you. For so much had you
engaged my waking Thoughts, that by them my Dreams were also made yours: I was
your Auditor in my Sleep; and (I cannot but still think upon it,) such a
strange Pleasure did there seize me from a sense of the Divine Law, as, while
awake, I never yet felt.


EVBVLVS. I Think such a Dream not unfit to be reckoned among your Blessings.
And though God, in these Days, makes not such use of Dreams as in times of old
he did; yet the affirming that he has now so wholly forsaken them, as that
they are altogether to be excluded from his Favor, and esteemed, all alike,
merely as Casual or Natural Things, is, I dare say, not a Virtue, especially,
where Men by Religious Thoughts do make way for his Comforts in the Night; and
in the Morning are ready to entertain them with thankfulness.

I remember that in Plutarch it is said, A Man's progress in Virtue may be
perceived from his Dreams, if in them he approves of no ill thing, and is
inclined to Righteous Deeds; his Imaginative Faculty being (as it were)
seasoned by right Reason, and having its Impress upon it. And, I hope, you may,
without Extravagance or Error, infer something of Rational Satisfaction from
your Dream.


Theoph. You would, I see, put me in the way to do it: And I have so far a
Satisfaction from my Dream, that I am glad I told it you, for the Remarks you
have made upon it.

But let not Dreams put us by the Business of our Walk; which is the showing
the Motives which are annexed unto the Divine Law for the securing of our
Obedience.


Eubul. Well then, Theophilus, we will go on.

These Motives are either such as are more General, relating to the Divine Laws
altogether; or more Particular, relating to them singly, and apart.

The more General Motives are these:

1. Their having Eternal Rewards promised to the Conscionable Observance of
them; and Eternal Punishments threatened to wilful Disobedience.

2. Their having stronger Assistances afforded for the Performance of them,
than under the Old Law there were.

3. Their having such Loving Invitations, and Affectionate Expressions of
Kindness joined unto them.

1. Their having Eternal Rewards promised to the Conscionable Observance of
them, etc.

That which is put in the Front of the Decalogue, (I am the Lord thy God, that
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage,) was a
great Motive for the Loving of those Laws. But how low is That, in Comparison
of This; I am he that prepare Eternal Mansions for you in the Heavens; That
reserve for you an Inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, which fades not
away; A Crown which withers not? And hence our Lord is called the Prince of
Life, Acts 3.10. Not only because he was dead, and is alive, and for ever will
live; but also because he was Author of Eternal Life, and made it the Reward of
Obedience to his Laws.

And when our Lord shall purchase our poor Obedience at so excessive a Value,
as the giving of Heaven and the Glory thereof, (when he might justly command
more Rigorous Services, without any Rewards further than merely our having of
Life, and being preserved while we do them,) what a mighty motive is it for
Obedience to these Laws, and for our Love to them also!

Mean is the being Blessed in the City and in the Field; in respect of the
Happiness that Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, and that has not ent'red into
the Heart of Man to conceive. To have Life Eternal, and all Joys attending it,
so that with Improved Souls, and Spiritual Bodies, we cannot wish them to be
greater, nor fear them to be less; Joys, must sutably following a Virtuous
Life: and so refined and sacred that they are worthy of an Immortality, for the
being possessed; how much does it surpass a Life's being long in an Earthly
Canaan, and those more common and sensible Blessings that were given to it?

Though yet these Earthly Rewards are not wholly excluded by the Heavenly
neither; but when they shall be expedient for us, we shall have them. Eternal
Blessings under the Gospel, do assure us of Temporal, so far forth as they
shall be for our Good; as Temporal, under the Mosaic Law, did presignifie
Eternal ones that should follow. For he that spared not his own Son but gave
him for us all, How shall be not in Him freely give us all things?

And herein, upon much better ground are we placed than Those were, who made
Virtue to be its own Reward, and would have Men, even in the midst of Torments,
though there were no hope of an Alleviation, to think that they had a
sufficiency of Happiness from it alone. This was high and magnificent Talk
indeed; and if (secure from ever being put into Practice,) it might have rested
in Speculation only, Virtue would not have been discredited thereby. But small
Comfort it carried with it, when Pains and Troubles were actually to be
undergone. And a Man, on the Rack, might almost be thought not un-wise, if for
the obtaining of ease he would let go such an Happiness.

For more commended, surely, is the observance of the Laws of Christ, (which
includes in it all sorts of Virtue.) Our Obedience is indeed to be maintained,
if occasion there were, even to the loss of all Earthly Enjoyments; but then,
it often in this World has Plenty and Honor as its Attendants and Reward: Or,
if it so shall be, that God in his Wisdom shall suffer it on every Hand to be
encompassed with Afflictions, it yet has something to sustain it, besides the
mere reflecting upon itself; to wit, the assurance, that however its condition,
at the present, be strait and difficult, it will not always be so. God can, and
it may be, he will, give Relaxation and Ease here; but if this he shall not do,
there shall certainly after Death be Joys sufficient; when these short Troubles
shall be abundantly made up by an Happiness which never shall have an end. And
this may afford a firm support to Virtue, and Administer a Cheerfulness even in
the Valley of the Shadow of Death.

Who is it then that can refuse Obedience to the Laws of our Lord, when he thus
brings Life and Immortality to Light, and promises them as Rewards to our
Obedience? And if the Excellency of the Laws themselves will not prevail upon
the Man for his Love, how can he stand out against the Happiness that attends
them?

Those Christians, that endeavor to put far from them this Happiness, by
esteeming the Obedience to be Low and Mercenary, which has respect to a
Reward, I very much pity; as being such, who, through sad error, deny to
themselves the greatest comfort of their Life; but very much blame them also,
in that, as much as in them lies, they divest the Holy Laws of their
Inestimable Ornament; and would take from us the Joy that is set before us;
which was the great support to our Lord, in his enduring the Cross, and
despising the Shame, and so may justly be an Encouragement to Us in the doing
of his Will: Especially, since, by reason of our Weakness and Imperfection, we
have little reason to let go what may so strongly excite us unto, and so
sweetly confirm us in, our Duty.

But, Theophilus, for the further securing of Obedience to these Laws, there
are Eternal Punishments after Death, threatened to the Disobedient. It is
better, says our Lord, to enter into Life Maimed, than having two Hands to go
into Hell, into the Fire that never shall be quenched: Where their Worm dies
not, and where their Fire is not quenched. There being a Worm to Gnaw the Man,
declares that there is Torment; and there being a worm not failing nor dying,
declares the perpetuity of the Torment; there being a Fire to burn denotes
pain; and there being a Fire not quenchable, (for so the Words (...) and (...)
signify,) denotes an Everlasting Duration of that pain.

In like manner are we to understand those Words of St. Matthew, Chap. 25.46.
They shall go into Everlasting Punishment; i. e. They shall go into that which
shall never cease, nor have end. The Law of Old did indeed, in its strictest
constitution, affix a Curse (to wit, Death,) upon every one that continued not
in all things Written therein to do them. But yet that Rigor was so far
Mitigated, that, when less Punishments were allowed for some Sins, Lustings,
though still forbidden, might seem to have no Penalty at all imposed; or else
were thought to be wiped off in Course, by the Daily Sacrifices. Hereupon it
was that the Jews, if they could abstain from outward Miscarriages, were little
concerned for inward Rectitude; a freedom from Punishment rendering the Law of
no weight with them.

But it is not so in the Laws of our Lord. They cannot be esteemed to lose
their efficacy for want of Punishment annexed. Whosoever shall break one of
these least Commands, and shall teach Men so, shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of Heaven: i. e. He shall have no place in it; shall be despised and
rejected by God in the Day of Judgment. Even the Looking upon a Woman to lust
after her; and the being Angry with a Brother without a Cause, are esteemed, by
our Lawgiver, in the same rank with Adultery and Murder, and shall be obnoxious
to the same kind of Punishment with them. Which is well signified by the words
in St. Matthew. 5.22. (...), He shall be liable to the Judgment, (viz. The Court
of the Twenty Three Elders;) where the Punishment was Capital, though in a more
mild manner than in the Council, ( viz. of the Sanhedrim,) or in the Valley of
Hinnom, denoted there, by the Expression of Hellfire. And therefore the least
Punishment hereafter, being such as answers to Death here, imports no less
than Death Eternal, though a lesser degree thereof, than what shall be
inflicted upon greater Sins.


Theoph. But can this Motive be said any way to prevail for our Love to these
Laws? It may excite indeed a Dread, but not likely our Love.


Eubul. Yet, Theophilus, let things be seriously considered, and even from This
Motive, how dreadful soever it may, at first view, appear, there will be reason
to love these Laws.

For, the Constituting such Punishments is no more than what is meet to be
done. Where the Laws are in themselves so every way good, and where there are
Eternal Rewards promised to the Observance of them; you will say, when they are
disobeyed, that it is but fit there should be Penalties inflicted; and these
Penalties such as shall be answerable to the Offenses committed.

Now the greatness of the Offenses is to be gathered from the exceeding Riches
of Gods Bounty, viz. Everlasting Rewards, held out unto Men, on Terms so
excellent, and to Rational Natures so truly agreeable. If These shall be
despised, and cast behind their backs, the Sin is of a very great height; and
what Punishment will so rightly suit it, as the contrary to that Eternal
Happiness, which they have rejected, viz. Eternal Misery?

The measure of Gods Justice is to these Men not greater than the abundant
Goodness was, which they so ungratefully refused. They shall not be thrown
deeper in Hell, than by the Will of God they might have been raised in Heaven.
Nor shall they continue longer in Punishments, than they should have done in
Joys.

Now these things, in Speculation, must be acknowledged to carry in them a
dueness of proportion, and to be therefore bountiful; as indeed every thing in
God and in his Actings, is; even his Justice no less than his Mercy. Only we
are weak and sinful, and so cannot over quickly discern it: But to impartial
Consideration it will at length show itself so to be.

But that which comes more near us, and may more move our Love, is this, viz.

That the Intent of threatening these Punishments is primarily, not that they
should be born, but that they should be escaped.

Self-preservation is a thing so natural unto Men, that the fears of losing
their Welfare and Being, shall have a more quick touch upon them than any thing
else. God therefore has added this Motive of Fear, that it may be a spur to
quicken us, when, by the Corruption of Nature, other Arguments are rendered less
prevalent.

These Punishments shall indeed be undergone by refractory Sinners; For they
have, as much as in them lies, gone about to dissolve utterly the Community
which is made up between God the Legislator, and Men his People, by infringing
the Authority of the Divine Laws, and the Dignity of Him who is to see that
they be observed. But it is only by such as These, that these Punishments shall
be undergone. To others they are chiefly a Motive to Obedience; and are
further, only as a reserve, when all other means have proved ineffectual.

The case in respect of Punishments is much different betwixt our Lawgiver, and
Lawgivers on Earth. Some of These are more forward to punish than to reward,
because Punishments do oftentimes increase their Treasuries, and Rewards
diminish them. But our Lord is no way profited by the punishment of any;
neither in the rewarding them is his Abundance extenuated. Much delight he
takes in the Life of Men; but he has given us the greatest Assurances, that he
has no pleasure in the death of Sinners. His threatening therefore to punish
them, is, that they may not be punished. And truly, though we may dread the
Effects of God's Justice, yet when he thereby shall awaken our Hearts that we
may be the more secured unto Happiness, as it may very much excite our
Obedience, so may it also our Love to God's Law; even upon the account of
threatening Eternal Punishments.


Theoph. I see out of the Eater there may be Meat, and out of the Strong,
Sweetness. What, to common view, is at the greatest distance from Love, is
(hearer than what I could think,) an Engagement thereof to the Divine Law.


Eubul. Another Motive for the securing of Obedience to the Laws of Christ, is,
their having stronger Assistances afforded for the Performance of them, than
under the Old Law there were.

The Holy Spirit will always join with our sincere Endeavors, and will help
our Infirmities. And hereupon the Gospel, and all the Laws of Jesus Christ,
are, in Holy Writ, called Spirit, by reason of the Grace of God's Spirit
preventing, and enabling us in the doing of them, and are therein put in
opposition to the Mosaic Law, which is termed the Letter. Thus is it 2 Cor.
3.6. God has fitted us to be Ministers of the New Testament, not of the
Letter, but of the Spirit; i. e. not of the Old Law, but of the Evangelical;
for the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives Life; i. e. The Spirit with its
Assistances in this Law enables us to perform it, and in so doing to obtain
Life. Hence it is that the Apostle (as some very Learned Persons interpret
him,) reckons more to the Constitution of a Christian, than of other Men,
joining Spirit to Soul and Body, and giving that the precedence of the other
two. I pray God your whole Spirit, Soul and Body, may be preserved blameless
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus, 2 Thessalonians. 5.23. Not that This is a Substance
distinct from the Soul and Body; but a Principle we may call it, which is
wrought within us by the Blessed Spirit, and is well expressed by the (...) of
St. Paul, the New Creation, and the (...) of St. Peter, the Divine Nature;
whereby we are enabled to act those things which merely by our Natural Powers
we cannot reach unto. And what is it that we cannot do, if our Lord, through
the Blessed Spirit, will lend us an Hand in the doing it? I can do, says St.
Paul, all things through Christ that strengthens me; and so may every good
Christian say as well as he: Which is a very great Encouragement to love these
Laws, in that they bring their Helps, as well as their Rewards along with them.


Theoph. What you say, Eubulus, might be a great Encouragement to love these
Laws, were these Assistances such as you speak them to be. But, alas, our Work
seems to be little the less for them. We must labor, fight, and strive; and
when we have done all which we are able, we can see much of the Weakness of
Men, but little of the Strength of God; and nothing that appears either
answerable to the Title of Spirit, which is given to these Laws, by reason (as
you say,) of God's Holy Spirit preventing and enabling us in our Obedience; or
expressive of the Constitution of a Christian, in which Spirit is added to Soul
and Body.


Eubul. I hope, Theophilus, you do not think that the Assistances of the Holy
Spirit are such things as put by our Endeavors, and nourish our Sloth. They
are Assistances, and so they do suppose that we ourselves should do something.
For were all to be performed by the Holy Spirit, without the intervention of
our Actions, we must call them by some other Name, for they could not properly
be termed Assistances. And therefore it is, that what our Lord does accomplish
for us by his Grace through the Holy Ghost, he enjoyneth us by his Command to
do, as of our own Power. He works in us to will and to do; but yet we are to
work out our own Salvation. He strengthens us, but we are to strive; The
Victory is from Him, but the Fighting must be ours. And so, it is very true
what you said, viz. That our Work seems not to be the less to us for the
Assistances which he gives; we must be altogether as industrious, and earnest,
as if the whole were to be done by ourselves, and nothing at all by Him.

But because, when we have done all which we are able to do, we can see much of
Human Weakness in our Actions, and but little of Divine Strength, shall we
therefore conclude that the Assistances of the Spirit have been none, or, at
most, very mean, and nothing worthy of the Character which is given them? What,
Theophilus, if the Holy Spirit in his aiding us, will so comply with the
Natural Powers of our Souls, that we cannot discetn his Actings from our own?
What if he, in a silent and gentle manner, shall suggest things to our
Understandings, shall secretly sway our Wills, and move our Affections really,
but yet imperceivably unto us? Let us not, because he draws us with the Cords
of a Man, say that we are not drawn at all. If, when we have done our best we
seem to ourselves to be weak, and to have done far less than we should have
done, it possibly is none of the least Aids of the Spirit, that we can discern
our own weakness, and desire to please God, even beyond our Abilities. His
Grace can be, and it this way is, very properly, made perfect in our Weakness.
I dare be bold to say, that he is not prompted from above, who shall deny that
there are Divine Assistances, because there is not a Demonstration to the Soul
that there are such. Nay, it may seem expedient that ordinarily they should be
secret and imperceptible: For, should they commonly be otherwise, Men would be
too apt to rely upon them; and thereby do less themselves, because they see
what their Aids are. Or, it may be, they would grow conceited and abuse the
helps of Gods Holy Spirit to the overthrow of the Excellent Grace of Humility.
Out of Mercy therefore the Blessed Spirit may Insensibly give his Aids unto
Men; that so, by a constancy in their endeavors, they at last may attain unto
a greater perfection of all Graces, and may the surer enjoy his Love by their
Humility.


Theoph. But, Eubulus, if the Holy Spirit should in his Assistances move upon
the Soul in this insensible way, how could it be known that there were any
Assistances at all? And if it could not be known, where would the Excellency of
these Laws be, from such a Motive as we are uncertain of?


Eubul. There would be certainty enough of it from the Scriptures Revealing
that such Assistances there are, although we should not know the manner of
them; nor the times in which they are afforded.

But yet, Theophilus, these Spiritual Aids are not always indiscernible
neither. They oftentimes are seen by their effects, though in their actings
they were unperceived. And when a Man's Life is changed, and he, that heretofore
was Dissolute and Wicked, is now become Sober and Religious; Or, when, in a
constant course of Piety and Devotion, he, from his Childhood has escaped the
enticements of Satan, and pollutions of the World, we (and he himself also,)
though those Assistances have not been discerned, may no less know, that the
Holy Spirit has been present with him, than we know that there is a Wind when
we hear the Sound thereof, though we see not whence it comes nor whither it
goes. And yet further, Theophilus, after faithful Obedience to the more Silent
and Gentle Motions of the Holy Spirit, it is not altogether unusual to have
inward and sacred Joys darted into the Soul; which, as they are Rewards for
Fidelity in the years past, so are they likewise more sensible Helps for higher
degrees of Piety in the years to come; and prelibations of that unspeakable Joy
which Holy Men shall be filled with hereafter in Heaven. If there be not such
discernible Assistances more frequent in the World, it is, either because Men
do not duly close with the Holy Spirit in his Ordinary and Secret Aids; or
because they indulge a Sad and Melancholy Temper, which shuts them out of the
Soul; or, because God sees them not requisite for a great many Persons. But yet
the Laws of our Lord may notwithstanding be truly said to have more strong
Assistances afforded, than under the Old Law there were; and deservedly to be
entitled so much to the Spirit, from the Secret Helps which the Holy Spirit
offers unto all that are willing to obey.


Theoph. I was willing to urge you something the more upon this Head, because
the Holy Spirit is signally the Honor of the Evangelical Laws; and because
many are forward to talk slightly of his Assistances, upon the account that
they are not Visible to the Eye, nor gross enough to be touched.


Eubul. I heartily pity the State of these Men, since none are more surely in
the way to Misery, than those that laugh at the Aids to Happiness; especially
when held out by a Divine Hand.

But let us go to the Third and last Motive for the securing of Obedience to
these Laws; which is, their having such Loving Invitations and Affectionate
Expressions of Kindness joined with them.

Come unto me (says our Lord,) all ye that Labor and are heavy Laden, and I
will give you rest. Where, by those that Labor and are heavy Laden, I suppose,
that They are not only to be understood, who perceive the burden of their Sins,
and see the necessity of Grace from their Misdoings. Our Lord here calls Men
not only to Comfort but also to Teach and Instruct them; that they may come to
an Acknowledgment of their Sins; which in their own Nature are a Weight and
Burden; although they be not yet perceived so to be. After the manner of those
who, Rev. 3.17 were Wretched and Miserable, and Poor and Blind and Naked; when
they felt no such thing.

So that all Men here are called by Christ; whether they be such as think
themselves to be miserable, or such as do not. That by the One the Misery which
they, in good sort, perceive, may be avoided; and from the Other, the Misery
which they are under, though they see it not, may by good Instructions be
removed; and they brought into those Paths which will give them a true rest
from Sin at the present; and will bring them into Everlasting Rest hereafter.

And how persuasive is that of St. Paul? We as Ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be you
reconciled unto God, i. e. be you Obedient to his Laws, and thereby reconcile
yourselves unto him, who by Disobedience were his Enemies. And how strangely
may this prevail for Love to God's Law, when his Commands, of themselves
Righteous and Gentle, are yet further softened by kind Invitations and
Passionate Beseechings!

These are, Theophilus, the general Motives relating to all the Divine Laws
together, and if we will not be obstinate, nor lay aside our Understandings,
with what pleasing Strengths will they come upon our Souls, and sway them into
Love and Obedience!


Theoph. But methinks, Eubulus, there is the absence of some things in them,
which were a great Ornament to the Law of Moses, and, as it may seem, would be
no less so to That of our Lord: viz. Those Visible Expressions (which I
remember you mentioned in your first Walk,) of God's Power and Presence, in the
Vrim and Thummim; in Oracles from the Ark; in the wondrous Activeness of the
sacred Fire; in the Cloud filling the Temple; and also in Miraculous
Deliverances and Revenges. These, you said, kept the love of Gods Laws awake,
that it sunk not into Carelessness and Irreverence. Is there not as much need of
these things, or such as these, now? And would they not have been meet to
accompany the Evangelical Motives you instanced in?


Eubul. These were things which were adapted for that State, where Men were to
be wrought upon chiefly by means that could be seen and felt, and were, as yet,
not so fit for a more spiritual Dispensation. But now, when Heavenly Mysteries
and Rewards are so fully revealed, it would be our shame, if, not satisfied
with them, we should still be looking after outward and sensible
Manifestations. And I speak a truth when I say, That God's being present with
us in a spiritual manner, is more suitable to his Nature, which is incorporeal,
than his appearing in a Cloud, or by other visible or audible Ways, in the
Jewish Temple, was. And it is also a more perfect Way than was that other. That
being more to the outward sense, and the weaker part of Man; This more to the
Soul, which is his Excellence: That being exercised through visible things;
This through the Holy Spirit who is invisible, and infinitely surpasses them.
Neither is there wanting what may keep our Love from Drowziness, as much, or
more, than what under the Old Law there did: The Word of God is sharper than a
two-edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of the Joints and
Marrow; and the Holy Spirit, like a Refiner's Fire, will give a quickness unto,
and keep up vigor in, our Love.

But suppose, Theophilus, there should be visible and continued Manifestations
of the Divine Presence, as of old there were: In tract of time they would be
esteemed little different from the effects of Nature; and would prevail with
Men no more than the Course of the Sun and Moon, and the Growth of Trees and
Herbs; which, from their commonness, make small Impressions upon the less
knowing, and immoral sort of Men. And, it may be, these more open Expressions
of his Power and Presence, which God Almighty gave under the first Temple, he
therefore denied under the second, because their every-days being seen, made
them so little taken notice of, that they thereby, in great measure, lost their
End.

But if you would have the Divine Power to be, now and then, in extraordinary
Concerns, exerted beyond the common road of Nature, (as I cannot say, but
sometimes it now is, though very rarely,) neither would this possibly have the
effect you think of. We live in a curious and uncrediting World* and those,
whom these things should most work upon, would, if far distant, not believe
that there were such things: If they should be so near as to see them, they
would be forward to solve such Acts by Natural Reasons, and thereby render them
fruitless to themselves. However it be, we in general may say, That God in
these later Ages of the World, chooses to manifest himself more by the exercise
of his Wisdom, than by the open Effects of his Power; herein dealing with Men
according to their own way, Policy and Contrivance being that which almost
every one affects. And from the more quiet and wise disposal of things now,
God's Hand, by religious and considering Men, may as truly be acknowledged, as
when his Methods were more discernable by the Eye.

Therefore, since the Divine Laws, as now they are settled, are abundantly
fitted for the prevailing upon sober and docible Minds; and those visible
effects of God's Power would not, in all likelihood, sway with those who are of
a contrary Disposition; and his secret way of acting is the choice of his
Providence, to confound and bring under the evil Policies of Men, in a suitable
and agreeing manner, we have no reason to complain, as if there were a want of
those visible Expressions of his Power and Presence which he heretofore
afforded; and we are very unjust, if we prefer some Motives belonging to the
Law of old, before those which appertain to the Divine Law now.


Theoph. Your Reply has satisfied me, and made a fair way for me to entreat
your proceeding to those Motives, which you said there were to every particular
Law apart by itself.


Eubul. They deserve not to be passed over without notice. For they are so
apposite, so sweet and strong, that nothing can be more: And such as are either
wholly peculiar to the Gospel, or else are there more clearly and convincingly
urged.

Would it not be long I might at large instance ^n those Laws which respect God
immediately, other Men, and ourselves; but I will so far presume as briefly to
do it.

Can any thing more stir up the Duty of Love and Gratitude to God, than that he
is so much more our Father by Redemption, than he was by Creation, by how much
the shedding of the Blood of God transcends the speaking of a Word? Can a
Reverential Fear be more awakened by any thing, than by our being acquainted
that he is able to destroy both Body and Soul in Hell; and by our being bid to
fear him with a redoubled Precept, Fear him, I say unto you, Fear him.

And then for Duties to others, in the Relation of Subjects to a Prince; of
Priest and People; of Husbands and Wives; of Parents and Children; of Masters
and Servants; and of Neighbors one to another.

Nothing can possibly prevail more upon Rational Men, for Obedience to Princes,
than that they are (...) and (...), Sacred Ministers of God. That Damnation
shall be received if resistance be made: And that the Conscience within is to
be preferred before the Fear of Wrath without. And surely, Princes may well
embrace the Name, and maintain the Practice of Christianity, which thus secures
them of the Hands and Hearts of their Subjects.

What stronger Motives can there be for Peoples Respect and Love to their
Ministers, than that they are Stewards of the Mysteries of God, upon their
account? That in Christ's stead they beseech them to be reconciled unto God? And
that they are set apart for this very thing; to wit, the promoting the welfare
of their Souls? and how prevalent such Motives have been, we may learn from the
Galatians carriage toward St. Paul; who would, if possible, have plucked out
their own Eyes, and given them unto him.

Neither are the Duties of Pastors urged with less Weight. The Church's being
purchased by the Blood of God is the argument for their Feeding it; and they
are charged before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall Judge the Quick and
the Dead, to do it. The consideration of which, what Heart would it not affect?

For Mutual Love and Delight between Those whom Wedlock has joined, it is an
highly sacred Motive, That Marriage is so far honored as to become Mysterious,
in the Signification of Christ the Bridegroom, and the Church his Spouse; and
of that Union which is between them, never to be dissolved. And how admirably
may the Hardness of Men's Hearts be overcome by such a Consideration as this!
And, how is the Credit of those who are the Weaker Sex provided for, by not
being permitted now to be cast off upon every trivial Distaste! For that
Mysterious Signification, which we said Marriage is enobled with, does plainly
hint that the Bond thereof is to continue firm and unbroken; and that the
Faithful Affections both of the One and the Other in the Wedded Pair, will
certainly, with other Virtues, after this Life, be rewarded; living, in a
manner, for ever in that Divine Love they did here represent.

Fathers must be tender to their Children, and not provoke them to Wrath; from
that winning Motive, that they have a Father in Heaven, who, they desire, may
not be pitiless and wrathful to them.

And Childrens Obedience is quickened, by its being in the Lord: Which
Expression does not only hint the Extent of their Obedience, and how far it
should reach, but does show also that God is concerned in it, and does observe
whether it be truly performed or no. And the taking notice of the Fifth
Commandment, as being the first that has a Promise annexed unto it; and the
improving that Promise of Earthly and Temporal Blessings into Spiritual and
Eternal, is a very high Encouragement of the Duty.

The Faithfulness of Servants has Motives admirably strong; to wit, That they
do Service to Christ, while they do it conscionably to their Masters. That He
sees their Diligence or Loitering, when their Masters cannot: And that He will
reward whatsoever good thing any Man does, no less though he be bound, than if
he were free.

And Masters have a Motive equally as strong for their Gentleness and Goodness
toward their Servants, from their having a Master in Heaven, with whom is no
respect of Persons. Which imports that the Authority which a Master has on
Earth, shall not in Heaven, or at God's Bar, stand him in any stead, if he bear
it hardly and frowardly toward his Servant.

Lastly, For the Duty of Neighbors one to another. What more taking Motive can
there be for their Love and Peaceableness, than that they are as lively Stones
built up a Spiritual House? Absurd it would be, if in our Buildings, the
Materials should be at variance; and will it not be much more so in Gods
Building, where Jesus Christ is the chief Cornerstone? They are excited to
love one another as being Brethren in a far more Noble Relation than that of
Nature. Thy Brother, says St. Paul, (in more than one place) for whom Christ
died. And what an effectual and kindly Operation may this have, in all those
Matters of Discord, which may arise among Neighbors and Friends? Shall such or
such an Offense make me an Enemy to him for whom Christ has died? Shall any
Worldly Concern overturn that Love, and break that Union, which Christ has
Cemented, and Established with his own most precious Blood? A mighty Inducement
for the love of Neighbors, this: Though not proper to this Relation alone, but
running through all the foregoing ones. The higher place in every one of them
being not too high, and the lower one not too low, to admit the Name of
Brother. And so all the Duties thereof may be promoted, and the more benignly
carried on, by this Motive.

I thought it not amiss, Theophilus, in short thus to hint the Excellent
Motives, which the Gospel affords, as proper to every particular Law, by itself
considered. And they are, as I said, either purely Evangelical, as flowing some
way or other from the Mystery of our Redemption, which could not have been
known had it not been divinely revealed; or else such as are, to a much greater
Persuasiveness, urged, than ever they were before.


Theoph. They prevail so much with me, that methinks were I in the meanest of
these Relations; or could I, by turns, be each part in them all, I could love
every Law belonging to them, for the apposite and excellent Motives which to
every Law are annexed.

But, Eubulus, you have not yet given me any taste of those Motives which
respect the Laws to a Man's Self in particular.


Eubul. But since you seem to desire it, I will. And while I recount them in my
thoughts sometimes, though I approve of any thing that leads to Virtue, be it
even in the meanest of Philosophers, yet I have a low esteem of the very
highest of their Encouragements, if compared with these of our Lord.

For the keeping of our Bodies free from Intemperance and Uncleanness, can
there be any thing more prevailing than that they are Members of that Body, to
which Christ is the Head? That they are Temples of the Holy Ghost? That they
are bought with a price, even with the Blood of Christ? And that they will not
be lost when they are laid in the Earth; but will be raised up again from the
Dead? And he who is wiling to weigh these things rightly, How can he take the
Members of Christ and make them the Instruments of Uncleanness, the Receptacles
of Luxury and Excess? How can he pollute that Temple which the Holy Ghost does
Consecrate, and delight to reside in? How can he answer it if be defiles that
Body which is not his own; yea, which our Savior has Cleansed with his Blood,
as well as Bought? And with what Face can he abuse That which shall rise again
from the Dead; but which, if it dies an un-chast Body, shall not be raised
Chaste: If a Vessel of Drunkenness and Intemperance, it shall not from the Grave
become Clean and Pure?

Another Law, respecting ourselves, is the keeping our Hearts pure. And what
Motive hereunto can be wished for greater than the seeing of God; i. e. the
being fitted thereby for that Vision of him which is Beatifick; nothing that is
impure being to enter there, where God's most Glorious Presence is? And not
only so shall they see God, but he will manifest Himself also unto them by the
Joys of his Blessed Spirit within them; and by the opening of their Eyes, that
they may behold the wondrous things of his Law; yea, and see him in every thing.

A Third Law to a Man's self, is the Cutting off the Right Hand, and pulling
out the Right Eye, in case they offend him; i. e. the being willing to part
with any thing, how useful and pleasant soever it be, rather than to be
ensnared by it, or betrayed into Sin. And who will be un-willing to do this
when he hears, that it is better for him to enter into Life Blind or Maimed,
than having two Hands or two Eyes to be cast into Everlasting Fire? Not as if
Lameness or the having One Eye should continue with him after his Entrance into
Life. No, God can supply all those defects, and he will do it. But if any
outward thing which possibly may not be less dear to the Man, than his Hand or
Eye, shall occasionally ensnare him, by exciting corrupt desires; which cannot
well be avoided otherwise than by parting with these Enjoyments: Better it will
be to go to Heaven without them, where Eternal Happiness shall make up such
losses, than retaining them in this World to be thrown into Hell, where he
shall be for ever lost to them, and to himself.

The last Law (or Laws rather,) respecting ourselves, is the putting away all
Carking, Carefulness, Discontent and Impatience.

It is impossible to conceive a more winning Motive against Carefulness, than
that which the words of our Blessed Lord afford us. Take no thought for your
Life, what ye shall Eat, or what ye shall Drink; nor yet for your Body, what ye
shall put on. Is not Life more than Meat, and the Body than Raiment? Behold the
Fowls of the Air; for they Sow not, neither do they Reap, nor gather into
Barns; yet your Heavenly Father feeds them. And why take ye thought for
Raiment? Consider the Lillies of the Field, how they grow; they toil not,
neither do they Spin; yet I say unto you that Solomon in all his Glory was not
arrayed like one of these. If God then so cloth the Grass of the Field, which
to Day is, and to Morrow is cast into the Oven, shall he not much more Cloth
you, O ye of little Faith? Truly so pleasing and powerful are these
persuasives, that they may allay all anxious Cares, no less from their
Speculation, than from the Enjoyment of the things they speak of. And with such
a Sacred Artfulness does our Lord urge them, that they not only, for their
matter, excel all the Philosophy of the Ancients; but, for their expression,
all their Oratory also.

And what may more nourish Contentation of Life, than, That in God we Live, and
Move, and have our Being. That he is infinitely Wise, and so knows what is best
for us; infinitely good, and so is not wanting to his Creatures? That, we are
Strangers and Pilgrims here; and so it is reasonable, that having Food and
Raiment, we should therewith be content? That he has given us the greatest
Blessing of his Love, his only Son to dye for us; and so we may well be content
if some lesser Blessing be denied us; which yet if we enjoyed, we could not
tell whether they would be Blessings to us or not?

And are the Motives for Patience in Troubles, less strong and prevailing?
Certainly they are not. This Grace has a Mark of Honor affixed upon it,
greater than which there cannot be. For God is styled the God of Patience; and
we have his Faithfulness as a Pledge, that amidst our sufferings we shall not
be forsaken. God is Faithful, who will not permit you to be Tempted above that
which you are able: But will, with the Temptation, make a way to escape, that
ye may be able to bear it. At such gracious expressions, who is it will not be
Patient? Nay, when we, as our Savior was, are to be made perfect by
Sufferings; when, through his especial favor, they work for us a far more
exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory, what Man is it, that, in his considerate
thoughts, will not acknowledge, he has reason even to rejoice in Afflictions?

These Motives for Patience are such as are highly suitable to the Soul in its
most perfect Actings and Desires; and are fitted to obtain their end, not on
some Tempers only, which are of the more sturdy, and less sensible sort; but on
all Men who have Reason and Understanding to consider things aright. They
require not that we should think that (...), the things that are out of our
power, have no Relation unto us; That there is no such thing as Pain in the
World; or if there be, that it is not Evil. No, we are looked upon as Men; and
are allowed to have a sense of the Afflictions that lie upon us: And, even
while it is thus with us, we have Supports and Comforts, not such as are only
verba and voces, airy and thin, deceiving us for a while into quietness; but
substantial and weighty ones, sinking into the Vitals, and in reality, greater
than all the Troubles we can undergo.


Theoph. I have known some, who, possibly, from such Considerations, have born
up even under very great Afflictions. But yet when God has deprived them of
some near Friends; or of One whom the Passion of Love has more intimately
united to them than the closest Ties from Blood could do, have lost all their
Patience. As Rachel wept for her Children and would not be comforted because
they were not; so is it with these; and sometimes their Sorrow so much prevails,
as to bring them down even into the Grave for their Deceased Friends.


Eubul. What you say is true; though I could wish it were not, for the Sake of
more than one who are equally Dear to you and me. But I am not sorry that you
have mentioned it; because, there are such proper and excellent Motives
afforded by our Lord, for the Alleviating our Grief at the Death of Friends.

When they Dye, we are told they are but asleep, and will after a while awake
again: And therefore we are not to Sorrow as some others do, who have no hope.
While we commit them to the Ground, they are in a manner Sown, as our Corn is,
and will come up again to greater advantage, both to us and themselves. They
are Sown in Corruption, they shall be raised in Incorruption; they are Sown in
Dishonor, they shall be raised in Glory. They are Sown in Weakness, they shall
be raised in Power; they are Sown Natural Bodies, they shall be raised
Spiritual. This is plainly spoken, and not only so, but is confirmed by our
Lords own Rising from the Dead, and becoming the First Fruits of them that
Slept. Which implies, that as the Harvest follows the First Fruits, so shall
our Christian Friends, with all other Holy Men, follow our Lord in his
Resurrection. It is very remarkable that the Holy Scripture gives to the whole
Church, as united with its Head, The Name of Christ. Thus 1 Cor. 12.12. As the
Body is one, and has many Members, and all the Members of that one Body being
many, are one Body, SO ALSO IS CHRIST. Whence there may seem an holy Necessity
that our Religious Friends should rise from the Dead. They are parts of the
Church; and as the Church and Christ are one, He could not be said to be wholly
risen, unless They likewise should rise from the Dead. If there be no
Resurrection of the Dead, says the Apostle, then is Christ not risen; which is
true also in this sense. His Resurrection would be incomplete, and in effect no
Resurrection, should not his Church, which is his Body, rise after him. What
need is there then of so many Lamentations, and of such Floods of Tears? Why
should we be dejected at the Graves of our Friends? which we may look upon as
the places from which they will arise, rather than as the places wherein they
are buried?

And what may yet further contribute to the appeasing of our Sorrow, is their
rising again never to be sick more; Never any more to leave us; but to enjoy
us, and to be enjoyed by us, in an Eternity of Happiness. For it cannot
reasonably be thought, that those particular Friendships, which were founded in
Virtue, will not hereafter be continued in Heaven; especially since a Religious
Faithfulness and Constancy in Affection shall have a good share in the
Everlasting Rewards which are there given. So that we shall have our Friends
again, and much more ours, than ever they were before.

Neither even at the present is our Communion with them dissolved by their
Death: For that Bond which unites us one to another, and to our Head, is
Spiritual; and so Death, which only divides the Soul from the Body, makes no
real separation of the Christian who is dead, from the Christians who are
alive. For they who still continue Members of the same Head, do also continue
Members one of another. And the same good Will which our Friends, as
Christians, had to us while they lived, we may safely believe they have after
they have left us: Such as consists in the making Supplications unto God,
that it may be well with us both in Life and Death; and in rejoicing at those
Spiritual Blessings which are held out unto us for the obtaining that Happiness
which they, before us, have reached unto.

Why then should we grieve as though they were quite lost unto us? As though
all our Interest in them were buried in their Graves; and all that Virtuous
Kindness they bore us, were wholly extinct? We rather may rejoice that their
Love toward us, and other Christians, is increased, and more perfect, as their
own Happiness is increased, and themselves are more perfect.


Theoph. What you say, might administer unto Patience, were it not that the
Fears of an Hell, and the Apprehensions that it may be worse with them now they
are dead, than it was when they were alive, did not so often interpose.


Eubul. But why should we suffer such Fears and Apprehensions to interpose in
relation to those Friends who have loved Religion and Virtue, and made them
visible in their Lives? Precious in the sight of God is the death of such. And
as for those daily Slips and Failures, which proceed only from that Weakness
which is common to all Mankind, they, from the Sincerity which has been in the
Heart, shall be forgiven. Indeed there are some Persons for whom our Hopes
cannot be so great; and we are not to be blamed if our Griefs be of a larger
measure in the Deaths of these. But yet we are by no means to pass sentence
ourselves upon them, but must leave them to stand or fall to their own Master.
And the same God that commands us to be charitable, means that we should be so,
not only to the Living, but the Dead also: And if he so strictly enjoins our
Charity toward them, we have some reason to hope, he will not deny unto them
his own Mercy.

This is certain, that however the evil Lives of some Men may render the
Thoughts of Death less comfortable to themselves and others, yet, through our
dear Lord's Dying for us, Death is, in reality, become an harmless thing to us,
as we are Christians; and we may Triumphantly use the words of St. Paul; O
Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory? Thanks be unto God
who has given us the Victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Nay, though Death
to our Bodily Eyes has Terror in its Face, and is attended with Worms and
Corruption, yet the same Apostle reckons it a part of the Church's Dowry, 1
Cor. 3.22. Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or Life, or DEATH, or Things
present, or Things to come, all are yours; and the same we may esteem it to be
in relation to our departed Friends.

You have seen, Theophilus, the excellent Motives for Patience on every Hand;
and for Obedience also to the other Laws that more nearly concern ourselves.

And truly the conceiving of a Man whose outward actions are all Clean and
Chaste; whose inward Thoughts are Pure and Holy; who can part with even Lawful
Enjoyments rather than be ensnared by them; who is contented with his Lot; not
anxious for the years to come, and cheerfully bearing up under present
sufferings; the conceiving, I say, of such an one, so every way perfect, is
very pleasant to the thoughts; and we cannot sooner think of him than we must
Love him; the Laws then that form the Man to be such, must needs be no less
fitted for our Love and Delight; and these, sure, will much be heightened from
such pleasing and weighty Inducements.


Theoph. I Will confess to you, Eubulus, from this short account, which you have
given, all my Affections are turned into a Love of these Sacred Laws; except
only that there is some room in my Soul left for Reverence and Admiration of
them. And I hope, while I speak the same Words that the Pious Mr. Herbert did,
I speak to the utmost the same Truth also, viz. That I would not part with one
Leaf of these Holy Laws, might I have the whole World in Exchange. They are
able to make (would Men permit them,) an Heaven upon Earth; while Peace and Joy
and Love would be in the Community, and an Holy Calmness and Inexpressible
Pleasure, in every private Breast.


Eubul. And may such be continually in yours without any ceasing or decay, for
the great Veneration and Love which you express to these Laws.


Theoph. Truly, Eubulus, it is impossible there should be any true Happiness
without them. Should not the Understanding be recovered from that Blindness and
Error which are in it; should not the Will be reduced from its Pravity and
Perverseness: Should not the Affections be delivered from their Tumultuousness
and Evil Excesses, even Heaven would not be a place of Joy and Bliss. For how
unagreeable would Glorious Mansions be, and an incorruptible Body, were the
Soul imperfect and vicious in all its Faculties; unacquainted with Holiness,
secretly grudging at God's Will, and openly disobeying it? What would the
Salvation be, should Saint with Saint carry it ill-naturedly; and enjoy their
Immortality, only for the Perpetuating of their Dissentions?

And if to them, whose Natures are not fashioned by these Laws, Heaven would
not afford an Happiness, we may be sure, Earth will not. Which makes me,
Eubulus, to pity those Men as Enemies to their own Welfare, who esteem Liberty
and Greatness to be then alone truly perfect, when they are attended with a
Licentiousness; doing whatever likes them, without any respect had to the Laws
of God or Man. Whereas God himself, who is infinite in Majesty, and most
absolute in Power, acts according to the Eternal Laws of Righteousness and
Goodness: And it is the perfection of his Greatness and Liberty, so to do.


Eubul. What you have said I cannot gainsay, but do much approve. And though, I
confess, I could never think, (as some have done,) that the Scriptures bare
saying that they are the Word of God, is a sufficient Testimony that they are
so; yet from the inward Excellence of these Laws, and those admirable Motives
which are added to them for the securing of our Obedience, there is, methinks,
a substantial Proof of their Divinity and Truth.

Can it be thought that the Devil could ever prompt any Man to make Laws so
righteous and good as these are? Or that he would promote their Observance with
such mighty Rewards, such severe Threatenings, and such sacred Considerations?
If so, then surely our Savior's Argument of Satan's being divided against
himself, and his Kingdoms not being able thereby to stand, might be altogether
as valid in the present case, as then it was, when the Jews said, that Devils
were cast out by Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils.

Neither have we more reason to imagine, That any Man out of his own falseness
and deceit did make these Laws, since they are so directly destructive of all
falseness and deceit; and may justly be supposed to be everlastingly so, in
that they are recommended to the World with Considerations so powerful and
savoury.

From their own Purity, therefore, and Goodness, they may well be owned to be
the same Divine Precepts, which in reality they are.


Theoph. And let me add, That no Man ever deserved to be so much honored among
Men, as He has done, who has given these Laws, and, beyond all example, has
encouraged their practice.

I cannot but think sometimes, how highly the grave Lucretius has extolled (and
is himself highly extolled by some for so doing,) his Epicurus; who endeavored
to Arm Men against all Fears, by the beating down of all Religion, and the
excluding the Gods from the knowledge of every thing on Earth, as being neither
pleased with good Actions, nor offended with evil ones. And He (so far well,)
does show, that all other Inventions, however very much conducive to the
Welfare of Men, are yet nothing to be compared to That which will quiet
tumultuous Passions, and render the Mind well informed and steady. Compare,
says he, with This, the great things which others have found out: Ceres and
Bacchus are much honored; She, as having first taught the way of sowing Corn;
He, as having first instructed Men in planting of Vines: But yet without these
things Men's Lives may be sustained; and, as report goes, some Nations, even
now, do live without them. At been non poterat sine puro pectore vivi; but
without a Breast well purged, a Man can have no happy Life. And then he goes on
with the Praises of his Philosopher, as being worthy a Place among the Gods.

But if He had so much Honor, who profanely taught Men not to fear, what shall
our Lord have, who, with sacred Religion, directs Men in the pleasant and right
Paths to Happiness? Who gives them Laws, which will render them easy to
themselves, and acceptable unto others; Who, in any Troubles that may befall
them, affords them the only Methods of Comfort; by telling them, that God is a
Father unto Men; in every thing taking care of them, and ordering even
Afflictions for the good of those who are pious; Who makes known everlasting
Joys after Death, which are prepared for those that live holy Lives; and
renders the way thereunto not difficult by the help which he continually
vouchsafes from above; And all this in such a wonderful manner, by having loved
us even unto Death, with a Love much stronger than Death itself.


Eubul. Our Lord does indeed, in these things, deserve Honor above all Men;
and we may often, on his account, sing that Anthem which, at his Birth, the
Angels sung, Glory be to God on high; on Earth, Peace; Good Will toward Men.

And I will further say, That They, who faithfully give up their Names unto
him, have the Precedence, not only of all Those, who, among the Heathens,
pretended to the study of Wisdom, but also of God's own People the Jews; yea,
in a sort, even of David himself, who was so dear to him; and whom, in our
Discourse, we have had occasion so often to mention.

For though I cannot but yield, that this King had a fair insight into the
Kingdom of the Messiah, and the things belonging unto it, (there being in his
Psalms so many undoubted Descriptions thereof,) yet it will not be an Untruth
to affirm, That the meanest Christian among us has (unless it be his own
fault,) more clear Revelations of Christ, of Life and Immortality, and of the
Assistances of the Holy Spirit, than David had, or any of the Prophets.

The words of our Lord tending to what I now say, are very remarkable: Verily I
say unto you, Among them that are born of Women, there has not risen a greater
than John the Baptist. Notwithstanding he that is least in the Kingdom of
Heaven, is greater than he, Matthew. 11.11. i. e. However a very great Prophet
John was; one that above all the rest, had the Honor to see our Lord in the
Flesh; a thing which many Prophets and Kings had desired to see, and had not
seen it; yet the least Disciple or Christian, when Christ shall be set at the
Right Hand of God, and shall raise up an Heavenly Kingdom upon Earth, shall he
greater than John. i. e. From the being Baptized with the Holy Ghost, and
having a larger knowledge of the Divine Will manifested; being made acquainted
with higher and more noble things than John was used to, shall, in this
respect, be greater than He, and more honored than Any that lived before him.


Theoph. How pleasant a Prospect are these things to a Christian! And who could
blame him, if, fixing his Thoughts upon them, He should account all other
things (in the Apostle's words,) as dung and dross in comparison of them?

But, pray, Eubulus, Since the Law is so good, Assistances so great, and
Motives so taking, how comes it to pass, that there should be so many
disobedient ones, as we, almost every where, see there are?


Eubul. Too many, God knows, there are; and one reason that there are so many,
is the superficial Knowledge of these things, and oftentimes a gross Ignorance.
Were the elder sort called to Catechism, (and some of those who fail not seeing
the Church once a week,) I doubt we should find them, though Men in Stature, to
be yet but Children in Understanding; perfect it may be, (and it may be not,)
in the words of the Creed, and the Commandments, but Strangers to the sense.


Theoph. But not a few, who are well instructed in the Divine Laws, are yet of
Lives bad enough.


Eubul. It is a truth what you say; though a sad one to be told. Yet while
there is so much Natural Pravity in the Heart of Men, and so many Temptations
abroad, it is not difficult to guess the reason.

For Christian Religion, though it oftentimes overcomes our Natural
Corruptions, yet does not wholly root them out; and evil Inclinations will sway
a great many from their Duty.

The Rewards, which our Lawgiver promises, are chiefly future and spiritual;
and Men (such is their Earthliness,) are generally for those things that are
present, and can be seen: And when those shall strongly solicit, and make shows
of great Profits, or Pleasures, or Honors, it is no wonder that Multitudes are
led away by them.

Add to this, That the Proofs of Christianity are not such as will compel Men's
assent unto them, whether they will or no, but are to be inculcated often upon
their Hearts, that they may there be firmly rooted. Now this requires Pains and
Industry; and if many Men are for Sloth and Ease, and do account the weighing
and considering of things to be harder, and more tedious, than bodily Labor,
we may quickly discern wherefore it is, that the Laws of our Lord are so little
observed.

And truly, the Actings of the Holy Ghost with Men, which are not ordinarily
according to the fullness of his Power, but so as may be resisted, are, in the
present case, worthy our Consideration. He by his Motions within us does
persuade, and silently he proposes our Welfare, suggesting the true means of
obtaining it, and furnishing us with Strength and Aids from above, if we will
admit of, and close with, them; but he does not usually, with an irresistible
Power, constrain us. And hence are those Expressions in Holy Writ, of quenching
and resisting the Spirit; which, if he acted according to the greatness and
extent of his Might, could not be quenched nor resisted.

Now, when Men are left to choose what Paths they will take; when they must come
in (as it were,) to the help of the Lord against their own Corruptions, and
those Pleasures of Sense, which (as the forbidden Apple did,) look fair, and to
be desired, it may not seem strange, that these are chosen, and the Divine
Precepts neglected.

Neither is Christian Religion to be faulted, as if it did not provide means
sufficient for the retaining Men in Obedience. It provides so far as is
consistent with their Virtue, which brooks not Force, and would be lost, had it
not the Will along with it.

And from what has been said, Theophilus, you may guess how it comes to pass,
that though the Laws are so good, Assistances so great, and Motives so taking,
there yet are so many that continue in Disobedience.

But we must not make our Walk to be the Injury of our Health. It is a moist
Air, and yonder Clouds look black upon us: An happy Night therefore to my
Theophilus.


DISCOURSE the Fifth.
The Contents.
THough the Generality of Men be Wicked, and, by occasion of these Laws being
given, shall suffer the greater Torments hereafter, yet it would not thereupon
have been better that these Laws should not have been given. The impious folly
of those Men who are willing to flatter themselves with God's being so much a
God of Mercy as that he will not destroy them though they walk contrary to his
Laws. An Explication of I am the Light of the World. Why Miracles were confined
to the first Ages of the Church. That Prophecy made good, viz. The Wolf shall
dwell with the Lamb, etc. The great Goodness of God in making these Laws to
reach so wide as the whole World. His great Wisdom and Mercy in putting these
his Laws into Writing, and enjoining the frequent Reading and Preaching of
them. The Reasonableness that these Laws should endure without Abrogation or
Change so long as the World shall stand. The great expectation which was of
this our Lawgiver for so many Ages, and, in every respect, his answering of it,
may prevail much for Men's Obedience to his Laws. The Righteousness and Goodness
of these Laws will manifest themselves to those who are sincerely Obedient.

THEOPHILUS. THE last part, Eubulus, of your Yesterdays Discourse, occasioned a
more than ordinary thoughtfulness in me. The Lives of Christians I reflected
upon; and they, almost every where, appeared unto me little less than a
contradiction to the Laws of Christ. Where is not Piety toward God neglected?
Unrighteousness, and Deceit, toward Men, not carried on? Enmity and Hatred not
nourished? Intemperance and Unchastity not abounding? And how rare are upright
and faithful Persons to be found? In the midst of these my Thoughts, I was
struck with those Words of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 2.21. It had been better for
them not to have known the way of Righteousness, than, after they have known
it, to turn from the Holy Commandment delivered unto them. And the not walking
according to the Laws of the Gospel, however the Name of Christ be openly
professed, I look upon to be a Turning from the Holy Commandment. And though I
still acknowledged (and for ever shall acknowledge,) the Divine Laws to be Holy
and Good, and the Blessing promised to them to be the highest expression of
God's Love to Mankind, yet at last, I fell to think, whether the Wickedness of
the Generality of Men, had not brought it to that pass, that considering the
greater Torments they shall hereafter suffer by occasion of these Laws being
given, and the Gospel's being Revealed, it would not have been better, that
these Laws should not have been given, and the Gospel not have heen Revealed
unto Men.

I will not justify my Thought, as if it were Innocent; it seemed to me, and
still seems, Irregular. But, for the time, it was so lodged within me, that I
could not easily remove it.


EVBVLVS. NEither will I commend this your Thought. But lest it should leave
behind it some Scruples in you, I think these things may, with Innocence, be
replied unto it.

Viz. That though there are many that refuse the great Love of our Lord in his
Laws, and the Happiness promised in the Gospel; yet some there are who do
entertain and embrace them and who always shall do so.

When Elijah thought that He, even He alone was left a true Worshipper of the
God of Israel, there were Seven Thousand in Israel who had not bowed their Knee
to Baal, 1 Kings, 19.18. Our Lawgiver has, and for ever will have, a flock of
Obedient ones; though a little flock it be. And better it is, sure, that some
through the Gospel should be Saved, than that all without it should Perish.

What Numbers there are that shall be Saved, there is none can tell; for the
Faithful, here, in the Visible Church, are, in a sort, Invisible unto us. But,
They will, through the Divine Goodness, be greater, than some severe ones have
been willing to think them.

With more Charity unto Men, and more Reverence unto God's Mercy, which is over
all his Works, we may trust, that God will not permit the Work of his own
Hands, and the purchase of his Son's Blood, to be so much destroyed, since he
has assured us he has no delight in the Death of a Sinner.

But leaving the Number of Those who shall be Saved unto God; and praying that
he would every day increase his Kingdom, we may affirm, be the Number what it
will, That it is better for their Sakes, who obey these Holy Laws, that the
Gospel has been Revealed, than it would have been for theirs who Disobey them,
that it should never have been made known. And there is some Reason to think,
that the Happiness of Holy Men in Heaven (how few soever they shall be who
shall reach thereunto,) will, in the whole, be greater unto Them, than all the
Torments of Hell shall be to the Damned, how numerous soever they are. Because
the Merits of our Lord which were truly infinite, have obtained that Happiness,
which will be answerable unto them; when the Sins of Men, which, though great,
must needs be acknowledged less than our Saviors Merits, have deserved those
Torments, which shall not be greater than their Sins were.

But, Theophilus, what I would further reply to your Thought is this; to wit,
that so dear unto God are his own Wisdom and Justice and Goodness, and so much
excelling all other things in the World, that the exercise of them through the
Laws of the Gospel, be the Reception of those Laws among Men what it will, is
better than the not revealing the Gospel would have been.

God is the Supreme Legislator; and, in the Gospel Dispensation, he has acted
as it became Him who is every way perfect. If Men do not generally admit of his
Mercy in so much Righteousness and Wisdom shown, it is yet good that it has
been shown: Because he has therein truly done the part of a Just and Gracious
Lawgiver. And it is not fit that Men's not doing what was their Duty, should
have hindered what was, in all respects, so beseeming Him. And, if for their
Disobedience to the Gospel-Laws, they shall suffer Everlasting Punishments, it
is, yet better that those Laws have been given; because of the Glory of God's
Justice, which is of infinitely more Value, than the freedom of such Rebellious
Sinners from pains would have been. Which pains, albeit intense and endless
they be, These Men do fully deserve, since they have refused Happiness no less
(if not more,) intense, and altogether endless.

It would indeed have been better for these Men's Persons, (as they by
Disobedience to the Laws of Christ have carried it,) that the Gospel should not
have been made known. Not unlike as it was with Judas, of whom our Lord thus
pronounced, Good were it for that Man that he had never been Born: Which is all
one as if he had said; Better it would have been for him that he had never been
Born, than by his Traitorous Infidelity it will be, from my coming into the
World. But though it would have been better for their Persons, (as the having
no being is to be preferred before the being in Extremity of Torments,) yet
considering the Whole of things together; better it is that even to their
Misery (since their Misery is thus chosen by them,) the Gospel of Christ should
have been Revealed, than that it should not have been. The Honor of God's
Justice is hereby Magnified; Saints and Angels, who rightly see things, will
discern the Beauty of it, and praise God for it; and God himself will have
Infinite Satisfaction, from having done according to the Perfection of his
Nature.

I thought it not amiss to say these things, Theophilus; They will not be your
Injury, though possibly not needful to be spoken unto you. And if you will
interpret them to that honest freedom I take with you, you will do well.


Theoph. Such a Freedom I ought much to prize, which affords me Satisfaction in
a matter which I durst not suffer to rise unto a Doubt. If it were ill
suggested to my secret Thoughts, I fostered it not: And I have the less reason
to find fault with it, from the occasion it has given of my being satisfied by
you, against any such thought for the future.

It has furnished me, I am sure, with that which directly meets with the
impious Folly of some Men, (and those too too many,) who are willing to flatter
themselves with God's being so much a God of Mercy, as that he will not destroy
them, though they walk contrary to his Laws: Esteeming Men to be more pleasing
to him as they are his Creatures, than displeasing as they are disobedient. And
because God's Mercy exceeds theirs, and they could not find in their Hearts to
condemn others to Eternal Punishments; They therefore are forward to think,
that however he has threatened, he will not condemn them. But the Glory of
God's Justice being, as you have said, of infinitely more value with him, than
the freedom of such disobedient ones from Pains can be reasonably thought to
be, does utterly dash such untoward Imaginations.


Eubul. What has been said does indeed appositely strike at these Men. For
though God's Mercy be infinite, yet it is exercised with Holiness and Wisdom,
which are likewise infinite. And He, who is every way perfect, will never lean
to any one of his Glorious Attributes alone, so as in the least to forsake the
other. His Mercy is infinitely shown in accepting upon such gracious Terms Men's
poor Obedience to his Laws. But if they shall refuse to obey him, preferring
the Pleasures of Sin before his Righteous Commands; Their being his Creatures,
and the Work of his Hands, will so little prevail with him, that, though they
were yet further commended, by being the immediate Offspring of Abraham, he
would sooner, out of the Stones of the Street, form Men whom he might save,
than show Mercy unto those who are so unworthy of it.

Neither do they rightly infer, That God's Mercy, which is infinitely more than
theirs, will be shown unto them, because they themselves would be so merciful
to the looser sort of Men, as to save them, while such, from the Punishments
which are threatened. A great Indignity they offer unto the most Holy God, in
thus making Him to be such as Themselves are. His Mercy is indeed infinitely
more than theirs, but yet of a Nature altogether different. Theirs proceeds
from weakness, and an evil favoring of Sin; And because their love to
Righteousness and Holiness is little or none, they would therefore effect more
for wicked Men, than God, who has all Power, will do; or, if we consider his
Justice and Wisdom, more than (with Reverence be it spoken,) he can do. God is
not less merciful than they, but more just; not less pitiful, but more holy;
not beneath them in Compassion, but infinitely above them in Wisdom. And
therefore let them not deceive themselves with vain Words and Thoughts. God
will in Righteousness inflict those Punishments upon them, which they, through
a Vicious Mercy, would have remitted unto others.


Theoph. I would to God such things as these were truly weighed by Men, and
urged home upon their own Consciences, that they might, at last, discern the
Fallacies they have been willing to put upon themselves, even to their
everlasting Destruction.


Eubul. We now have, Theophilus, spoken to all those things which from the
first we designed; and have found the Divine Laws to be every way excellent,
whether we consider

The Lawgiver; (Love having been the primary moving Cause of his giving Laws
unto us; and this his Love being highly commended from the Greatness of his
Person.)

Or, the Laws themselves; (all the troublesome Ceremonies of the Old Law being
done away; and that in so excellent a manner; only such Laws being enjoined as
have in them an intrinsic goodness, or else are for ends absolutely good, and
such as are discernable by every one. Those Moral Laws which were given to the
Jews being by our Lord more fully and clearly given; And there being, from
these Laws, a fair way for the pardon of all Sins.)

Or lastly, The Motives which are annexed to these Laws for the securing of
Obedience; whether they be more General, relating to the Sacred Laws
altogether, (as, their having Eternal Rewards promised to the Observance of
them, and Eternal Punishments threatened to Disobedience. Their having stronger
Assistances afforded for the Performance of them, than under the Old Law there
were: And, last of all, their having such loving Invitations, and affectionate
Expressions of Kindness joined with them,) or whether more Particular,
belonging to them singly and apart, (as they respect God or Men in the several
Relations they may stand in one to another, or as they respect ourselves.)

But though, to our Power, we have done this, yet much short have we come of
the Dignity of our subject. And while the Apostle asks the Question, Who is
sufficient for these things? We must acknowledge that we are altogether
insufficient.

But since a good part of our Walk is yet to come, it will not be amiss, from
the whole of what has been said, to make some Inferences not unagreeable to
our Subject. And this Task I am willing should be yours, Theophilus, who I knew
are good at deducing one Truth from another; and who will do kindly by me, if
you will let me be your Auditor now, as you have, mostly hitherto, been mine.


Theoph. He is most fit to make the Inferences who made the Discourse. But (if
it will not be unacceptable,) I will endeavor alternately to follow you, if
you will lead the way.


Eubul. If it must be so only, and you will not wholly excuse me, I will begin.

And, First, Theophilus, From the Divine Laws thus considered, we have (if I
mistake not,) a true and just Explication of that place of Scripture, Joh.
8.12. I am the Light of the World, he that believes in me shall not walk in
Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life. They are the Words of our Blessed
Lord; and are to be understood of Him as a Lawgiver; so clearly has he in his
own Person made good those Types that were of him, and dispelled those shadows
of things to come; so excellently explained the Moral Law, and given a new
luster to it; so thoroughly Revealed Heavenly Rewards, and brought Life and
Immortality to Light. Hence, in the Prophet Malachi, He is called the Sun of
Righteousness; and in St. Luke he is termed (...), rendered in our Translation
Dayspring. But whether so, or the East, or Sunrising, it certainly is a Title
of our Lord; as having done that in Relation to Spirituals, and Good Practice,
which the Sun does in its Rising, and with its Presence, viz. put to slight the
Darkness wherewith we were encompassed. And thus the People that Lived in Evil
Practices, and in Ignorance of the Divine Laws, are said to sit in Darkness,
and in the shadow of Death, Mat. 4.16. and, from our Lords coming, are said to
see great Light, and to have Light sprung up unto them. Which must necessarily
be understood of his instructing them; giving them Laws, and revealing unto
them Eternal Rewards for the quickening their Obedience thereunto.

And this, possibly, may give us some insight into that place of Scripture
also. Which has been so difficult unto, and, in a sort, the Torture of
Interpreters, 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ being put to Death in the Flesh, but quickened
by the Spirit; by which also he went and Preached to the Souls in PRISON, i. e.
to those whose Souls within them were, through Ignorance and Evil Practice, as
in the Darkness of a Prison. The Light of Nature being almost quite extinct: To
These, He, through the Spirit, Preached by the Mouth of Noah.

By his Laws it is therefore, and by other things upon their account Revealed,
that Christ is the Light of the World.

And, after the same manner, is God the Father said to be Light; as having by
these Laws, through Jesus Christ, shown what He Himself is, what he chiefly and
most earnestly does Will, Desire, and Love; insomuch that we cannot likely be
mistaken in his Nature, unless we will be so, either through Perverseness or
Negligence.

Should any of those Heathens, who, in Relation to Human Welfare, had
undervaluing Opinions of the Deity, have read these Laws, with the Inestimable
Encouragements annexed unto them, they, when they had seen the greatest
Prosperity to have its allays of Trouble; and all Men sooner or later to Die,
could not any longer have thought, that God, out of Envy and ill Nature, would
not permit an unmixt Happiness in this World; or that he would keep Immortality
to himself, as by no means enduring that any should be partakers of it with
him. It is but the due considering these Sacred Precepts, as they proceed from
our Lords being given into the World, and God cannot but be confessed by us to
be (as under the Gospel he styles himself,) Love; and with the clearest Light
all the perfections of Goodness and Mercy will be discerned in him.


Theoph. Hence also we may (as I think,) not untruly gather the reason, why
Miracles, by which these Laws were established, were confined to the first Ages
of the Church. So great is the Perfection, and Excellency of Christ's Laws,
that now they are known they do not need such props to sustain them. They have
inward Beauty enough to recommend them; and they carry (as I may so speak,)
Marks in their own Foreheads to Testify their Truth and Perfection.

Miracles, at the first, were indeed necessary in respect of Those who spread
the Gospel; upon the account that they were to Combat with all Religions in
the World; and so, were to be aided with a Demonstration of the Spirit: i. e.
with a Power of working Miracles; by which they might be encouraged to carry on
a work of so great difficulty.

And then, in respect of Others also, to whom this Gospel was Preached,
Miracles were necessary: To show that this Gospel was Divine; and not to be
meanly thought of because it was New, and different from the Religions they had
been used unto.

But now, there having been Time and Leisure for it to be known, from its
Goodness, and the Efficacy of the Holy Spirit, which always, though invisibly,
attends it, it will stand in the World: And, content with the Fame of Old
Miracles, it, without the help of News ones, will constitute such a Church, as
that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Neither will it, in humble
and well tempered Hearts and Affections, have a less easy entrance, or a less
sincere entertainment now, from its Pureness and Excellence, than at first it
had when mighty Signs and Wonders made way for it.


Eubul. And may we not also hence infer, that Prophecy to be made good, which
said, The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with
the Kid, and the Calf and the young Lion, and the Fatling together? In so much
Righteousness, Goodness, and Wisdom, are these Laws of Jesus Christ made, that
the Tempers and Dispositions of Men which are different as the Wolf and the
Lamb, the Leopard and the Kid, the Calf and young Lion, shall, if they will
sincerely submit themselves to the Scepter of Christ, be united and reconciled.

He that is Proud and Lofty, shall be taught to be Meek and Lowly. He that
breathes nothing but Hatred and Enmity, shall be instructed to love all Men,
yea, even his Enemies; and this upon a most rational and excellent account. He
that is hardhearted and covetous, and would not abstain from enriching himself,
though it were by the Tears of the Orphans and Widows, shall be learnt to pray
for the Welfare of others, to rejoice in the Blessings which God bestows upon
them, and freely to part with his own for the relief of his poor Brethren. All
sweetness of Nature, all love and sincere Affection, will these Laws of our
Lord instill into, and nourish in the Breasts of Men, unless they refractorily
shall stand out against their own Happiness. And if they do, the fault shall be
in themselves; for there is no defect in these Sacred Laws, why they should not
obtain their blessed End. They only require of Men, to act as Men of
Understanding Souls should do; and, without any Force offered, do leave them
the use of their Reason, and a freedom of choice. And if they shall refuse
Obedience to the Laws of Christ, the blame is their own: But those his Laws
must be acknowledged to be thoroughly fitted for the making every Mountain and
Hill low, the Crooked strait, and the rough places plain; i. e. to render the
haughty, the perverse, the ill-natured, compliant unto Peace; and the poorest
Persons not too low to have a tender respect and love showed unto them.


Theoph. And hence also, Eubulus, we see the great Goodness of God, in making
these his Laws to reach so wide; there not being any part of the World to which
they do not belong.

It is not now one Nation alone, that has the Privilege of these Laws beyond
others. Neither is any Ammonite or Moabite forbid to enter the Congregation of
the Lord till the tenth Generation. The extent of these Laws is correspondent
to the goodness of them; and they may be truly called the Kingdom of Heaven;
not only because from their Righteousness and Purity they are a Lively Image of
that Kingdom, which we believe to be in Heaven; but also because as far as
Heaven reaches, they also reach; And thus the Kingdom of Heaven is explained
by some, Matthew. 3. and some other places of Holy Writ. The Kingdom of Heaven is
at hand; i. e. Those Laws, and that Government are approaching, which shall
spread themselves as far and wide as Heaven. Answerable to that of Daniel,
Chap. 7.27. The Kingdom, and Dominion, and the Greatness of the Kingdom under
the whole Heaven, shall be given unto the Saints.

And herein consists the great note of Distinction betwixt the Mosaic and
Evangelical Dispensation. Under the former, the Land of Canaan must be repaired
unto by those few, of other Lands, who were willing to know and do Gods Will:
Under the later, the Divine Law does itself, (as it were,) Travel throughout
the World; and comes even home unto those many that are most remote; investing
them with Privileges greater than Theirs, who once were preferred above all
the Nations of the Earth.

The Infinite Goodness of God, this is, thus to give the Heathen to be his Sons
Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth to be his Dominion. A Favor,
Eubulus, highly to be prized by us, who are not to forget what large Bounds the
Devil had gotten in our Gentile World. How Wickedness not fit to be divulged,
was, in many Temples, the very Essentials of the Sacred Rites: And how, from
the Examples of their Gods, the Votaries could infer a Liberty for the vilest
Practice. Ego homuncio hoc non facerem? Ter, Eunuch. So that it is no wonder,
that Impudence was by some of them reckoned one of their Deities, and had
Divine Worship paid to it.

And though indeed Christ's Flock in Scripture be called a little Flock, yet
that, possibly, might have an immediate Relation unto the Number of the
Disciples, who then were, and were but few; and not to those, who, in great
Multitudes, were to be added to the Church afterward. We read of Thousands in
a short time won over to the Church, and submitting to these Laws. And Rev.
7.4. we are told, that there was a great Multitude in Heaven, which no Man
could number of all Nations and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues, standing
before the Throne and the Lamb.

But if Christ's Flock be little, (as too sure it is,) in Comparison of the
rest of Mankind, who by reason of Infidelity, Profaneness, Hppocrisie, and
other corrupt Practices, have little Relation unto Christ; it is not because
these Laws do not extend unto Them, but because They refuse them.

The Goodness of God is not the less for not being entertained by the
Generality of Men. Were it with an Impartial Eye looked upon, it might excite
the Praises of all Men. That now every Nation is in the sight of God of equal
account with the Land of Judea. Every City, that will truly own and obey his
Laws, is esteemed no less than Jerusalem; and every Temple, where true Devotion
is offered up, where the Laws of Christ are un-corruptly declared, and his
Sacraments duly Administered, as highly valued by him as the Gates of Sion, and
the Temple there.

And as he respects not One Nation before another, so neither is He, a
respecter of Persons. The Poor Man shall not be despised because he is Poor,
but shall have his Obedience kindly accepted, and fully Rewarded. Neither shall
the Rich be Envied or Rejected, because he is Rich; but shall find our Lord
Faithful and Just in the Valuing and Recompensing the Observance of his Laws.

So that we may say with David, (possibly in a larger Sense than he meant of
Lands, Nations, and People, which in Holy Writ are often limited to the Tribes
and Families of the Jews; the Regions and Cities of Palestine,) O be joyful in
the Lord all ye Lands, serve the Lord with Gladness, and come before his
presence with a Song. Let the People Praise thee, O God, yea, let all the
People Praise thee; For, having given such Excellent Laws to all People, thou will judge the folk righteously; and, with thy especial favor, govern all the
Nations upon Earth. Hear ye all ye People, give Ear all ye Inhabitants of the
World; both Low and High, Rich and Poor, one with another; the Goodness of God
is the same to you all, in these his Holy Laws; Praise him therefore and
Magnify him for ever.


Eubul. And have we not also from hence, Theophilus, an instance of Gods Wisdom
and Mercy, in putting these his Laws into Writing; and enjoining the frequent
Reading and Preaching of them?

What are for all the World, and do belong to all Nations how distant soever,
could not so conveniently have been dispersed for the good of all, had they
been confined to some Men's Breasts only. Whereas now, in their being written,
they can the more easily and punctually be known. And from their being
translated into all Languages, and speaking in those Languages the same thing,
God is pleased happily to reverse the Confusion of Tongues at Babel.

Had they been left merely to an Oral Tradition, we, by reason of the Passions,
Prejudices, Interests, and (to say the best) the weakness of the Memories of
Men, should have had little security for their being preserved incorrupt; if
yet they would have been preserved at all.

The Instance is sad, (but not impertinent to be mentioned,) how by this
Traditional way, the Knowledge of God and his Laws were, in not many Hundred
Years after the Flood, in effect, wholly lost; not retrieveable but by new
Revelations, and the Constituting, as it were, a new Ecclesiastic State in
Abraham and his Posterity; to which, for a not unlike Reason, he afterward saw
it requisite to write his Laws in the Mount.

Besides, how would they have escaped amidst the Enthusiasms of many, who
pretend unto fairer Revelations than any of these Written Laws? Which shows the
great Wisdom of God in committing these his Laws unto Writing; and may also
show Us, that no Laws, which are not Written, are to be accounted His, how
Divine soever they may be pretended. For why, these should be put in Writing
for the securing them from the corrupt Passions, and personal Weaknesses of
Men; and others, of no less Authority and Concern (as is pretended,) than
These, should be left merely to the Breasts and Tongues of some Men, who are of
like Passions and Deficiencies with others, I must confess, Theophilus, I
understand not.

Nor is Gods Mercy less shown than his Wisdom; in that now, we are not to go we
know not whither, to seek the Will of God, that we may obey it; but have his
Laws near us, and at hand, in every place. As God said to the Israelites, Deuteronomy.
30.13. so may it now be said to all Men: These Laws are not hidden from thee,
neither are they far off. They are not in Heaven, that thou should say, Who
shall go up for us into Heaven, and bring them unto us, that we may hear them,
and do them? Neither are they beyond the Sea, that thou should say, Who shall
go over the Sea for us, and bring them unto us, that we may hear them, and do
them? But they are nigh unto thee, in thy Mouth, and in thy Heart, that thou
may do them. Nigh they are, and not a Family but may have them always lie
open to their view; not a particular Person but may have them as a Treasure in
his Chamber or Closet.

Neither does God only take care that these his Laws should be made known by
being Written; but he has also commanded that they being Written should be
Preached. For those Precepts, Preach the Word, be Instant in season and out of
season, Reprove, Rebuke, Exhort with all long-Suffering and Doctrine, are not
Temporary ones, given to Timothy, and, in Him, to cease; but such as are to be
practiced by Ministers to the end of the World. They must not be negligent to
put Men always in Remembrance of these Laws, though they be already known; but
still Line must be upon Line, and Precept upon Precept; here a little, and
there a little.

A very great Mercy of God it is, Theophilus, that he will have his Laws,
though they be written, to be yet thus frequently Preached, that none may
perish for want of Knowledge. And a Mercy it is no less, that though his Laws
be Preached, he yet has caused them to be written, putting them into the Hands
of every Christian; That, in case False Teachers should arise, (as it is
foretold there will,) we may have wherewithal to discover and disprove them.

And truly, the having the Holy Scriptures in their Hand and Eye, is a
Privilege that one would wonder any should endeavor to take away from the
People, since it always, by the Bounty of God, belonged unto them. Under the
Old Testament, the Divine Laws were to be bound upon the Hands of the People,
and to be, as it were, Frontlets between their Eyes; to be written also on the
Posts of their Houses, and on their Gates; so far were they from being
withheld. Under the New Testament, we find that the Writings of the Evangelists
were not composed for the use of the Apostles only, but for every Christian
also, in particular: As may, in good sort, be seen by our Savior's Sermon in
the Mount; which was not spoken to the Disciples as Ministers, but as private
Christians. For, at his Preaching it, there were no Apostles; they not being
made, nor sent, till afterward. We find also, that all the Epistles (excepting
those only to particular Persons,) are written to the Holy Brethren; To the
Churches of God that are sanctified in Jesus Christ; And to all that call upon
the Name of the Lord Jesus.

And hereupon we may discern, (as in a late Book has been well discoursed,)
that the Holy Scriptures are, as it were, a Trust committed to every Christian;
and he is to be so true to his charge, as by no means to part with it. Yea,
these Sacred Writings are our Lord's Will and Testament; by which a Man becomes
an Heir, through Jesus Christ. And if so, then He that is Heir of an Estate,
has, surely, no less right to the Conveyances that make over the Estate, than
he has to the Estate itself. And therefore, if in common Estates upon Earth,
it will be every Man's Prudence to secure to himself the Deeds upon which the
Estates depend: In this Heavenly Inheritance, it will be every Man's not
Prudence only, but Duty to preserve to himself the Writings that conveigh it.
The reason is, because, though a Man may, without blame, sometimes part with an
Inheritance on Earth, yet with That, in Heaven, he cannot, without the
Imputation of Folly and Wickedness; and even the exposing of his own Soul to
Sale and Servitude.

The Pleadings of some Men, viz. That the permitting the Scriptures to be in
the Hands of the common People, is the cause of Schisms and Heresies, would
have more weight with it, if, in the Ages most fruitful of Schisms and
Heresies, the Learned had not had therein as great a share as (not to say a
greater than,) any others; and, if, where the Vulgar have, of late, in this
matter, seemed most guilty, we had not too much reason to believe, That even
Those, who most complain of them, have by their secret Emissaries, seduced
them, on purpose, into Errors, and divided them into Parties; when otherwise
they would have walked in straiter Paths, and been more at Unity amongst
themselves.

But though there has been, by some, an ill use made of the Scriptures, yet
God, to whom These Things long before were not hid, thought them not reason
enough for hindering the Writing of his Will; or for the withholding it, when
written, from the Hands of any. And his Goodness and Wisdom is herein
manifested, in that the ill effects which would have proceeded from the not
writing his Laws, or the denying them to the Eye of the Vulgar, would, in all
probability, have been far more and greater, than from the contrary: And the
good effects of their being written, and allowed to the use of all Men, are, by
the blessing of God, much greater than the bad Consequences now are.


Theoph. Inferred also may be the Reasonableness that these Laws should endure
without Abrogation or Change, so long as the World shall stand.

The Gospel is called, (...), The Everlasting Gospel, Rev. 14.6. Such as never
shall cease, nor be, as to the Laws of it, in any case Repealed. And upon this
account it is, that the Time from our Lord's Ascension, to the End of the
World, or his Coming to Judgment, is called the Last Days in Holy Writ. A great
many years, indeed, have passed since these Laws were given by our Lord; and a
great many more possibly may pass, before the Dissolution of the World shall
be; but yet these are the Last Days; because we are not to expect another
Dispension, nor another Lawgiver: For it is He that will be with us (in his
Laws, and by his Spirit,) unto the End of the World.

Better Laws cannot be given. None can Imagine how there should be any Other
more suitable to Infinite Holiness, Justice, and Goodness in Him that gives
them, or more agreeable to the Nature and Soul of Men to whom they are given.
And so, if the Gospel, wherein these Laws are, be called Everlasting; if the
Time that shall be to the End of the World, together with that which has
already been since these Laws were given, has the Appellation of the Last
Days, upon the account that a further Declaration of God's Will is not to be
expected; we, from our foregoing Discourse, may easily perceive that abundant
Reason there is, why it so should be.

And whosoever they be, that shall make the Breach of any of the Divine Laws
either to be none, or a less fault now, than in former Ages it was, under a
Pretense that our Nature grows weaker every Day than other, and must
therefore have its Allowances in Disobedience, (for so they seem too plainly to
affirm who say, Hodie pro fornicatione neminem esse deponendum, quia fragiliora
sunt nostra Corpora quam olim erant, Distinct 82 in Gloss.) do foully reflect
upon our Lawgivers perpetual institution; and make those Sacred Precepts, which
should govern the evil Inclinations of Men, to be, in effect, overruled by
them; which is a thing so extremely ill, that the World must be weak indeed,
when it is not odious to a Religious Ear.


Eubul. Your Inferences, Theophilus, are Right; and I cannot, at present, think
of another; But that must not hinder your further going on with them.


Theoph. I have done what I promised; following every one of yours with
another. But if you have made an end, your ceasing is my excuse; and may well
be so.


Eubul. To draw then to a Conclusion of this our Subject. I hope in the
Consideration of the Divine Laws; we have not exceeded the bounds of our Duty;
by inquiring further than we ought to do.


Theoph. I think, I justly may absolve you from any such fault, now committed.
For though it be a fault over-curiously to pry into the Laws of our Lord, as if
all the Reasons of them were to be understood by us; and though, where we do
not understand many things in Relation to them, we are to acquiesce, by
persuading ourselves, that they are, in every respect, Holy and Just; yet where
the reasons of them lie open to view, or, at least, by an Humble and Devout
search into them, may easily be found out, there it will be well-becoming us,
and no more than Duty, to look into them: That the Excellences of them may be
discerned by us; and that our Love of them, and Gods Glory from them, may be
the more raised and magnified. And indeed, Eubulus, in all your words I have
perceived nothing but what is agreeable to so humble a search, and so pious an
end. And I acknowledge myself as much edified thereby, so likewise much obliged
to you.


Eubul. The Design of our Discourse has been good: And that, I trust, will
cast a Vail upon what Defects soever may have been in it. And if it has
administered to your Satisfaction, or, in the Apostle's words, but stirred up
your pure Mind by way of Remembrance, I shall account its doing so to be
sufficiently my Reward.

A good Work it would be, Theophilus, if, upon occasion, we could prevail
abroad for a due esteem and love of these sacred Laws.

Men are apt to think, (and sometimes they may think right) that, in relation to
the Commands of Masters and Governors, they could do better than what they are
enjoined to do: And yet, notwithstanding, they will yield Obedience, as judging
it but reasonable, That not always what is best, but what best pleases those
who are in Power, is to be done. But better they cannot do than that which the
Laws of our Lord require. His Will never stands in Opposition to what is, in
itself, really best; because he is pleased with nothing but that which is holy,
just, and good. Which sure may create a very great Satisfaction in us, whilst
we submit to his Laws; and may render those his Laws of very high account with
us.

But yet, for all this, his Laws, and Himself too, are much disesteem'd; and
the mean regard which they generally find, has made me with sorrow to think
upon those Words of Arrian's Epictetus; (...), etc. Men, says he, have built
Altars and Temples to Triptolemus, who showed them the way of Agriculture;
(...), etc. But to Him who finds out, and gives Light to the Truth of Things;
directing Men not merely to preserve Life, but to Live well, and as Men ought
to do, Who of you all Dedicates a Temple to his Honor, or so much as thanks
God upon his Account?

All this cannot, I confess, be said, with relation to our Lawgiver. Temples
are built unto him, and Praises are offered unto God who sent him into the
World. But are they not, with a great many, as an outward show, rather than the
Expressions of inward Devotion, and unfeigned Thankfulness? While they obey not
the Laws of Him whom they thus celebrate; and (to use our Lord's own words,) do
draw near unto him with their Lips, when their Heart is far from him.

Most Men are willing to have our Lord their Priest to Atone for their Sins,
and for Novelty and Entertainment, they can be content to have him their
Prophet too. But as a King and Lawgiver they care not for him; and are backward
to submit to his Scepter and Laws. Yet surely his Scepter is a Righteous
Scepter; and his Commands not grievous; but such as are fitted to Human Nature,
and its Interests in this World; that the Man may seem unwilling to be Happy,
either here or hereafter, who refuses Obedience unto them.

It was a true word of the People concerning our Lord, That never Man spoke as
he spoke. His Words were with Authority, bringing a Convincingness along with
them. And shall Men now be deaf to them? Frequently did our Savior use that
Exhortation, (shall I call it?) or Command, or both, He that has Ears to hear,
let him hear. As much as to say, Of so great importance are the things I
declare unto you, that if ever a more than ordinary Attention was requisite,
now it is. Well it were, if it could not be said of Multitudes, That there is a
Price put into their Hands, and they have no Heart to it.


Theoph. Let me add, Eubulus, that the great expectation which was of this our
Lawgiver, and his Laws, may prevail much for Men's Obedience to them. Toward
Him the Faces of the Jews, even from Moses's time, and upwards, were bent: The
coming of Shiloh was earnestly waited for: And He, after so many Propbecies
made of him, had the Name of (...), and (...), Him that Comes, or the Coming
King, as is very frequently to be seen in the Evangelists.

And when the Ages past were so intent upon his Coming; when there were so many
Types and Predictions of him, which, under his Government, betokened the
greatest Happiness unto Men, shall Men, now He is come, esteem meanly of Him
and his Laws? And this, when to those, who will impartially weigh and consider
things, He is not a jot less worthy than all the Expectations of a great
People, for many more than a thousand Years, and those many Figures and
Prophecies of him, imported him to be? Yea, when He is excellent beyond the
Conceptions of Men; Angels themselves desiring with Reverence to look into
these things? When also All Men are no less concerned in Him now, than the Jews
formerly were? How ill will it look, after all this, if Men shall slight his
Person, and refuse Obedience to his Laws; which if a Man observe, he shall not
only live in them, but live happily to all Eternity?


Eubul. Your Persuasive for Reverence and Honor to the Person of our Lawgiver,
and for Submission and Obedience to his Laws, is very strong. Yet, methinks, I
would not more urge for an Observance of, than for an hearty Love unto, those
his Laws. Though truly, where there is a faithful Observance, there will be a
true Love of them also. Their Righteousness and Goodness will presently
manifest themselves to those who are Conscionably Obedient. And, as our Lord
says, Wisdom is justified of her Children; so these Laws, which may, in
reality, be termed Wisdom, as proceeding from Him, who is Wisdom itself, will
justify their own Excellencies to the Thoughts of those who observe them; and
by Them will be vindicated against all Gainsayers and Disobedient Ones.

I will end all with this Prayer; That God by shedding abroad his Love into our
Hearts, would increase our Love daily more and more to his Laws; That we may
cheerfully obey Him in this World, and be everlasting rewarded by Him in the
next.


DISCOURSE the Sixth.
The Contents.
NOt a few think themselves secure in their actings, if they can show that some
good Men in Holy Writ, or some well accounted of since, have done the like.
Examples of Good Men to be imitated no further than they have the Laws of
Christ for their Rule and Warrant. They can of themselves lay no Obligation
upon us. The Holy Men we read of in Scripture, were not sent into the World to
be a Rule to all Others in the Things they acted. The Uncertainty of Examples
very great. Their Insufficiency. None of the Actions of our Blessed Lord, from
his Example merely, and without a Law, did lay any Obligation upon us to
Imitate them. The Laws of Christ reach to all Moral Actions. No Examples of
Goodness beyond what is included in those Laws. Inferences concerning the
Examples in Holy Writ. In those things where the Law of God is Silent, Prudence
is to be our Guide. Examples, though of themselves they lay no Obligation upon
us, are yet of use. Those which bear the Image of the Laws of Christ, are given
us for Incentives and Encouragements of our Obedience. When Divine Laws are
questioned as to their Sense, Examples, upon occasion, may be Interpretations
of them. By Examples we may be instructed to do our Duties in a decent, and
becoming way. Decency added unto Sincerity may make its reward the greater.
Examples are Registered in Holy Scripture for the Honor of those, whose they
were. Our Condition the more sure, than it would have been, if we had had none
in whose Steps we might tread. By comparing Examples with our Rule, we shall
quickly find whether they will hold Good for our Practice or no.

THEOPHILUS. YOU have finished, Eubulus, what you intended concerning the
Divine Laws. But, I hope, you have not therein put an end to Discourses of a
like Nature, Religious and Sacred. So much have you won upon me by your Five
last, that, should you be willing to rest, I would crave leave (for this once
at least,) to excite you forwards. Or, should you enter upon new matter that
stands at any distance from Religion, how Ingenious soever it might be, I
would presume to stop your Course.


EVBVLVS. ALthough the things that are Holy, may be administered unto by things
which, in their Nature, are not so; and even by Lower Objects may afford
Recruits to a Mind long engaged in Diviner Speculations; yet since you are so
much taken with These as to account them your Refreshments as well as Business,
your so good Inclinations I will no way stint.


Theoph. And why, Eubulus, should not Christians (especially those that have
Time and Leisure,) often make Religion, and the great Concerns thereof, to be
the matter of their Discourse, as well as Plato, and Cicero, and some others,
made the Immortality of the Soul; the Contempt of Death; the bearing of
Troubles bravely, and other things not unlike these, to be the Subject of
theirs? These things were, I may say, their Divinity; and though their
Reasonings were in the dark, and themselves uncertain amidst their
Disquisitions, yet they esteemed them to be the chief things that made the Life
of Man happy. I see not why it should be otherwise with us; who have greater
Assurances of the Truth of our Divinity; and, as to our Welfare and Happiness,
are therein not less, but more, concerned than they were.


Eubul. I would think that many there are, who are more frequent and fervent in
the thoughts of these things, than you seem to think they are. But Christianity
being that which chiefly instructs the Heart; and which, for the better
excluding of Hypocrisy and Vainglory, does contain Precepts that in some Acts
enjoin secrecy; therefore, I suppose, a great many, willing rather in reality
to be, than to appear, Religious, are not so forward to talk of the things,
which yet they truly love.


Theoph. I will not be against any Interpretation that carries Charity toward
other Men. I yet may be allowed to fear, that to some, their Religion is the
less confirmed in their thoughts, from their constant avoiding, in their words,
any thing that tends thereunto. Not to say that some, by shunning one Rock,
have split upon another; putting on too much the Guise of Profaneness, while
they have abandoned the Garb of Hypocrisy.

But you and I shall not, between ourselves, be suspected of any such Vanity;
and, being thus in private, are free from the Censures of others also, if we
bend our Talk toward sacred Things.

I therefore request of you, that, in persuance of your former Discourses, you
would consider the Examples of Pious Men Registered in Holy Scriptures; which
are esteemed by many of little less force than the Divine Laws; and, ranked
with them, are made, in part, the Rule of our Actions.


Eubul. I shall the more willingly yield unto this your Request, because too
much is attributed to the Examples of others. And not a few are they, who think
themselves secure in their Actings, if they can show that some good Men in Holy
Writ, or some well accounted of since, have done the like.


Theoph. Truly, Eubulus, I have myself taken notice, that some things, which,
looked upon in themselves, would be acknowledged not to be right, yet
considered as done by such and such Persons, (as if their doing them had put a
new Nature into them,) will be well thought of; and often, without any scruple
at all, will be imitated.


Eubul. And hence it is, that a great many are uncertainly good; and more are,
too surely, evil in their practice.


Theoph. How far then, Eubulus, may the Examples of good Men be imitated by us?


Eubul. Even no further, Theophilus, than they have the Laws of Jesus Christ
for their Rule and Warrant. Which will be manifest to any one who will
impartially consider these two things.

1. That Examples, as of themselves, can lay no Obligation upon us.

2. That the Perfection of the Laws of Christ is so great, that they reach to
all Moral Actions, and even to the Thoughts of our Hearts.


Theoph. I will be very attentive to you; and I hope you expect not my further
Entreaties for your progress.


Eubul. First then, That Examples, as of themselves, can lay no Obligation upon
us. And this in a twofold respect; From want of Authority in the Persons
partly; and partly from the uncertainty and insufficiency of their Example.

From a want of Authority in the Persons, first.

The Holy Men we read of in Scripture, were not sent into the World to be a Law
to all others in the things they acted. If we look upon the Patriarchs,
together with the Prophets, what was there in them that might show, that every
thing they did was to be a Rule to the whole Nation of the Jews then, and to
all Mankind afterward? They had indeed Authority enough for the engaging
Obedience to what they said. Moses received from God the Laws which he gave:
And his delivering them with these words, God spoke, or, Thus says the Lord,
or some such like form, and confirming the truth of them also by Miracles, was
Argument sufficient for their being observed. And the Holy Prophets, carrying
Testimony of their being divinely inspired, might claim Attention and
Observance to their Prophecies, in whatever related to practice.

But what Authority did all their Actions bear for Imitation? All of them were
Men of like Passions with us; and their Persons were much of a different sort
from the greatness of the things they wrote.

Moses had something in him that was worse than his slowness of speech; for he
spoke unadvisedly with his Lips. What failures David and Solomon had; what
passions Jonah toward his God, we know. Ezekiel, who had the most Visions of
any, is more often than any called the Son of Man; lest he (as is thought,)
should have forgotten his own Meanness. And St. Paul, that he might not be
exalted above measure, and that others also might not think too highly of him,
had a Messenger of Satan sent to buffet him. And if we should run through all
the Personal Failings of Holy Men, the Authority from their Example would be
found to be little or none. As St. Paul says of himself, and the other
Apostles, We have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, that the Excellency of the
Power may be of God, and not of us; so may it also be said of Moses, and the
Prophets: They were but as a mean Cask to the Will of God, which was enclosed
in them, and by them delivered unto others; and their own Persons and Actions
of no Authority in respect of the Injunctions which from God they declared.

The Uncertainty, Theophilus, of Examples next, will show us that they, of
themselves, do not oblige us.

How many of those Examples shall bind us to Imitation, is no where in
Scripture told us. Some of them carry an open unlawfulness along with them.
Others may well be questioned whether they be rightly honest or not: And others
that were lawful and good in the Circumstances they, when acted, were in, will
be found not so easy to be fitted for our own, and all other Men's
Circumstances. For they admit of an unaccountable variety; and that variety may
so much alter the quality of Actions, as to make some, that are lawful, to
become sinful; and others that we are free to do or not to do, to become
necessary to be done.

So that either we must be told in how many Circumstances such Examples will
hold good, and be imitable, and in how many they will become unlawful and
inexpedient; or else every one must be left to choose what Examples he will, and
to apply them how he thinks good.

The former is a Task that no Man will undertake; The later would bring in the
greatest Confusion of Practice; while some would take the bad Examples, others
misapply the good; and so all Edification and Unity would be overthrown.

And as the Examples are uncertain, so are they insufficient. And indeed so far
as there is an Uncertainty, there is, in some sense, an Insufficiency. For
should they be never so full in themselves, yet if Men's Understandings should
generally be so dimsighted, as that they could not, through diversity of
Circumstances, discern how to take right Measures of their Actions from them,
they would be insufficient as to us.

But we shall find a great Deficiency of Examples in Holy Writ, in that there
are Thousands of Actions, which are to be governed by Religion, (as indeed all
our Actions are,) of which we can find no suitable Example in Scripture. I need
not, Theophilus, give you nor myself the trouble of gathering together many
Instances of Actions to show what I now say. Let Men, in the Diversity of
Callings that are in the World; and in the many Relations that they stand in
unto others, consider their own Actions; and amidst all the Examples of
Scripture, they will see themselves left alone, not having a sure Light from
any of them.

Whence from the Uncertainty and Insufficiency of the Examples, as well as from
the want of Authority in the Persons, no Examples are Obligatory unto us; nor
to be imitated any further than they have the Laws of Christ for their Rule and
Warrant.


Theoph. But, Eubulus, our Blessed Lord wanted no Authority in his Person; and
his Example was perfect; and what Others Example could not do, His may; may it
not?


Eubul. We will therefore consider the Actions of our Lord; than whom there
never was, neither could be, a better Pattern in the World; and yet we shall
find that none of them, from his Example merely, and without a Law, did lay an
absolute Obligation upon us to imitate them.

1. Some of them were Miraculous Actions; and, as such, we are not bound to
imitate them. For no Man is obliged to do those things, which are beyond the
Powers which God ever gave him; or has promised to bestow upon him. Such
Actions as these are the accomplishments of the Son of God, above all others;
neither has he, nor ever will he impart the Abilities of doing the like,
unless upon extraordinary occasions, and for the obtaining the chiefest Ends,
the Glory of God and the Salvation of the Souls of Men, when they cannot
reasonably be compassed without such Miraculous Actings; as at the first
spreading the Gospel they could not. But ordinarily, none will be thought
deficient in their Actions, because they turn not Water into Wine; Cure not
Diseases with a Word; give not Eyes to the Blind; Legs to the Lame; and Life to
the Dead.

2. Some of our Lords Actions were such as proceeded from that Authority and
Prerogative, which, as he was a Prince, did belong unto him.

Of this sort was his sending for the Ass and Colt, without so much as having
the owners leave; or acquainting him with what he did, Matthew. 21.2. As also was
his driving the Buyers and Sellers with a Scourge out of the Temple, and
overthrowing the Tables of the Money Changers, Mat. 21.12. Neither are These to
be imitated by us, as we are private Men. Whosoever shall take away that which
is another, without his leave and license, and shall use it as their own, will
be guilty of Injustice. And so, whosoever as a private Person shall take upon
him Magisterially to new Model the Church or the Discipline thereof, he usurps
that Authority which is due unto our Lord; and is imparted to some only, who
are rightly called thereunto. And he deserves the Scourge which our Lord made,
rather than any Praise for his Actions in this kind.

3. Some Actions of our Lord, are such as belong to his Mediatory Office; by
which he interceeds with God for Men, not in a Submiss and Precarious manner,
but by way of Covenant and Merit. These we must not imitate. He that shall
mediate with God, upon the account of his own Merit; as if he had done whatever
was required of him to do; and also had supererogated, and so might claim, as
of Right, a Reward to himself, and somewhat over and above, which he might
impart to others, who have been deficient in their Duty, and could therefore
expect nothing; such an one imitateth Christ no otherwise than to become a
Traitor to him; and goes about to share in that Glory, which our Lord will not
part with to another. Nothing but Submission is to be shown, and Imperfection
acknowledged by us: For we have done in every thing less than was our Duty to
do; and so must account ourselves less than the least of Gods Mercies.

4. Some Actions of our Lord are Moral; such as respect Righteousness of Life;
and These we are to imitate.

But yet These we are not obliged unto merely by his Example.

Now These are such as may be reduced either to the Law of Nature, or else to
the Gospel, as particularly belonging thereunto.

Those Actions which he did, relating to the Law of Nature, we also are to do;
Such are the Worshipping of God; the being just unto Men; Temperate in our own
Persons, and such like. But the Law within us, which, as the Apostle says, is
written in our Hearts, laid an Obligation upon us before to do these things;
and so the Duty of performing them depends not upon his Example.

As for those Actions that purely relate unto the Gospel; How had we been bound
by them, unless he had said, This I say unto you, This do ye? Or how could we
have known that his Actions should have been imitated, unless he had given Laws
for the doing the like? When we had seen him reproached, and bearing all
Indignities without Endeavors of vindicating himself, (though he had the power
of doing it,) small Encouragement there would have been for our complying with
his Example, had he not said, Resist not Evil; but whosoever shall smite thee
on the Right Cheek, turn to him the other also, Love your Enemies; Bless them
them that curse you; Do good to them that hate you; And pray for them that
despitefully use you; that ye may be the Children of your Father who is in
Heaven.

Certainly, had there been only the Example of our Lord, without any thing
else, we should not, Theophilus, have known how to interpret some Actions. But
if in the Example which he has set, his Will and Design should have been told,
the Matter of his Actions would have put on the Nature of a Law; and so, would
have bound us to imitation, not as Example so much, as Law.

Whence I suppose, Theophilus, it is plain that the Example of none, no, (with
Reverence I speak it,) not of our Blessed Lord himself, do, as of themselves,
lay any Obligations upon us; and consequently our Imitation of Holy Men is to
go no further than their Example has the Divine Laws for its Rule and Warrant.

2. The Perfection of the Laws of Christ which reaches to all Moral Actions,
and even to the Thoughts of our Hearts, shows us the same thing also.

Nothing is there that is just and good, but the Precepts of the Gospel do
enjoin it: Nothing that is unrighteous, but is forbidden there. And in this
sense in is that the Law of God is said to be exceeding broad, Psalm. 119.

Now to say that there may be Examples of Goodness beyond what is included in
the Laws of Christ, is to make those Laws imperfect, which pierce in every
thing even to the dividing asunder of the Soul and Spirit, and the Joints and
Marrow; and which proceed from Him who is infinitely Wise, and so cannot be
thought to be any way deficient.

But to say that such or such an Example is good, because it includes in it
that goodness which the Laws of our Lord do enjoin, is to grant that the Law is
Superior to the Example; and, though there should have been no such Example,
would have required the matter of it to have been done.


Theoph. But pray, Eubulus, what shall we think of the Example of the Church,
in some things which we account necessary to be done from her Practice, when
yet there is no Command in Holy Scripture for the doing them? I will instance
only in two things, though I might in more; to wit, The Baptizing of Infants,
and the setting apart the First Day of the Week as Holy. It may seem that
either we are mistaken, when we press the necessity of these things; or else
that there are some things necessary which the Precepts of our Lord do not
reach unto.


Eubul. But yet, Theophilus, even in these things we are not swayed merely by
the Example of the Church, without great Reason moving Her to the constant
Observance of them. And though there be no direct Command for these things, yet
if they may with good probability be inferred from Holy Writ; if there be a
Congruity in them to some Laws given unto the Jews, so far as Reason and
Enquity enforced those Laws; and if there be likewise some things in the New
Testament, that more than a little intimate the doing of them, we may observe
them upon the same Grounds that the Church observed them, and not only from her
Example. Though truly her Example downwards, even from her First Age, may add
Authority to the Considerations now mentioned, in that she is a Society which
above all others in the World, has the Aids and Direction of the Holy Spirit,
who is the Guide unto all Truth.

If we look upon your first Instance of Baptizing Infants, there is a Command
that all Nations should be Baptized; God enlarging his Covenant to all Mankind,
which was confined to the Jews before. Though truly, even the Covenant which
was made with Abraham (of which Circumcision was the Seal,) was of an
Evangelical Nature, and belonged to him chiefly as he was the Father of the
Faithful; and to his Spiritual no less than to his Fleshly Race. And if
Children before, and in the time of the Old Law were capable of the Covenant,
why not in the time of the Gospel, where is much greater Love manifested unto
Men, than ever there was in the Jewish State? And while Divine Love is more
abundant to all Sorts and Conditions of Men, shall poor and helpless Children
suffer a Diminution in it? Especially when our Blessed Lord was pleased to take
them in his Arms; to rebuke those that kept them from him; and to pronounce
that of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. There is so much cause to think that the
Privileges of Children are not only continued, but increased under the Gospel;
that to make us to be of another Mind, it may seem necessary that there should
have been a Command on purpose not to Baptize them. And what Prejudice, think
we, would it not have wrought in the Jews toward Christianity, if their
Children, who were taken into Covenant under Moses, should have been excluded
the Covenant under Christ? Or, should it be said that God has Mercy in store
for them, as Infants, why, if the inward Grace be vouchsafed unto them, should
the outward Seal of such Grace be denied them; who, if they be fit for the
Kingdom of Heaven, are sure not unfit for the Font?

As for your other Instance of setting apart the First Day of the Week as Holy;
Natural Religion will tell us, that some time is to be allowed to the Service
of God: And Revealed Religion has acquainted us, that God, by a Command to the
Jews, (the Reason of which is fetched from the very beginning of the World,)
had determined the seventh part of Time to be continued as his own Peculiar;
The Equity of which Portion of Time, (in that it respected the Resting of
Cattle as well as of Men,) the Church still owneth, as not knowing a better
than what God himself had appointed.

But the Day of Christ's Resurrection, by reason of the Exceeding Greatness of
Gods Power and Love showed in it, surpassing that Day which immediately
succeeded the Creation; and having been signalized by the Apostles, and other
Believers meeting together upon it; not once by Chance; or another time as it
happened, but frequently by Choice; Our Lord also honoring their coming
together, by his own Presence, and by the wonderful Presence of the Holy Ghost
sent upon them on that Day; and its being probable likewise, that the
Observation thereof was by the Order of the Apostles; or otherwise there would
not have been such early Discipline, as the Laying by in Store Collections for
the Saints on that Day; nor would the Day itself, in so short a time, have been
established throughout the whole Church, still every Hour increasing; and
further, it being no less probable, that except the Apostles had in this thing
sufficiently understood the Will of their Lord, they would not have been the
Authors of the Change of that Day, which, for Reason of Equity, as well as
Ceremony, was so strictly observed for so many Ages in the Jewish Church; we
may upon these accounts, and others such as These, and not from the Churches
Example only, acknowledge the setting apart of the first Day of the Week, to be
of great Moment. And the more, in that the Two great Adverse Parties to
Christianity, the Jews and Heathens, were so rightly opposed hereby. In the
Observing one Day in Seven, the first Christians ran counter to the Heathens;
by the acknowledging Him to he their God, who in Six Days made the World, and
Rested the Seventh: In the keeping Holy the First Day of the Week, they
professed openly, against the Jews, that they worshipped God, not as a Redeemer
out of Egypt, but as the Father of Jesus Christ, who on that Day Rose from the
Dead; and was our Redemption in so wonderful a Manner, as that the Redemption
from Egypt was only a Shadow of it.

In both your Instances, Theophilus, there is indeed the Practice of the
Church, but then there is a great deal more beside; so much as shows, that in
great probability, and in the best Judgment she can make, they are things of
more than Ordinary Consequence; and to be Solemnly Observed by all who would
sincerely approve themselves unto God.

And not unlike, possibly, may be said in some other things which we have the
Church's Example for, but no positive Command from God: For her Example is
founded upon such Rational and Religious Considerations, and so Consonant unto
the Divine Laws, as do affix very much Honor to her Practice; and do Recommend
it as necessary, if not in the Highest Degree, yet so as not to be disobeyed by
Us, nor thrown off by Her.

So that we may conclude, that in the imitating of any Example, we are to have
respect to the Law, and to the Testimony; to Examine it, whether it be
Repugnant to the Rule or not, If it be Repugnant thereunto, how Specious soever
it may seem, and how much soever Cried up it be, we must by no means imitate
it. The Perfection of the Gospel Laws forbids it.


Theoph. It seems very agreeable to Reason and Truth what you have said. And
would you therefrom (as you well may,) give some particular Judgment of the
Examples in Holy Writ, I should account it among your kindnesses to me.


Eubul. That Admirable Person, Dr. Sanderson, in his Lecture De Piorum
Exemplis, has done what you desire: But that our Walk may not want Discourse,
and that I may not seem unwilling to gratify you so far as I am able, what I
can remember from Him, and think of elsewhere, that will be pertinent, you
shall have.

There is no need of saying any thing of those Actions which in Holy Scripture
are Sentenced as Evil ones. How good soever the Actors otherwise have been,
such their Doings have evidently been Breaches of Gods Law, and so are by no
means to be imitated.

But then for other Examples we may say,

1. That Those which have no Mark of Condemnation put upon them, are not
thereby presently to be drawn into Imitation. For Holy Penmen showing
themselves Faithful Historians, in delivering Matters truly, but not taking
upon them the Persons of Judges, in Condemning every thing that is amiss, some
of these Actions possibly may be against the Laws of our Lord. The Drunkenness
of Noah; Lot's offering his Daughters to the abuses of the Sodomites; Joseph's
Swearing by the Life of Pharaoh, and such like, are not Condemned, but who will
say they are to be Imitated?

Nor Secondly, are these Examples which have Praise given to them, without
further search to have our Imitation.

Some of them were Extraordinary Actions; (as was Phineas's Smiting the Man of
Israel, and the Midianitish Woman, in the Act of Whoredom, through the Belly
with a Javelin,) and so, are not to be extended beyond the Time and
Circumstances in which they were done.

Some of them were Mixed Actions; only in one part of them Praiseworthy; in the
Other against the Laws of our Lord. Such was the Midwives Example in speaking
of the Hebrew Women's Childbirths, Exodus 1.19. As also was that of the Unjust
Steward, Luke 16.8. A Lie there was in the One as well as Piety; and Injustice
in the Other as well as Prudence. And we are taught that even the Glory of God
is not to be promoted by our Lie; and that no Evil is to be done that good may
come thereof.

Thirdly, Nor yet are those Actions, which have been in order to Signal Ends,
and by the especial Providence of God have attained those Ends, an absolute
Warrant for our imitating them.

I instance in the Fact of Jacob and his Mother Rebecca, in the getting the
Blessing from Esau the Elder Son.

A Promise God had made to Rebecca, that the Elder should serve the Younger:
And on Jacob's having the Blessing of his Father, the Welfare of the whole Race
which proceeded out of his Loins, and was the chosen People of God, might seem
in a manner to depend. The Blessing is sought for through deceitful Means, and
is obtained. The Father, when he knows of all, does not reverse the Blessing,
as seeing the Hand of God in the thing; and God confirms the Blessing to
Jacob and his Posterity.

The Manifest and Strong Providence of God, in this Example, will not Authorize
our doing like unto it, though in concerns (if such there could be,) altogether
as high and great as These were.

The Reason is, The Expressions of Gods Will through Christ in the New
Testament, are to be preferred before the Instances of his Providence in the
Old. His Providence can order the irregular Actions of Men unto Ends that are
good; and by them can bring about those things which he has designed. But His
Will cannot, by reason of its Perfection, command any unrighteous Deed to be
done, as if his End could not be obtained without it. And His Will in the
Gospel being fully and clearly revealed by Him who was in the Bosom of his
Father, and so knew his whole Mind, That Will of his is now to be our Rule, and
esteemed by us, in our Practice, before any Actings of his Providence; either
that have been heretofore, or that shall be hereafter.

This we may do; improve, so far as in us lies, the evil Actions of others,
into the good of ourselves and them, and to the Glory of God: For in so doing
we shall imitate the Wisdom and Providence of God, which is holy: But we may
never do evil Actions ourselves, nor encourage others to do them, upon the
account that God has made them sometimes instrumental to good Ends. For they
are not in themselves a jot the better for the having been thus used to those
Ends. God has indeed in his Wisdom well improved them; but in his Holiness he
never approved of them. And his Will in the Laws of his Son, is, and always
will be, highly dear unto him: And therefore, in all cases, how little hopes of
success soever there be, and, at all times, how hazardous soever they may
appear, is to be stuck unto by us.

4. Those Actions which under the Old Testament were altogether innocent, are
not all of them, without scruple, to be imitated by us, who are Christians.

Such, I suppose, was Moses's slaying the Egyptian, who strove with the Hebrew
Man, Exodus 2.12. Ehud's running his Dagger into Eglon, Judges 3.22. Elijah's
calling down Fire from Heaven, for the consuming of the Captains and their
Fifties, 2 Kings 1.10. David's causing the Ammonites to be put under Saws and
Harrows of Iron, and to pass through the Brick-Kiln, 2 Samuel 12.31. And his
cursing his Enemies, as, in his Psalms, we frequently hear him do.

In some of these Instances, if not in all, we are to look to an extraordinary
Spirit (yet not disagreeing to the Mosaic State,) impelling the Actors; and
therefore it is very unsafe to bring them to the common Rules of Life now under
the Gospel.

It might justly be objected against a private Man that should go about to do
as Moses did, Who made thee a Ruler or a Judge over us? And Ehud's Deed, how
little Warrant is it for Attempts of the like Nature? We know whom our Lord
checked, for desiring they might do as Elias had done, with these words, Ye
know not what Spirit ye are of: The Son of Man came not to destroy, but to
save, Luke 9.54. And David's Carriage toward the Conquered Ammonites, who will
say it may, to the worst of Enemies, be imitated? And his so frequent
Execrations of his Enemies, may they not be said to proceed from a Prophetic
Spirit, and to be Predictions wrapped up in the Form of a Curse? But who now may
pretend to such a Spirit? And not having the same Spirit, how may they presume
to do the same thing?

Look we to the Rule under the Gospel; and there we shall find the Precepts
that are given us to be of a mild and soft temper; and the Spirit, that
actuates those Precepts in our Souls, to be gentle and sweet-natured: Not
unlike unto the Dove, whose Resemblance he took, when he descended in a Bodily
Shape. We are to Love our Enemies; to Bless them that Curse us; to do good to
them that hate us. And Servants and Inferiors are to be subject to their
Masters and Superiors; not only to the good and gentle, but also to the
froward. It is not unworthy Observation, that in the whole Gospel there are no
Precepts that relate to the carrying on a War, because if our Savior's Laws be
obeyed sincerely on all Hands, there will be no occasion for Fighting.

Now where the State and Laws are New, (as under our Lord in great measure they
are,) some things that were innocent and commendable under a former State, may
not be so unto us. For these Laws are to last so long as the World stands;
whereas the Laws that authorized some of those Examples (even now spoken of,)
were only Impulses of the Spirit for that time alone in which they were done.
Yea, the Laws which were most properly belonging to the Mosaic Institution,
and endured the longest, were in great measure but in order unto our Savior's
more perfect Institution, which was to come; and which is styled The
Everlasting Gospel, because its Laws shall never cease to bind us, as was
before observed.

5. No Actions of Holy Men, that express not the Substance of a Divine Law, are
necessarily to be imitated by us.

For if our Imitation of Examples, in Sacred Writings, be to have the Laws of
Christ for its Rule and Guidance, then those Examples which do not any way
express those Laws, although they be not contrary to them, lay no Obligation
upon us for our imitating them. Hence that Posture which our Savior and his
Disciples were in at the first Institution of his Supper, since it was not
belonging to the Substance of the Command of their Consecrating Bread and Wine,
and Giving them; and of others Receiving them at their Hand, does not oblige us.

There is none can understand any Posture from the Command, Do this in
Remembrance of me; and there is no Command on purpose for any Posture to be
observed: Why then should there be so much Discord in the Church of Christ
about it? It were well we could not say, Men more earnestly contend about an
indifferent Circumstance of the Duty, than they make Conscience of the Duty
itself.

And from what has been said, Theophilus, we may see how great and dangerous
their Error is, who raise Examples so high, as to make them, together with the
Laws of our Lord, the Rule of our Actions; when those Laws alone, and of
themselves, are so.

Nothing, say they, is to be done, but what is warranted by some Command or
Example in Holy Writ. Which, what is it but a derogating from the Divine Law,
to add overmuch unto Examples; and to give some Men, who have their Eyes too
much set upon Examples, an occasion therefrom to take oftentimes a greater
Latitude than the Sacred Precepts will allow?

When the Law of God is silent as to any particular Action, and does not forbid
it, it is to be supposed we are left at liberty to do, or not to do it. Neither
need we seek to an Example for our Warrant; but our Prudence, with respect only
to that general Law, Whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God, is to be our
Guide. For those Examples, which are not directly expressive of the Laws of
God, arose at first from the Prudence of the Agents; and why may not We, upon
the same Grounds, do the same Things? Or why should an Example be of more
Authority with us, than that Prudence from which it sprung, and which lies in
common to all Men, for the ordering a great part of their Lives?

Certainly the wholly excluding the Dictates of Prudence, where no Law of God
lays any prohibition upon us; and the joining of Examples together with the
Divine Precepts, without any mark of Difference, as if they were of equal sway
with them, may be of pernicious Consequence to the Practice of Men; and has
already been, too too much, instrumental unto the quarrelling with the wholesome
Discipline and Constitutions of our Church; and the disturbing of that Peace,
which ought to be more among Christians than others; but which has been less
in the midst of them, than it has been, even with Those, who, in the
Psalmist's words, are Strangers unto Peace.


Theoph. But if Examples lay no Obligation upon us, any further than as they
have the Laws of Christ for their Rule and Warrant, pray, Eubulus, of what use
are they? And to what end have we any thing more in Holy Writ, than the Laws
thereof? These of themselves engaging us to all the Duties that any Examples
can point us unto.


Eubul. We may say with the Apostle in general, That all the Examples in sacred
Scripture, yea, even those that are bad, as well as those that are more
commendable, (for they were all ordered by the selfsame Spirit to be set down
there,) have their good uses; and are profitable either for Doctrine, or for
Reproof, or for Correction, or for Instruction in Righteousness; that the Man
of God may be thoroughly furnished to every good work.

But more particularly we say,

1. That those Examples, which plainly bear the Image of the Laws of Christ,
are given us for Incentives and Encouragements of our Obedience to those Laws.

Though our Rule be perfect, yet it will more prevail upon us, when it brings
an Example with it, to show that it has been obeyed by others, and may be by
us.

We are apt to think that our Task is difficult, and beyond our Strength. In
Mercy therefore and Love, God has been pleased to Register the Actions and
Lives of some Men, to show us, that what he requires of us, is not impossible
to be done. Why should we think it an hard thing to have Faith in God, when
Abraham has believed in Him, and taught, that it is a Duty which may be
performed by us? Why should we esteem it unreasonable to be patient in
Adversity, when we Read of the Patience of Job in greater Evils, than as yet we
have suffered, or are like to suffer? We may Cheerfully set about the Duty of
Mortification, and Self-Denial, from the knowledge of St. Paul's keeping under
his Body, and bringing it into Subjection.

But the Chief Example of all is our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ. And God has
required his Obedience both Active and Passive, not only that he thereby might
Merit for us, but also that he might Manifest the Reasonableness of his Laws;
and might Excite our Obedience by his own Example.

Who can justly refuse to be Meek and Lowly, when He, who Commands us to be so,
was so Himself, though he were a King? Who is it will deny to Love his Enemies,
when our Lord, who enjoins us thus to do, did the same thing; yea Loved Us
ourselves, when we were Enemies unto Him? That we should not be Weary nor Faint
in our Minds under the Troubles that may befall us for Religions Sake, we are
bid to consider Him, who endured such contradiction of Sinners against himself;
and to look unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith; who for the Joy
that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the Shame.

And what greater Allurements can there be, for our Obedience to his Laws, than
that He, who made these Excellent Laws did himself Live according unto them;
and was in all respects such as he would have US to be? If his Commands move us
not, how can we withstand his Example?


Theoph. His Example is Strong: But may not the Perfection thereof (he being
God as well as Man,) make us despair of ever reaching it, rather than encourage
us to endeavor toward it?


Eubul. In case any should so think, God has afforded us Patterns amongst
Those who have nothing but what is Human in their Natures; and we are to be
followers of Them, as They have been of Christ.

Though truly Those Actions of our Lord, which belonged unto him chiefly as he
was a Man, (such as were the Expressions of his Meekness, Patience,
Self-Denial, Affiance in God, and such like,) we may imitate immediately from
Himself; and have no need that any should interpose betwixt Us and Him, as an
Example of the same things. For who can Practice those Virtues and Graces in a
manner more befitting our Imitation, than He has done? He was made in the
likeness of Men; and was in all points Tempted even as we are; so that we may
exactly see our own Duty in his Behavior. Only He was without Sin; and though
we cannot, while we are in this World, attain unto the Perfection of being
wholly free from Sin, as He was, yet it is but meet the Copy which is set us
should be Exact and Accurate: That thereby we might not rest in Low Degrees,
but might still be excited to rise higher.

Nay, even those Actions of our Lord, which proceeded more from his Divine than
Human Nature, are, for the most part, not so much out of our reach, but they
may yield us something for our Imitation. And they were not Written barely as
Narratives, without any respect to our Practice. They carried in them a
Conformity to the Laws which he gave; and we are excited to give Obedience to
those his Laws, in that while he acted most like God, he had a respect unto
Them; and did then express the matter of Them, as well as when he acted most
like Man.

In his Miraculous Actions, there were the Piety, the Kindness, and the
Compassion, which he requires of us as Men, mixed with his Power as he was God.
And so far they are Incentives to our Duties. We cannot indeed feed a Multitude
by a Miracle, but we can give Food to the Hungry, according to our Abilities.
We cannot Heal the Sick, by a Word, but we can Administer to their Necessities;
We cannot make the Lame to Walk, and the Blind to See; but we can be Legs to
the One, and Eyes to the Other, in our way; by giving Support and Direction to
them. Unto this Goodness and Pity, these Miraculous Actions of our Lord do
prompt us; and hence the Church of Christ, though it could not reach the
Miracle of our Lords Fast for Forty Days, yet thought itself bound to the
Piety of it; and as far as it well could, to the Abstinence of it also.

So likewise his Actions, which proceeded from his Prerogative as he was a
Prince, (which I said we must not imitate,) have something that may admit of an
Analogy betwixt our Actions and Them: And may stir us up unto that Practice,
which we as Christians are bound unto. Thus his Driving the Buyers and Sellers
out of the Temple, and overturning the Tables of the Money Changers,
encourages us to be Zealously affected in a good Matter; and to oppose every
thing that is Evil, so far as lies in our Sphere. Thus also his Mediatory
Actions may be Excitements to us earnestly to interceed with God for the
Eternal Welfare of Others, in an Humble and Submissive way; not forgetting our
own Meanness while we do it; and remembering also, that what we do in this kind
is no more than what is our Duty to do.

You see, Theophilus, that our Lords Example even in the Actions that are above
the Ordinary Level, as well as in those which chiefly represented his Human
Nature, is a Motive to Us for Obedience to his Laws.

I may further also say, viz. That not only the Examples of some Holy Men's
Actions, in Sacred Writings, which, as to the whole were good; but Those also,
which, as to some things, are short of the measure, and below the Standard of
Goodness, are written for the stirring us up to our Duties: Though (as I before
said,) they are not presently, and without further Consideration to be drawn
into Practice. Of this sort are those Actions which are of a Mixed Nature, and
are Commended. Only this we must be sure to do; to have an Eye to that alone in
the Examples, which is Praiseworthy; avoiding the Other part of them. The
Goodness and Mercy of the Hebrew Midwives may excite us, in different
occasions, to the like Virtues; but so only, as to join Truth with them. And
from the Prudence of the Unjust Steward we are encouraged to be Prudent, yet
not so as to follow him in his Unrighteousness.

This is one end of Scripture Examples, which are Expressive of the Laws of
Christ, to be Incentives and Encouragements to our Obedience.


Theoph. Were it not to hinder you, I would give you my thanks for the good
insight into Examples you have already afforded me: But I will not be your let.


Eubul. I had much rather your share in the Discourse had been larger; that I
might have had better occasion to give the like thanks to you: Though I
complain not of the Burden, if so you can find any thing of Satisfaction
therefrom.

A Second Use of Examples in Holy Writ is this. That if some of the Divine Laws
be questioned as to their Sense, These, upon occasion, may be Interpretations
of them.

We may instance, Theophilus, in the Law against Swearing. I say unto you,
Swear not at all, Matthew. 5. Some you know do from hence Condemn all Swearing
whatsoever. And therefore they will refuse the taking of an Oath, though
Solemnly by the Magistrate, in things of great Consequence, required to do it.

But that Swearing is not simply unlawful, but only as it is lightly used, and
in ordinary Conversation, we have the Example of St. Paul to testify, who, to
confirm the Truth of God, in his Epistles, does seriously bind it with his
Oath. God is my Witness, says he, whom I serve with my Spirit, in the Gospel
of his Son, that without ceasing I make mention of you all in my Prayers, Romans
1.9. God is my Witness; which is an appealing to Him, or an invocating of Him,
as a Witness of the Truth of what he says. So Gal. 1.20. Now the things that I
write unto you, behold, before God, I lie not. And we have the same Reason to
be assured, That these Oaths were as rightly made, as the Things which he spoke
were truly spoken: For the same Holy Spirit dictated both the one and the other.

Neither can I say, that we have not the Example of our blessed Savior himself
in this present Case, Mark 8.12. (...); Verily I say unto you, if there shall a
sign be given to this Generation. Which though rendered by our Translators,
There shall no sign be given, etc. yet it is observed by learned Men to be the
same kind of expression with that of Hebr. 3.11. (...). As I swear unto them in
my Wrath, IF they shall enter into my Rest. And with that of Ezekiel. 14.16.
(...). As I live, IF their Sons or Daughters shall be delivered: Which is an
abbreviated or imperfect Form of an Oath, very usual among the Hebrews, and in
these Instances may imply thus much: If their Sons and Daughters be delivered,
Let me not be termed the Living God. If they shall enter into my Rest; If a
Sign shall be given to this Generation, Let me be accounted false, never, in
what I say, to be believed more. What seeming Difficulty then there is in our
Savior's Command against Swearing, here, in great probability, his own, but,
in certainty, the Example of the Apostle, takes it all away. And as this Law
is cleared by an Example, so many other Divine Laws in like manner.

A third Use of Examples is, That we may be thereby instructed to do our Duties
in a decent and becoming manner.

For it is not an unfrequent thing, that even good Actions may lose something of
their Beauty, by a less comely, and not well managed, performance. It is
sufficient, that the Divine Laws provide, that those things which are righteous
and good should be done by us, and that the contrary should be avoided; but
they cannot be expected to go so low, as to enjoin all the Particulars of
Decency.

Now herein the Examples of Holy Men may be of use; and, by their ways and
circumstances of doing Duties, may be a good light unto us, of more
advantageously accomplishing what we are commanded.

St. Paul did his Duty, in his constant asserting of the Faith of Christ; But
it was the Decency of his Duty, when styled a Madman by Festus, he gave the
Governor the Title of most noble Festus; (as if he had been obliged, rather
than injured by him;) and with a calmness affirmed, That he spoke forth the
words of truth and soberness, Acts 26.25. With a less obliging Carriage he
might have been faithful to the Religion which he professed; but, as he then
acted, he added Comeliness to his Fidelity.

Instances many more might be given, but Men's particular Cases may better find
them out, and more appositely apply them.

I must confess, That the welfare of a Man's Soul does not depend upon the
outward Decency of his Actings, but upon the inward Sincerity of them; which of
itself carries a true Beauty with it in the Eye of God, who sees not as Man
sees. But yet it must not be denied, that even Virtues and Christian Graces
may be more acceptable unto Men, when they are decently exercised. And if, by
bringing such a Comeliness to them, we can insinuate them into the Hearts of
others, and make them spread the wider, I am sure we shall receive a much
greater Reward with God, than upon the account of Naked Sincerity we should do.
They that turn many unto Righteousness shall shine as the Stars for ever and
ever, says the Prophet Daniel; and a Comeliness in acting Virtues is highly
instrumental to the thus turning them.

Now this Decency of doing Duties, is oftentimes learnt sooner from the
Examples of others, than from the lonely Dictates of a Man's own Prudence. And,
possibly, with respect unto this, as well as unto Virtue itself, was that
excellent Rule of the Heathen, of proposing to ourselves the Examples of
Persons eminent for Wisdom and Goodness. Think, says he, how Plato would have
done in such a Case, how Epaminondas would have carried it. And to this End
also Examples may be recorded in Holy Scripture, That we might thus be
Followers of them, and might mark those who have so walked, for a more comely
deportment in our Duties.

But, Theophilus, Lest the benefit of Examples in Holy Writ should wholly
accrue unto Us; and They who set us these excellent Patterns should now have no
Concern in them: Therefore,

Fourthly, They were Registered there in Honor unto Those, who were thus
Exemplary unto Others.

It is said of Mary Magdalen, for her pious Action of pouring the Box of
Ointment on the Head of our Lord, That wheresoever the Gospel should be
preached in the whole World, there also should this that this woman has done,
be told for a memorial of her, Mat. 26.13. In the same manner are the good
Actions of Holy Men preserved in the Scripture, that they may be told as a
Memorial of them, wheresoever these Sacred Writings shall come, and so long as
they shall last, which shall be to the End of the World. Moses shall for ever
be celebrated, who refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh 's Daughter,
choosing rather to suffer Afflictions with the People of God, than to enjoy the
Pleasures of Sin for a Season. Abraham's Faith shall never cease to be praised,
till Faith itself shall cease, and be turned into Vision. Gideon, Barak,
Sampson, Jephtha, David also, and Samuel, and all the Prophets and Apostles,
shall, for their faithful Deeds, be had in Everlasting Remembrance; Such Honor
have all God's Saints. And though they be happy in the enjoyment of the
Recompense of Reward, and may seem not to need any of that praise which Earth
can give, yet surely it cannot but be esteemed an high Favor from God unto
them, while they are Blessed in Heaven, to be Honorable on Earth; and
Celebrated themselves here, while they are praising God there.

Had we ourselves, Theophilus, no use and benefit from these examples, yet
their being Registered, as an Honor to the Persons that lived so well, is
sufficient reason for their being written. Though, truly, in this their Honor,
we may reap a great deal of satisfaction. For those Righteous Actions which God
has so much honored Them for, we may justly conclude, He will be well pleased
with in Us; Since He is no Respecter of Persons; in every Nation, he that
fears Him, and works Righteousness, being accepted with him. It Is true,
indeed, we cannot expect that God will give Divine Authority to any more Books
than the Bible; and write our Names in them. But He has other ways of
Rewarding Holy Livers on Earth, besides enrolling them in a Sacred Volume that
shall last as long as the World. He can give us Honor and Prosperity while we
Live; and can Embalm us also in a lasting Name when we are dead. And though he
should not do this; yet we read of another Book of God, in which the Names, and
all the good Actions of Faithful Men are recorded; and which at the last day
will be opened, when every man shall receive according to his works. The
Righteous Deeds of Holy Men, being preserved in the Books of Scripture, may put
us in mind of this other Book: And the Honor which they have of being never
forgotten in this world, encourages us to the like Holy and Just Actions, that
we may be remembered in the world to come.


Theoph. God grant we may at last be remembered there, and then I shall little
care, though the same Earth that covers my Body, bury my Memory also. Though
yet the Honor of Living in Sacred Writings after Death, and of being made
instrumental to other Men's virtuous Deeds, and to the more comely performing of
them, I acknowledge to be very great. And since God is pleased to make a Good
Name, and the Being, for Ages, Exemplary, to be a Reward of a well-led Life, I
will not blame Those, why by rightly ordering their Lives, have an Eye to such
a Reward.


Eubul. I am sure we have a great deal of Reason to account it a Blessing, that
we have had so many patterns of Virtue set us; by which we are the better
capacitated for being Happy ourselves, and being also Examples unto others.

The Faith indeed of Abraham is thought by some to have been the more
excellent, and even to have given him the Name of the Father of the Faithful,
upon the account that he had no precedent Example of any ones Believing in God;
He dwelling in Vr of the Chaldees, where they were all Idolaters.

But supposing this were so; and that therefore our Faith cannot have the
accomplishment of Father Abraham's, because we have Him and many Others our
Examples; Yet our Condition, in our Faith, is much the more sure unto us than
it would have been, if we had had none in whose steps we might tread. For who
of us would have done as Abraham did? We may therefore praise God, in that he
has caused us to be Born into the World after so many excellent Persons, whose
Examples may direct us further, than of our Selves we could have gone. And
albeit we shall not have the Honor to receive others into our Bosom, when in
Heaven, as Abraham does; yet if we can the more easily have a place in his; and
be our Selves, in some measure, Leaders of other Men thither, we shall have no
reason to complain of any want of Happiness; but a great deal of cause to
rejoice that the way to Heaven was made so plain; and that we had so many
encouragements in it not to faint. And with reference unto this, The Church
has piously ordered that we should bless Gods H. Name, for all his Servants
departed this Life in his Faith and Fear; Beseeching him to give us Grace so to
follow their Examples, that with Them we may be partakers of his Heavenly
Kingdom.


Theoph. A great Esteem and Love, Eubulus, we may have for the Examples of Holy
Men; but it must at last End in the Esteem and Love of the Laws of Christ;
which include in them all the Good that the best Examples of Men ever have
shown, or can show.


Eubulus. It must so, Theophilus; For all those actions of Men and Women famous
in their Generations; The Practice of Righteousness and Mercy; of Munificence
and Liberality; of Temperance and Sobriety; of unfeigned Devotion and Piety
toward God (all of which, every Man has a Tongue to praise,) are but
imperfect draughts of these Holy Laws. I say, imperfect Draughts; Because no
Man (our Blessed Lord alone excepted,) has ever yet risen to that height of
Excellence, which they require. Very pleasing they are, as they are represented
in the Lives of Good Men; though they there are not unlike a Beautiful Face,
drawn to great disadvantage; and with many unbecoming Shades. But could we see
them without failure, expressed in the demeanor of any Man, and had Eyes clear
enough to behold them, we should confess, that they were a Sight too good for
Earth.

However, in the commendable actions of Men, with the imperfections of
Mortality, if we would but reflect thus; to wit, The Constancy of that Man is a
pleasant thing to behold: The Righteousness of this Man is truly Comely; Mercy
and Goodness here is a real Ornament to the Actor; Friendship and Kindness
there, How amiable are they! The Flourishing of Society in Peace and Industry,
and all public Virtues; The Affections and Tenderness of Parents; The
Submission and Dutifulness of Children; The Dwelling of Brethren together in
Unity; And the Affability and Usefulness of Neighbors to each other; Who is it
can look upon and not be highly pleased in them? But all These are nothing else
but the Excellencies of the Laws of our Lord: And shall we not Reverence, shall
we not Love them? If, I say, we would in the Laudable actions of Men, though
much distant from the Perfection of the Laws of Christ, often cast our Thoughts
upon those Laws; acknowledging the Beauty to belong unto them, which in all
these things is really derived from them; it would be no more than a due
Expression of Esteem and Love toward them; and, at the best, much ^^ow their
Excellency.

Meet therefore, surely it is, when we have a Mind to do any thing, and have an
Example of the same ready in Sacred Scripture, that we think not ourselves
presently authorized thereby to do it: Some actions, even of good Men, who are
now happy in Heaven, having not been always, nor altogether, Good. Let us make
the Precepts of the Gospel to be our Touchstone; and, by comparing the Example
with the Rule, we shall quickly find whether it will hold good for our Practice
or no. Choose we either those Examples of Holy Writ, which in the whole; or
those, which in some part of them, are the Image of a Divine Law; and thereupon
have a perpetual Rectitude. Yet, in these later, be sure to avoid that part of
the Example, which is transgressive of the Command. As for those which had a
Warrant only for the Time in which they were done, they lay no more obligation
upon us now, than Circumcision and Sacrifices do; but are wholly to be shunned.
And those which the Law of God is silent in, and which are therefore merely
indifferent, we may justly esteem ourselves no more bound by them, than we are
to wear a Seamless Coat; or to lie along every time we eat; unless Human Laws
shall, upon Prudential accounts, enjoin the doing them.

And then for other Examples, Theophilus, not recorded in Scripture, They also
are to be Examined by the Rule. If in any thing they deviate from the Laws of
Christ, we are not to follow them, though they be grown the Practice of Many;
and of some who may seem to be more Understanding and Religious, than most of
their Neighbors. Always bearing in mind, that the Best have their Errors and
Frailties; and that the most dangerous Errors in Religion are, for the most
part, if not always, ushered in with Semblances of Holiness more than ordinary;
which to wise Men do often betray themselves by being over-acted.

But the Divine Laws are in every respect sincere and perfect; and will lead us
into no paths but such as will undoubtedly bring us unto Happiness. They have
no Interest to set up besides the Glory of God, and the everlasting Welfare of
Souls: And will bear the being searched into themselves, as well as they
require that other things be proved by them. We may, through them, find out the
failures of many specious Actions, and Pretenses; but may despair in any
example to see those Excellences, which are not in far greater measures in Them.

And Thus, Theophilus, as well as I could, I have answered your Request. In the
doing of which, I cannot reasonably be thought to have detracted any thing from
Sacred Examples, by having made them wholly dependent on Sacred Laws. Were
there generally a greater Caution used in Those, and a greater Love showed to
These, Men would walk more Surely Themselves, and would set far better Copies
unto Others.


Theoph. I dare say, none of those Holy Men, who have left us their good
Examples, would think those good Examples injured by what you have said: Since
their greatest Care, in them, was to obey God's Law: And their greatest
Pleasure, from them, was to have done it.

This your kindness, Eubulus, together with your other, shall, I hope, find
that Entertainment with me, which you would wish: And, among the Virtues which
they tend to promote, I will see that Friendship and Gratitude shall not be
wanting.


DISCOURSE the Seventh.
The Contents.
COncerning the Divine Law, as taken in a larger Sense. Of the Historical part
of Scripture; particularly of the Creation. All other Opinions concerning the
Being of the World are cold and unaffecting. Of the Fall of Man. It gives Light
to many things; which otherwise we should never have known the reason of. The
sad effects of our Fall are in great measure corrected by God's Mercy, and made
Comfortable to us. Many things in the dark, and mingled with falsities in
profane Authors, we may from hence more clearly discern. Sacred History shows
forth God's immediate Hand; and plainly tells us, that he punished and
rewarded, for such and such reasons. Of the History of our Redemption. How
wonderful it is; and what a Sacredness runs through all the Circumstances of
our Lord's Conception, Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension. The
great evidence of these things. Of the Prophetical part of Scripture.
Especially of those Prophecies relating to our Blessed Savior. As Divine Truth
is eminently seen in all of them; so the quick and various workings of
Providence, for the fulfilling of some of them, are very delightful. The
Predictions of the Heathen Oracles much different from these. The Sibyllin
Prophecies of suspected Credit. Of the Adhortative part of Holy Writ. God has
used the most taking words for the prevailing with Men for Obedience. In the
Gospel there is nothing wanting, that may work upon the Soul of Man. Of the
Devotional part of Sacred Scripture. It consists of such Services were fit
for Men to pay unto their God; and needed not Secrecy to shelter them from an
Honest Ear, or Chaste Eye. Devotion raised to a much greater perfection, by
having our Lord and the Holy Spirit so nearly concerned in it. Those persons
quite mistake what they read in Sacred Scripture, who find a pleasure therein
without any respect to the Divine Law, properly as such. What we are to think
of those, who are conscientiously Obedient to the Divine Law, but yet find not
that Delight therein, which Earthly things do frequently give them; and who
hereupon are very apt to interpret their Love to God's Precepts to be
unsincere, and such as will be rejected. The great reasonableness and Benefit
of Holy Meditation.

THEOPHILUS. I Remember, Eubulus, that as by the Word Law you understood the
Preceptive Part of the Bible, (which you have hitherto discoursed of) so you
did not exclude from it, what ever else is contained in Holy Writ.


EVBVLVS. YEs, Theophilus, we may in a larger Sense understand this also. And
indeed since all Scriptures have, some way or other, a respect to the Precepts
thereof, therefore the Word Law does oftentimes import the whole Scripture; as
is manifest in these places. John 10. It is written in your LAW, I have said ye
are Gods. And Cap. 12. We have heard out of the LAW, that Christ abides for
ever; and Cap. 15. It is written in their LAW, they hated me without a cause.
All which places are not in the Law properly so called, but in the Psalms. And
I doubt not, but as the Psalms are called in a larger Sense Gods Law, so our
Psalmists, in these words, O how I love thy Law, means all that God by Divine
Inspiration has caused to be written; as well as the Law taken in the
strictest signification.


Theoph. Give me leave to tell you, that I look not upon you to have done your
task thoroughly, unless you deal with the other Parts of Holy Scripture, as you
have done with that which is properly Preceptive.


Eubul. There is the less need of this, because if That be excellent, and
amiable, in relation to us, the rest of the Bible, as being in order unto, and
promotive of the Precepts there, (for so in reality it is,) must be Excellent
and Amiable likewise; whether it be, Historical or Prophetic; Adhortative or
Devotional, and to one or other of these,) all (except what we have already
discoursed of,) or, at least, the most of what the Sacred Writings include, is
reducible.


Theoph. If you would be a little particular herein, you would seem to me not
to exceed the Bounds of your Discourse. Good Eubulus, begin with the Historical
part of the Bible, which, for the great things it contains, and the Faithful
account which it gives, does, when ever I read it, afford me very great
satisfaction.


Eubul. That the accounts of things are Faithful, and Written with a design of
Truth, the Holy Writers not sparing themselves, but putting down their own
faults, (as several of them in several places do,) is a very great Evidence.
Such an Integrity cannot but be Loved, where from Historians having less
respect to their own Reputation, than to the verity of things, a Man may be as
well satisfied in his knowledge of the most Ancient Times, as he is in those
which he Lives in, and sees with his Eyes.

Yea, such History may much the more engage his Love, when it gives him not
merely the knowledge of the first Times, but such a knowledge as, to a good
Man, puts a Relish into All Times; and will make the years pass more gratefully
to the End of the World.

Look we, Theophilus, upon the account of the Creation of the World, which we
may be certain was Written by Gods Immediate Appointment and Inspiration, for
the exciting a due Fear and Love of Him; i. e. an Obedience to his Laws; and
what Delight may we not conceive therefrom? While the Wise Men of the World
have in vain sought, how this goodly Fabric of the Heaven and Earth, came to
be such as it is; some of them affirming it to be from all Eternity, the same
which we now see it; others determining it to be from a lucky hit of Matter,
casually coming together into this Beauteous Form: We, amidst their Errors, can
pity them; and the more enjoy the Truth, from the Ignorance and Darkness which
these Searchers have been in.

But as the knowledge of a Truth which they could not reach unto, may upon that
score be prized by us, so we may intermingle the greatest Love with our Esteem
of it, because it gives us such a firm support throughout our Lives.

God who Created the World, did it not more to manifest his Power, than to
express his Goodness unto Men, whom he made to enjoy it, and to be served by
all things in it. And how Cold and Vnaffecting are the Other Opinions in
respect of this Truth! Were the World such as it now is from all Eternity,
altogether without a Deity, or with no Relation unto one, (which is the opinion
of some Atheistical Men,) it could not give us the pleasure of thinking that it
was the effect of Divine Power and Love to us. Nay, were it Eternal by a
necessary Efflux from the Goodness of a Deity, which could not refrain from the
thus exerting itself, (as the Platonists hold,) where would be the Favor? For
that which cannot possibly be otherwise lays no Obligation upon us. And
should the World have risen merely by Chance, (as the Epicureans would have
it,) there would this way also have been the Total absence of Kindness. For
what has Chance to do with Kindness, whose perfection it is to have the
Understanding and Will along with it?

But now, in the History of the Worlds Beginning, we can behold the Love and
Beneficence of the Great Creator; and with Pleasure can Contemplate Him, who
makes his Goodness to be seen in every thing, though Himself be Invisible. So
great a Privilege is it to have the World founded in the Divine Power, Wisdom,
and Love, that one who knows those things, and is a Virtuous Person, would not
for a World that the World should be without them. The Light would be a less
pleasant thing to behold, should it not have been from Him who is the Fountain
of Light. And what pleasure would the Heavenly Bodies (whether those which we
term fixed, or those, which (as Cicero speaks,) are Vocabulo non^e errantia,
Planets not in reality but word only,) afford by their Motion and Influence,
were it not from the Creators Order that they thus Move; from his Care of us
that they thus shed their Influence. Could we not say also concerning these
Earthly Things, That Manifold are thy Works, O Lord, in Wisdom have thou made
them all; the Earth is full of thy Riches; And, even concerning ourselves
likewise, that Man was first formed by God, who breathed into him the Breath of
Life; that, ever since, we have been fearfully and wonderfully made; and that
in his Book are all our Members Written; both We and They should lose all our
Excellence. For an Excellence wholly destitute of Wisdom, wholly destitute of
Love, would be an empty thing, yea a mere Contradiction.


Theoph. It must needs be yielded that such History is Worthy to be Loved, on
the Considerations you now mentioned; and one Consideration more may be added;
viz. That though there be in some ancient Authors, some things not altogether
unlike to this History, (they, in probability, having either seen Moses's
Writings; and so, out of design mingled Fictions with them, for the making an
Opinion of their own; or else heard an imperfect Relation of them; and so,
given us only some faint resemblances of Truth, though the best they could,)
yet none of them all do give that satisfaction to a Religious Reader, which
Moses does. He having been thoroughly instructed by the Creator himself for what
he has Written; and having given Confirmation also of its Truth by the Wonders
which he wrought.


Eubul. It is not difficult to conceive, why, though even by Natural Reason it
may be inferred, that the World owed its Form and Fashion to a Divine Power,
there yet is such a defective account of the Origin of the Universe from the
Philosophers of Old. For they, however otherwise of good Knowledge and great
Industry, relying altogether on the Experience of the Works of Nature; in which
they saw that something was requisite for the production of another thing, could
not imagine (that great expression of Omnipotence,) a Creation out of Nothing.
But it is a great satisfaction to the Understanding to know that Nothing is too
hard for God; and that it is but meet to believe, that He who had Being and
Life in himself from all Eternity, could be the Entire Author and Conserver of
Being and Life to all other things. And Moses's Words, viz. God said, let there
be Light, and there was Light, and so in other things of the World,) were
Expressions Worthy of his Almightiness concerning whom they were spoken; as
signifying it was no less easy to Him to make the World, than to speak the
Word.

That which in Sacred Story too quickly follows Man's being made in so happy a
Condition, is his falling from it by the Allurements of Satan. But even This
(though sad to relate,) gives us light in many things, which otherwise we
should never have known the reason of. As why the Earth is so much inclined to
Briars, Thistles, and Weeds: And why with so much Labor and Sweat we must Till
it for our Bread. Why Men are naturally Prone to Evil; and are so apt, against
their Reason, to be led away by their Passions and Lusts. Why Women, in so much
Sorrow and Pain, do bring forth Children; And why all Men must Dye, and are
allowed, in respect of some other Creatures, so short a time to Live.

These things are taught by this Divine Book alone; and though there have been
among the Heathen Wise Men, who have complained of them, yet they knew not what
to ascribe them to, beside either Hard Chance, or Hard Fate. Mankinds
Transgressing of a most equal and easy Command, and the Corruption of our
Nature thereupon, and the Miseries and Death that followed as a Punishment unto
all, in that all had Sinned, being, in Tract of Time, so far forgotten, that
('it is probable to Conjecture,) they would never, by any of them, have been
thought of more.

But however this part of the History (as was said,) is sad to Relate, yet that
which follows will give true cause of Comfort and Joy. For we are told, That
the Seed of the Woman should break the Serpents Head. Through That, we are
restored again to Gods Favor; and from this early promise, I suppose, it is,
that He is termed the Lamb that was slain from the Beginning of the World. It
is through Him, that the Curse upon the Ground is in great measure turned into
a Blessing. Briars and Thorns we can make a Fence of, for the securing the
Fruits they would Choke. No Noxious Creature, no Venomous Herb, but is of
Excellent use for the Welfare of Man; and even the Threatening, of our Eating
Bread in the Sweat of our Brow, is no less a Promise, that if we Labor God
will give us food. Woman's bringing forth Children in Pain and Sorrow may be
undergon with Cheerfulness, since They (and all Men also,) shall be saved in
Childbearing, i. e. by a Child which was to be born of a Woman. Death may
Cease to be Terrible to us, since of a Punishment it is made a Passage to a
better Life. And the Shortness of our Lives in Comparison of the Lives of some
other Creatures, need not be complained of; since this is the whole of their
Living; of ours it is not: And a few years in this World, are, in Gods Sight, a
sufficient Probation for an Eternal Life elsewhere. And truly the Corruption of
our Nature may not deject us; since the Laws of our Lord (who is the Seed of
the Woman,) being by a Divine Power set home upon our Hearts, will, unless it
be our own faults, most certainly correct it. We hence likewise are certified
who is our irreconcilable Enemy; how we are always to be aware of him; and to
suspect his Onsets, though He be invisible to us: How yet, we may have
assurance against him, in that his Head is Bruised; and, if we resist him, he
will fly from us.

It would be altogether endless should I go about to remark all the Excellences
of Sacred History; which, who is it can thoroughly do? The important Things
hitherto spoken of, could not have been known without it; and therein it may
claim our Love; some other things in Profane Authors, which are in the Dark and
mingled with Falsities, we, from thence, may with a clearer Light discern: And
herein likewise it may call for Respect as due from us unto it. I will instance
in few of many, Man's being said, by Plato in his Phaedro, to be at the first
(...), of both Sexes, and afterward to be cleaved in two, does something
resemble Eve's being taken out of Adam. Hesiod's Pandora who brought all sorts
of Evil upon Mankind, bears some Analogy with our first Mother's being the
Author of our Fall and Misery. Niobe's being turned into Stone from Sorrow for
the Destruction of her Children, may not amifs be referred to Lot's Wife, who
looking behind her, contrary to Gods Command, to see what became of Sodom,
where her Kinsfolks (and not improbable some of her Children,) were left,
became a Pillar of Salt. And Nisus's Hair we may, with some allowances, derive
from Sampson: These being in all probability the real Truths of those Fables.
And who will doubt but the reputed Sacredness of an Helicon and Pyrene, and the
Rapturous Vein said to be, by them conferred, did arise from the Well of Beer
at which the Children of Israel in an inspired manner Sung; Spring up, O Well;
Sing ye unto it: The Princes dug, etc. Numb. 21. The same may be said of
several Rites used by the Heathens in their Temples and Sacrifices; which it is
more than likely were fetched from Gods Service prescribed to the Hebrews: Nor
this, as we may justly think, without the Craft of the Devil; who endeavors to
lessen the Honor, which from them was to accrue unto God, by making them in
other places to belong unto himself.

We further, Theophilus, may say this of the Old Testament History: That the
larger Lines of it do evidently show forth Gods immediate Hand, either in
Justice or in Mercy; and plainly tell us that He punished or rewarded for such
or such Reasons. Thus the Destruction of the World by Water was because the
Earth was Corrupt before God, and filled with Violence. And the saving of Noah
and his Family, was because Him God had seen Righteous before him in that
Generation. The like was there in the overthrow of Sodom; and the preserving of
just Lot. Thus also in the affairs of Abraham and his Seed, the things of
greater note leave us not to interpret doubtfully, whether it was a Chance that
happened unto them, or was Gods manifest Power and Providence. And truly there
are such Contrivances from the Divine Wisdom in the managing and carrying on
some particulars of this History, as if the Holy Ghost had designed by the most
artful, and surprising Methods to engage our Affections. And when we read them
we must be very incredulous, or very heedless, if our Fear of God, our Trust in
him, and other such like Graces, be not stirred up, and exercised within us. It
is impossible, a good Man should be taken with any History, so much as with
this: Since by being Conversant in it, he does not only, as it were, Live in
those Times, with those Persons who were dear unto God; but does likewise
before hand become their Friend and Intimate, with whom he hopes to Live for
ever, in that City which has Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God.


Theoph. I would not that the pleasure, (though great it be,) which you have
excited in me from the History of the Old Testament, should make me forget that
of the New. Dear, Eubulus, let not that pass without some Remarks from you also.


Eubul. There cannot be in the whole World what may more deservedly engage our
Love than That. And what we have hitherto been speaking, though it be very
taking, is yet much the more so, because a great deal of it has a more
Spiritual meaning; and is in Order to the History of our Redemption.

The Genealogies in the Old Law were of Civil use to the Jews, in more respects
than one. But they may chiefly seem, by the Providence of God, to be so exactly
Registered and Preserved, that the Race of the Messiah, when he should come,
should not be unknown and confused. And yet who can declare his Generation? So
surpassing all others is it, how Glorious soever.

The Chief Matter of the Gospel Story is the Redemption of the world, by the
Son of God's suffering in our stead; undergoing his Fathers wrath, that we
might be partakers of his Love. And how delightful may such History be to us!
From the depth of Bondage and Misery, to be asserted into the liberty of the
Sons of God, and made capable, upon most excellent Terms, of everlasting
Happiness, how may it affect us!

Our Redemption in itself is a thing Divinely Great. But the Method of
accomplishing it, Who can sufficiently admire?

Though the Son of God, who was to work this mighty Favor for us, from all
Eternity, was, and, to all Eternity, will be, God the Blessed; as far in his
Godhead from being punishable for sinful Men, as Men in their sins are from
being acceptable to a Just and Holy God; yet there is a way found out for him
to undergo Pain and Punishment in our stead. God the Father has prepared for
him a Body, and, by his own uniting it with the Divine Nature, he can both
Suffer and Dye. And in his being capacitated thus to do, Christ is, by way of
Eminence, the Wisdom of God; as exceeding the deepest Conceptions of Men or
Angels.

Neither may his History in other Circumstances, of his Coming into,
Continuance in, and Leaving of, the World, less prevail upon us, for an H ol
Admiration and Delight.

Highly wonderful was his Conception within the Womb of a Pure Virgin, by the
Power of the Highest overshadowing her. And his Birth, from the multitude of
the Heavenly Host praising God; from the Star's, being Created on purpose for
the leading the wise Men from afar to worship him; Show forth an Holy Lamp, and
Splendour, ordered by Wisdom from above, as a Peculiar to Him alone, of all that
ever were born into the World.

One thing more is very apposite to the History of his Birth: That it was in a
Time of Peace over all the World. The Temple of Janus at Rome was shut: And no
noise of War disturbed the Nations: This was the Hand of God, that He, who was
styled the Prince of Peace, should then be born, when Peace was upon Earth.
Especially, since the Laws he was to give, were not to make their way by Force
and Arms; but were calmly to be weighed; and for their Reasonableness and
Excellence to find entertainment in the World.


Theoph. But there were some Circumstances in his Birth, which were as
remarkable for their Meanness, as these you have mentioned were for their
Greatness. Such were his Mothers being of Low Degree; Her bringing forth her
Son in a Stable; And the First Message of his Birth being made known to
Shepherds: All of which may seem unworthy of his Person, as they are much of a
different piece from what you but now spoke.


Eubul. Yet in them all, Theophilus, there is no less Wisdom and Love seen,
than in those things which were Splendid and Glorious.

What if the Blessed Virgin was not great in the World, She yet was of a very
Creditable Stock; of no meaner an one than that of David. She yet was of
Spotless Innocence, and of Great Piety; which are, in his Eyes, who sees not
as men see, of the greatest Price, and far beyond outward Grandeur. Such Humble
ones God will exalt, while the mighty shall be put down from their Seat. And
this was the Matter of the Blessed Virgins Praising of God, and rejoicing in
him; and will be the Praise and Joy of the Meek and Lowly for ever.

His Birth was indeed at first made known unto Shepherds; and they were
directed to the place where the young Child was; But had the Angels in Heaven,
and the Great ones on Earth been his only Attendants, the meaner sort of Men
might have been discouraged; as thinking that the Benefit of a Savior was
only, or chiefly there, where State and Greatness made way for it. But now,
Meaner Persons, so they be Harmless and Industrious, (as these Shepherds, from
their Calling, and their keeping Watch with their Flocks by night, appear to
have been) are showed to be no less dear unto God, than those of higher Rank.

And Lastly, his being Born in a Stable, and laid in a Manger, does manifest
also that He was truly Man: Which would not have been so thoroughly discerned,
had all things been of the more splendid sort. For where there is nothing but
Grandeur and State, Men seem to themselves to be, and are permitted by God to
be called more than Men, I have said ye are Gods. But the being of Human Race
is never questioned where the Condition and Circumstances are Low. The things
then that are meanest in our Savior's Birth, afford us as much cause of
Rejoicing, as those that are highest. Let a Jew call our Savior Mean; we will
not account it our Reproach; because he thereby acknowledges Him to be a Man;
which we shall always esteem our Honor: We hereby are so pleased with the low
Condition of his Mother; the poor place of his Birth; and the inferior
Attendents about him; that we praise his Name for them; as being great
assurances of our Interest in him.

If in his Life we read his Infant-Obedience to the Law; in being Circumcised;
of his sitting in the Temple with the Doctors, Hearing, and asking them
Questions. If his Baptism and Solemn Unction after it to his Office, by the
Holy Ghost's descent upon him like a Dove, and the Voice from Heaven: If his
Temptation in the Wilderness, and his Conquest over the Devil therein; What
pleasurable Entertainment is there for Holy Thoughts! And whether we find him
Curing Diseases; Casting out Devils; Feeding Multitudes with a Miracle; Laying
Command on the Wind and Sea; and Raising the Dead: Or whether we read him
publicly Teaching, or privately Instructing; Praying in Secret unto God; or
appearing Gloriously in his Transfiguration; How diversely may we be affected,
yet every way with Delight!

Yea, if we look toward his Leaving of the World, when, in the Garden, he
Sweat, as it were, great drops of Blood, under those Sins which in a Garden
first took Birth; If we consider his bitter Cross and Passion; the Reproaches
amidst his Torments; and the Death that followed them; though we Sympathize
with him, we yet cannot but love the Story. For herein, the wonderful work of
our Redemption is completed. Here we see a Sacrifice of more worth than a
World; propitiatory for the Sins of all Mankind. Because, as Manhood was
intimately conjoined with the Godhead, and made one Person, He was Infinite who
suffered; and so paid our Price in a short Time, which we ourSelves could not
have done, but by an Eternity of Torments.

If we read on, and accompany our Lord to his Grave, we shall find him after a
shameful Death, to be Honorably Buried; wrapped in fine Linen with Spices;
and laid in a Sepulcher, in which never any before was laid. And it may affect
us with a secret Pleasure, to see Him, who was Conceived within a Virgin's
Womb, where no one Conceived in Sin had before lain, to be Buried, as it were,
in a Virgin Sepulcher, where no sinful Man's Body had ever been laid.

But what Joy may his Resurrection stir up in us, after such endeavors to
secure his Body, if possible, from Rising; and, when Risen, to stifle the Truth
of its being so. It cannot but delight us to read of Angels descending from
Heaven, to roll away the Stone before the Sepulcher; and to attend upon our
Lord in his leaving his Grave. And it may almost be a pleasant doubt, whether
cheereth us the more, their so kindly speaking to our Lords Friends, that These
went away, though with some fear, yet with great Joy; or their terrifying the
insolent Keepers, that through Fear Those shook, and became as Dead Men. If we
are taken with Splendour, we have it in the Angels appearance in Raiment white
as Snow; And also in the Resurrection of many Saints; who, after their Savior
had left his Grave, came out of theirs, and went into the Holy City: and
appeared unto many. If Love and Kindness please us, we have our Lord's frequent
showing himself to his Disciples, after his Rising: And though a Crown was
ready for him in the Heavens, He yet cannot quickly leave Those, who once had
left all and followed him; but continues among them Forty days, speaking of the
things pertaining to the Kingdom of God.

These great and delightful things are succeeded by His Ascension into Heaven;
which is truly Great, and highly pleasant to a Religious Soul; Whether we
consider the Cloud of Angels which received him: The Powers of Darkness which
he led Captive; or the inestimable Gifts which he gave through the Holy Ghost:
Gifts, which were worthy of him; and such, as no one else could bestow. And,
what especially concerns us, Our Nature, which was Created lower than the
Angels, is in Him Exalted far above them. And to our Joy also we read, That He
is gone to prepare Mansions for us, That where He is, there we may be also.

This sure, if any thing in the World can entitle History to the greatest Love,
may well entitle this to Ours.

Abundance more there is in the New Testament, which I shall not now insist on,
though it be exceeding Delightful. I thought good to recount that which more
immediately related to our Redeemer; because it is of such unspeakable Value
unto us.


Theoph. In the particulars which you have given of it, I have more than once
thought of the words of Seneca. Cum Sextium lego, libet omnes casus prov^care.
When I read Sextius 's Book, I could even Challenge Fortune to do her Worst. I
have an Antidote there, greater than all her Mischiefs. What was height o
Expression, concerning Sextius's Philosophy, is no more than Truth if applied
to this History. When Old Simeon had taken our Savior into his Arms, it was in
good earnest that he said, Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in Peace
according to thy Word; for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation. The World has
nothing worthy my Eye or Thought, after such an inestimable Favor. And, truly,
when a Man, with a right frame of Soul, reads these things, what can his Heart
desire more? How much may he be above all ordinary Joys! How much above all
ordinary Griefs!

And yet, Eubulus, how much soever these great things tend to the composing of
all irregular Passions in me, I cannot forbear the being very much disturbed,
when I consider, there are some who look upon all these things as imposture;
and have endeavored to beat them d wn as such. Surely were there no other
Proofs, the Sacredness and Love, which all along breath in them, might show
them to be of higher Original, than what Deceit could reach unto. And could an
understanding Man be tempted to doubt of their Truth, yet, me thinks, they
should so far prevail upon him, as the less to care whether any thing else were
true or not.


Eubul. But God be thanked, Theophilus, we have the greatest proofs of these
Things, for the Confirmation of our Faith; and for its, and our Defense,
against all the Oppositions of Unbelievers, and the Carnal Reasonings of the
World.

Why should the Evangelists and Apostles go about to deceive the World in
things of so great Importance? Their whole design in making known the Gospel
was, so far as can be discerned, none other than that Mankind should through it
be happy. And what injury had the whole World done them, that they should in a
matter which so highly concerned it, impose thus upon it; as they needs must
have done, had they not been absolutely sure of what they declared?

Untruths, for the most part, look at the interest of the spreaders of them;
and are always of a less extent; confined to certain Persons, or Places, or
Times; and are not such as shall respect all Persons, Places, and Times, so
long as the World shall endure, (as these things manifestly do,) unless there
shall be a most Envious and Evil Nature; or an inordinate design of Praise or
Profit in the Inventors.

But neither of these can be thought to have been in Those, who first published
these things.

Not an Envious and Evil Nature; for who out of Envy would publish such things
as all Wise and Serious Men would wish should be true, if really they were not
so? Who, out of Evil Nature would write and declare Laws to the World, that
should beget and propagate the greatest Sweetness of Temper? An happy effect of
Envy it would be, to show the Unspeakable Love of God unto us; and to instruct
us in such a pureness of Devotion toward him, as becomes Creatures of Rational
Souls to exercise toward their Creator, and infinitely Loving Father. To
instruct us also in such an Amiableness of Deportment toward Men, as shall
show that they are heartily loved by us. These things cannot be the Design of
an Envious and Evil Nature.

No, nor yet of wordly Praise or Profit. Not of Profit, for they taught the way
of being Rich toward God: Of laying up of Treasures in Heaven; which was the
refusing the Mammon of Unrighteousness, by giving Alms to the Poor, and
forsaking Houses and Lands for the Sake of Christ.

Neither were these Politic Precepts to Teach Men to despise these things,
that the Teachers themselves might be the more enriched by them; for They, by
their own Example no less than by Precepts, had showed that those wordly things
were meanly to be accounted of; They forsook all and followed Christ.

And surely they did altogether as little design Praise to themselves; for all
which they said or did, they spoke and acted for the Glory of God. The
Pharisees they Condemned for looking after the Praise of Men, Matthew. 6. And
others they infixed a Note of Discredit upon, for Loving the Praise of Men more
than the Praise of God. They wrote down Precepts for the avoiding of applause
in our good actions; yea so far were they from the seeking after Praise
themselves that they Registered their own, and Companions Failings. At the
Betraying of Jesus, all his Disciples cowardly forsook him and fled, Matthew. 26.
And this is writ by one who himself forsook him and fled as well as the rest.
And St. Peter's denying of his Master, is at large described by St. Mark, who
was his Intimate and Friend. And the whole is approved of by St. Peter, who had
the viewing of St. Mark's Writings, and (as is thought by some,) did dictate
the Matter of them.

From these considerations, there is no reason to think, that the Penmen of the
New Testament wrote Falsehoods, or things that they did not thoroughly know to be
true.

Add to these the unlikelyhood, that poor Fishermen (for such the Disciples as
to the greater part were, and the rest not much better,) could raise such a
Story of their own Heads; so agreeable to the Predictions of the Old Testament,
and yet false; or that they would have done it, so contrary to the expectation
of the Jews, and to their own expectation also, a little before: Who thought of
nothing more than of a Messiah, who as a King should deliver them from their
Earthly Enemies. Especially, when Indignities, Reproaches, loss of all
Comforts, yea of Life itself fell upon them for what they Attested; and might
have been avoided by their Silence, or denying it.

Such Evils might indeed terrify Truth, and render it forsaken; but that they
should encourage a feigned thing, and bear up Men's Spirits for the spreading of
a Lie, who is it can imagine? Certainly no Man can with any show of Reason do
it: Who shall yet further consider, that none could possibly be greater
encouragers of Speaking Truth than the Apostles were in all their Writings; nor
greater Enemies to false Speaking than They. For they forbid it under pain of
Eternal Damnation. Nothing must enter into the New Jerusalem which makes a
Lie: And all who do so must have their part in the Lake that burns with Fire
and Brimstone; which is the Second Death.

These are some of those many proofs, which confirm the Truth of Scripture
Story; and whoever is willing, notwithstanding such Rational Evidence, to
disbelieve it, is, I doubt, of such ill Principles and Morals, that it is his
interest such History should not be true. For then there would be no Hell after
this Life; which, should there be one, he is conscious to himself, would be
very hot to Him.


Theoph. He would deserve it should be so. And none will be forward to pity his
Misery, who shall thus shut his Ears upon the message of his Happiness.

But, Eubulus, the Prophetic part of Scripture is next to have your Eye.


Eubul. The Prophetic is, in its way, Historical also, different only in this;
Historical tells you what has been; Prophetic tells you what will be: and if
it be fulfilled long since, and written, it passes into a more surprising sort
of History. We are much delighted in the account of former Times; and not less
desirous to know what will be in future; And when that which has been
predicted, comes exactly so to pass, we are the more taken with it, because
the Times to come more properly belong unto God; and we look upon it as his
immediate Hand, if any thing be thus made know. And hence it is, that
whatsoever has the name of a Prophecy, needs nothing else to gain
attention, and to set itself off amongst the vulgar: who, in this respect,
could the less be found fault with, were they not too forward to look upon
every idle Prognostication as a Prophecy; till at last they see the things to
be false, and themselves to be ridiculous from their Credulity.

But if ordinary, short lived Predictions shall be thus attended unto, with
what delight may those be entertained, which were of greater note; and which
God has ordained as a part of Holy Writ, to be Monuments of his Prescience to
all Generations!

I will instance only in those Prophecies which respected our Blessed Savior
so long before his coming; which may wonderfully delight us, in the exceeding
exactness of their being fulfilled.

what Heart will not be affected that reads the Prophecy of Esaias c. 9. so very
express concerning our Lord? He speaks of Him in it, as if he were already
come. To us a Child is Born; to us a Son is given. Highly pertinent to him, in
whom the promises are Yea and Amen; and through whom God calls those things
that are not as though they were. In which also, there is a strange Propriety
of Expression, as to his Nature. To us a Child is Born; as Man, he could be so;
to us a Son is given; as he was God, he could only be Given and not Born.

The Time of our Lords Coming so rightly answering to the weeks of Daniel,
(according to which also the Jews expected the Coming of the Messiah, about the
Time our Redeemer came) may well be our delight; and the more, because the
wicked Jews, seeing Daniel to stand the Christians in so much stead by his
Prophecies, have, since that time, made a new division of their Law into
Prophetas, and Hagiographos; and have excluded Him from the number of Prophets,
and given him none of the highest places among the others; whom they made to be
of a lower Rank than the Prophets were.

These Prophecies, Behold a Virgin shall bring forth a Son; Esai. 7.14. And the
Lord has created a new thing in the Earth, a Woman shall compass a Man, Jer.
31.22. How pleasant are they to the Understanding, when we read them fulfilled
in our Lords, being conceived of the Holy; and born of a Virgin Mother?

And truly the Prediction Micah 5.2. Of his being born at Bethleem, may move us
with a more than ordinary delight, when we consider how strangely God's
Providence was engaged for the fulfilling it. All that Taxing which was laid
upon the Jewish Nation by Augustus; and which required every one to repair to
his own City to be Taxed, may appear in a special manner to be ordered by God,
for the bringing Mary unto Bethleem, to be delivered of her Son. It was a great
way that Joseph and Mary were to go; From N zareth in Galile, to the City of
David in Judea; And it might seem ill to have happened unto Mary, at a time when
her Condition rather required Rest, than was fit for so great a Journey; and
this too (as is not improbable) in the depth of Winter. But God sometimes is
accomplishing his own Will, and great things for us, when Affairs appear to be
cross and unhappy. Yea, and can order the Councils of Princes, at a great
distance from them, to carry on these Designs, which He in his Providence has
laid; but which never entered their Hearts to imagine. And so it is here. We see
no means how Mary should have been at Bethleem, delivered of her Son there, had
not the Taxation at that very Time been enjoined. Which may show that She and
Joseph had no Thoughts of fulfilling a Prophecy by their journey thither. But
hence it was, that the Son of David was born in the City of David; and Divine
Wisdom had ordered, that of this Man it should be said, He was Born there.

If we look to those Prophecies which were of our Lord's Suffering and Death,
they are such as may give us a great deal of satisfaction in a Crucified
Savior. That of Esai is very express, in Chap. 53. He is despised and rejected
of Men; a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief. He has born our Griefs,
and carried our Sorrows. He was wounded for our Transgressions; He was bruised
for our iniquities. How exactly is his Picture, as it were, drawn by this
Prophet? and how pleased may we be with the Likeness, though it represents him
in Grief and Sorrows? So likewise in Daniel, Chap. 9.26. After sixty two Weeks
shall the Messiah be cut off, but not for himself. Which things are also a good
and just Interpretation of our Lord's Behavior under his Sufferings. For
should he not have suffered in our stead, but died only as our Example, and as
a Testimony of the Truth of his Doctrine, (as Socinus and his Followers would
have it,) some things (I speak it reverently,) would not have born a good
Color; nor at all have been reconcilable to that Perfection which we must own
to be in our Lord. I will instance in one, and that is, his Sweat in the
Garden. Consider this without the thoughts of his dying for our Sins, and say
whether it betrays not too great a fear of Death; whether there may not seem to
have been greater Instances of undaunted Courage from some Heathen Heroes, and
from some who have born the Name of Christians, than from Christ himself. That
He should be so much concerned at a single Death, when he knew he died for an
Example to others of not fearing Death upon a good occasion, what from these
Men's Opinions can we think of it?

But then, when we consider that He was wounded for our Transgressions; that he
struggled with the Wrath of God which was due to all Men, and was never to have
end; that he trod the Wine Press alone, and none was with him; The uncommonness
of his Sweat (which was as great drops of Blood,) may show forth the greatness
of the Burden that was laid upon him; and may make us to wonder at the Power
that could at all bear up under such Pressures; but, by no means, to accuse him
of Timorousness, because his Garments are thus died with Blood. So great and
reverend is that Action (or Passion rather,) of our Lord with respect to his
Suffering in our stead, which otherwise will require a good Invention to make
it appear not mean.

Add to this, that Expression of his, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? Had he died only for an Example unto us, and a Confirmation of the Truth of
what he declared, why should he thus have cried out? Should we ourselves be
called to die for our Holy Religion, I cannot say that we might lawfully thus
cry unto God: We ought rather to submit unto his Will, with hopes that he had
not forsaken us. Something else then must be the cause of these his words; viz.
The pouring out of the full Vials of Gods Wrath upon Him, as upon one that bare
the Iniquities of us all. And this will render his words highly apposite unto,
and expressive of, his Passion, which otherwise might seem beyond it.

So that though we are to conceive of our Lord's Death as an Example unto us,
(for he is said to suffer for us, leaving us an Example, that we should follow
his steps,) yet as in his Life there are some things above an Example, so in
his Death likewise there are, which are placed beyond our Imitation. We may
imitate his Meekness and Patience, and Love to Mankind; but the height of his
Sufferings for the Sins of the World we cannot. And some Expressions betokening
the Greatness of his Passion, whether from his Words or Bloody Sweat, must
stand alone, as highly agreeable to the State of his Agony, but not so fit for
any besides Himself.

Thus amiable are these Prophecies to the Considerate Reader; not only in so
exactly foretelling his Sufferings and Death, and thereby vindicating the
Honor of our Religion against the Jews who upbraid us with those his
Sufferings and Death; but also in showing forth a true Beauty in the
now-mention'd Deportment of our Savior, which an horrid Opinion of some, who
call themselves Christians, does tend to make very unbecoming.

Nor may the Prophecies of the manner of his Death be less satisfactory unto
us; to wit, They pierced my Hands and my Feet, Psalm. 22.17. And Zach. 12.10.
They shall look upon me whom they have pierced. For how rightly are these
fulfilled in his suffering the Roman Crucifixion! the Jews having no sort of
Punishment, in which the Undergoers were thus pierced. And this Death being
inflicted by the Roman Power, directs us to the Satisfaction of another
Prophecy; viz. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah till Shiloh come. But
the Power of Life and Death (which is the most proper Signification of
Scepter,) being wholly taken from the Jews, and exercised in Judea by the
Romans, may show that the Messiah was come before, according to that Prophecy.
And very remarkable it is, that though Jerusalem, before our Lord's Birth, was
Conquered by Pompey the Great, yet throughout the Life of Hircanus the High
Priest, the Reign of Herod the Great, and Archelaus his Son, the Jews did Rule
by their own Laws; and so, the Scepter was not departed from Judah, at the
coming of our Lord into the World.

I will mention only one Prophecy more, which from the unexpected Methods, and
the quick and various Workings of Providence, may be very delightful; and that
is the Prophecy of Esai concerning his Burial, Chap. 53. He made his Grave with
the Rich in his Death. But how shall this be? For the Custom of the Romans
required that He and the other Two should continue on the Cross, exposed there
to the Fowls of the Air to be eaten; or to be consumed leisurely by the Air and
Weather. That this Prophecy should be fulfilled, God so orders it, that the
Jews, who were the Authors of his Death, should, though they wished no good to
him, be the Promoters of his Burial. Thus that the Bodies might not remain on
the Cross upon the Sabbath day, (which was then a great day,) the Jews besought
Pilate that they might be taken away; and had their desire granted. But though
this were granted them, yet still the Prophecy was in a fair way not to be
fulfilled. For among the Jews there was a place on purpose to bury Malefactors
in: And so our Lord must have been buried with the Thieves; and then how could
he be said to make his Grave with the Rich in his Death?

That therefore this might be effected, Joseph of Arimathea, a Rich Man, and
honorable Counselor, comes and begs Christ's Body of Pilate. Pilate, possibly
having a regard to him as he was a Wealthy Man, and in good esteem; and not
well knowing how to deny the Body of Jesus to Burial, whom he had declared to
be free from fault, though he had afterward condemned him; ordered the Body to
be given to Joseph. Who, after it was wound up in fine Linen and Spices, laid
it in a New Sepulcher, which he, in his Garden, had hewn out of a Rock, for
his own Tomb. And so, contrary to the use of the Romans, he was Buried; and
contrary to the use of the Jews, he was Buried not with Malefactors, but in a
Creditable Sepulcher with the Rich. In such an Eminent and surprising Manner
will God bring about his own Counsels; and has accomplished this Prophecy.

There are also many other Prophecies directly showing forth the Resurrection,
Ascension, and other things relating to our Lord; in which a Religious and
Contemplative Soul may find a Rich and Glorious Repast. But these I at present
will omit; and will only take notice of what I hinted before, viz. That some
other parts of Holy Writ, in themselves very delightful, do yet afford us a
further Delight, and are in a sort Prophetical, by including the Image of
greater things to come. Such were the Israelites coming out of Egypt, which
signified our Lords Coming out from thence. The Rock in the Wilderness pouring
out Water; which Rock was Christ. Jonas's being three Days and three Nights in
the Whales Belly, and afterward thrown up; which imported our Lords being so
long in the Grave, and then Rising. Isaac's Living, after Abraham had in
intention Sacrificed him; which betokened our Lords Resurrection. Agar and
Sarah, which were an Allegory of the Two Covenants. Canaan, Jerusalem, and
Mount Sion, which were Types of a Country, City, and Church above. And many
more such as These; which, what a true and suitable pleasure do they give to one
whose Heart is fixed on Sacred things?


Theoph. While we look from hence, backwards, it may indeed hugely delight us
to see the Shadows of our future Happiness. While from thence we look forwards,
it may take us wholly up in Love and Joy to behold those Shadows reduced into
Realities; which for the Excellence in themselves, and the infinite advantage
they give unto us, have been altogether worthy of such Presignifications.

And truly, Eubulus, of quite another Strain were those speeches which the
Heathen Oracles, gave when they were consulted about things to come. The
Ambiguous Signification of their Words denoted Sophistry and Cunning rather
than Prescience. And hence, it is no wonder that they were not forward of
themselves to Prophecy, since when sought unto for knowledge of future Events,
they were thus put to their Shifts. For the Devil can but guess what will be,
by comparing present affairs with what are past. And though his guesses may
more incline to certainty than the guesses of Men, (for we may suppose him to
have a far greater insight into former years, and the successes of things in
them, than any Man can have,) yet, for his Reputation Sake with his Votaries,
he durst not speak things positively, but always in a dubious Sense; that if
they fell out otherwise than was at first thought, another Latent meaning might
rather make Men blame their own Dimsightedness toward the Oracle, than the
Oracle's toward the futurities enquired after.

There are, I must confess, very perspicuous and important Prophecies in the
Books of the Sybils. And I will not say, but God in his Goodness might inspire
those Women for the giving out some Oracles, which, as rightly suting with the
Revelations of the Gospel, might afterward the more sway with the Nations. But
many of these Prophecies were, by the Pious Fraud of some Persons, not Written
till after things were come to pass: With a design, no doubt, to bring a
greater honor to what in appearance was so plainly foretold. Thus the Oracles
which were ascribed to the Cumean Sibyl, were, in great measure, written by the
Jews, before our Savior came into the World. Those which are Extant under the
Name of the Erythrean Sibyl, are, for the most part spurious, as being Written
by some that lived more than an Hundred Years after our Lord. But instead of
greater, there is less credit (as in such dealing it usually falls out,) both
to the Jewish and Christian affairs mentioned by them. Varro, so far as there
are Acrosticks in them, denies their Truth. Cicero, for the same reason,
contends that they were rather from Human Study, than Divine Inspiration. And
Celsus will have many things to be foisted in by the Christians: So that the
Reputation of the whole is hereby much diminished. And, indeed, it is, with a
rational Man, a very great argument against them, that many Oracles there are
so particular, and direct, that the Holy Scriptures themselves are, in some
things, less particular and direct. And who can think that God would more
plainly reveal himself to uncouth Women among the Nations, than to Holy Men
among his own People; to whom as a Pledge of his Favor, above all others, the
Sacred Oracles (as the Apostle speaks,) were committed?


Eubul. You do the Prophecies of the Holy Scripture no more than right, while
you prefer them above all others. There is no Deceit in them. The Time in which
they were written is well known: And was long before the things Prophesied came
to pass. The Jews, who were the greatest Enemies to our Lord, cannot deny the
Truth of them. And some of these Enemies, from the expressness of those
Prophecies which respect our Saviors sufferings, have been forced to say, that
there is to be a Suffering Messiah, as well as a Glorious one; though they will
not allow the True Messiah, who is both the One and the Other, to be either.


Theoph. I could desire to be continually fixed on the thoughts of the
Prophetic part of Scripture; so divinely pleasant is it from the lively
Representation of great and sacred things in aftertimes revealed. I doubt not,
but there will be a true Beauty in that other part of holy Scripture, which you
termed the ADHORTATIVE.


Eubul. If great Love, intermingled with great Art in the enforcing of it, can
give a Beauty, (and what can give a greater Beauty than these?) it is truly
amiable.

And, indeed, God, who knows our Frame and Make, and can tell what Words will
most Sway the Affections of Men, has seemed to let go none that may prevail
with them to be such as they ought to be. Sometimes enforcing his Exhortations,
from the Greatness of his Favors; the Excellences of his Laws; the Natural
Desires and Aversations of Men; their Forgetfulness; and such like.

I almost wonder how any of the Jews of Old, could be Disobedient, when they
read such Words as these. Ask now of the Days that are past, since the Day that
God Created Man upon the Earth; and ask from the One side of Heaven unto the
Other, whether there has been any such thing as this great thing is; or has
been heard like it. Did ever People hear the Voice of God speaking out of the
midst of the Fire, as Thou have heard, and Live? Or has God assayed to go,
and take him a Nation from the midst of another Nation, by Signs and Wonders,
and a Mighty Hand? Thou shall therefore keep his Statutes. He led thee through
the great and terrible Wilderness, where there was no Water; and he brought
thee forth Water out of the Rock of Flint. He fed thee there with Manna, which
thy Fathers knew not; Thy Raiment waxed not Old upon thee; neither did thy Foot
swell these Forty years; Therefore shall thou keep the Commandments of the Lord
thy God. And where an Exhortation is set home by the recounting of such mighty
Favors, it cannot, sure but prevail.

There is nothing usually will take more with a Man, than the Reputation of
being Wise and Understanding: The Excellency of Man consisting in nothing more,
than in a Power of Discerning and Acting what is good. On this ground therefore
it is that God builds his Exhortation: Keep, says he, and do these Statutes
and Judgments, for this is your Wisdom and Understanding in the sight of the
Nations, Deuteronomy. ^.6. And, since a Man will bear any thing better than the Name
of Fool, and accounts it a great Discredit to act weakly and below a Man;
Therefore God so often in Scripture terms Disobedience Folly; and speaks
thus to Transgressors; O ye Fools, when will you learn Wisdom? How long ye
simple Ones will ye love Simplicity, and Fools hate Knowledge? Turn you at my
Reproof.

I look upon Peace and Plenty to be, as it were, a visible Exhortation, and a
Persuasive that is palpable, and may be felt: But because these do sometimes
steal away the Heart, and are apt to render the Man forgetful of his Gracious
Benefactor, God, in infinite Goodness, is pleased to strengthen this
Exhortation, by Cautioning us, when we have eaten and are full, not to forget
Him; to take heed to ourselves; and to keep our Souls diligently, lest we
forget the things which our Eyes have seen; and lest we depart from the Lord
our God, all the days of our Life.

But should any be so heedless or perverse as not to be prevailed upon by such
Exhortations as these, how can they hold out against God's pathetical Pleading
with them? Thus Ezekiel. 18, Ye say, The Way of the Lord is not equal: O House of
Israel, is not my Way equal? are not your Ways unequal? If ye offer the Lame
and the Sick, is it not evil? Offer it now unto thy Governor, will He be
pleased with thee, or accept thy Person? says the Lord of Hosts. A Son
honors his Father, and a Servant his Master: If I then be a Father, where is
mine Honor? If a Master, where is my Fear? Malac. 1. I will plead with you,
says the Lord, and with your Childrens Children will I plead: For pass over
the Isles of Chittim and see, and send unto Kedar, and consider diligently, and
see if there be any such thing. Has a Nation changed their Gods, which yet are
no Gods? But my People have changed their Glory for that which profits not.
Be astonished, O ye Heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very
desolate, says the Lord of Hosts. For my People have committed two Evils; They
have forsaken me, the Fountain of Living Waters; and hewed them out Cisterns,
broken Cisterns, that can hold no Water, Jer. 2.


Theoph. These are highly moving. And, in my Opinion, no less is that of
quickening Men's Obedience, even by the better Carriage of Beasts and Fowls. I
have nourished and brought up Children, and they have rebelled against me. The
Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib: But Israel does not know,
my People does not consider, Isai. 1. I hearkened and heard, but thy spoke not
aright; no Man repented him of his Wickedness, saying, What have I done? Yea,
the Stork in the Heavens knows her appointed times, and the Turtle, and the
Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their coming; but my People know not
the Judgment of the Lord, Jer. 8. He will be yet much lower than the Beasts and
Fowls, who seeing himself out-gone by them, will not be ashamed and quicken his
pace.


Eubul. There are innumerable other Schemes of Speech, which God Almighty
uses; as if he would not omit so much as one Figure or Topic of sacred
Oratory, by which the wicked Hearts of Men might be bent to their good. And
truly all the gracious Methods, which under the Legal Dispensation he has
chosen for Persuasives, are in force now under the Gospel, for the engaging us
to Obedience; it being through the Blood of Christ that so much Care and Love
was then showed. Only what were made Excitements to the Jews, are now, with the
change of some Circumstances, enlarged, and do belong to the whole World.

As for those Exhortations which are more strictly comprised in the Gospel;
what may we say of them? or rather what may we not? The New Covenant is so
wholly in itself a Persuasive, set off with the highest Expressions of Divine
Wisdom and Love; that where IT alone will not prevail, all other Arguments may
seem fruitless. But that there may nothing be wanting which may work upon the
Soul of Man, what affectionate Beseechings are there added! What earnest
Invitations given! How are pure Minds stirred up by way of Remembrance! What
fervent Prayers are made for Men's Constancy and Perseverance! What Christian
Sorrow expressed at the Defection of any! What tender-heartedness showed
toward those, who, after a Fall, are repentant! And in them all, what
Attractives are there for our Love!

I have sometimes thought, that should a Person, to whom the True God is
unknown, read, or hear, the earnest Exhortations, the many taking Suggestions,
which in Holy Scripture are used for the engaging Men to Obedience, he would
judge, that, surely, God is much advantaged thereby; or otherwise he would not
be so very desirous of it. This I am sure we may with Truth say; that were it
possible our Obedience could add to the Blessedness of the Almighty, he could
not use more winning Speeches for the obtaining of it than now he does. But
therefore because we can no way profit Him by the Observance of his Laws, and
because it is our own very great advantage if we do observe them; how sweetly
prevalent may so many persuasives seem unto us! And how with an holy Gratitude
may we say; Lord, what is Man that thou have such regard unto him! That thou
give him Line upon Line, Exhortation upon Exhortation; and continuest an
uncessant care over him for the securing him unto Happiness!


Theoph. It is fit indeed that such Exhortations should be followed with
Devotions: Praises unto God, who is so Gracious unto Men; and Prayers that we
may never suffer such persuasives to be fruitless upon us. And it may fairly
lead you, Eubulus, to the Devotional Part of Holy Scripture; in the last place
to be spoken unto.


Eubul. This we shall find to be truly excellent also: For it consisted of such
Services, as (in their intent,) were fit for Men to pay unto their God. None of
their Holy Feasts was there, but was in Memory of some Signal Favor. And, as
it was their pleasure to rejoice thus before their Lord, and Holy Benefactor,
so it may likewise be our pleasure to read of their Religious doing it. Had the
Creation of the World been understood by the Heathens, Juvenal would not have
derided the Jews as such, Queis Septima quaeque fuit Lux Ignava; and vitae
partem non attigit ullam: Who lost the Seventh part of their Time; and improved
it to no End of Life. And if Plutarch had known the design of their carrying
Boughs of Trees in their Feast of Tabernacles, he would not in a Scoffing
Manner have called it the Jewish (...), by an Odious comparing it with that
intemperate Feast of Bacchus; in which the Bacchides ran about with Javelins
wrapped round with Ivy, termed (...). Their Sacrifices were Visible Prayers or
Praises, or Expiations; in all of them the End was truly Excellent; and no one
of them had such Rites as required Secrecy, for a Shelter from an honest and
Chaste Eye. And hence possibly it was, that God forbad Groves to be near his
Altar; as having, by their Shades and Recesses, given occasion to those
Uncleanness which too frequently attended the Worship of the Heathens.
Neither ever did or durst any, tacita libare acerra; and inaperto vivere voto;
ask those things which it were a shame Men should hear. But the Scope of their
Petitions was Gods Blessing in the way of Righteousness.

And as in these things their Religious Services were quite of a different
Color from those of the Nations; and in every thing might have worn this
Impress, Holiness to the Lord, so it is very remarkable, what Humility and
Submission of Spirit, attended their Devotions when God laid Afflictions upon
them. It is the Lord, let him do what pleases him; says Eli. I was Dumb, I
opened not my Mouth, because Thou did it; says David. Though he kill yet
will I put my Trust in Him, says Job. Herein, likewise, very different from
the Heathen; who in their Sufferings were forward to accuse their Gods; venting
their Griefs in undecent Invectives against them.

But when we read of those sacred Heights of Devotion which some of their Holy
Men rose unto, how must we be affected! how divided betwixt Love and Delight!
Our Souls are embruted, if we be not almost transformed into the same Seraphick
Temper with them; who (to use the words of one of them) have thought One day in
Gods Courts better than a Thousand: Desiring nothing in Heaven but God; nor any
thing on Earth in Comparison of Him.

And such Devotion how yet further is it improved by our Blessed Lord, who has
continued all Night therein; who has Consecrated himself by Prayer a Sacrifice
for the whole World; and has offered up, upon his Cross, Supplications with
strong Cries and Tears, hoth for Himself and Us! Who is it can avoid the being
wholly possessed with Love, who contemplateth our Savior at the Right Hand of
God, in a mighty way Mediating for us? Though at a distance from us, yet openly
on our behalf, urging his Merits, Passion and Death, and presenting our Prayers
unto his Father! Which, that they may be the more acceptable, he himself, while
on Earth, has given us a most perfect Prayer, as a Patte n for our Imitation,
and a Form for our Use; suitable to the greatest Ardour of Piety that Mortality
is capable of: Has sent likewise from Heaven the Holy Spirit to make
Intercessions for us, with Groans that cannot be uttered; joining with us from
within, and giving our Prayers such a Fervor and Powerfulness as is not to be
equaled by Words. Devotion raised to such Perfection, as the having our
Blessed Lord, and the Holy Spirit so nearly concerned in it, is so highly
amiable, that it requires only the being truly known, for the being sincerely
loved.

You have, Theophilus, in short measures, an account of the Divine Law, as the
word Law may be taken in the wider sense.


Theoph. How acceptable the account you have given me is, I cannot more truly
say, than by telling you I could have very willingly heard it much longer. Yea,
so delightful are these other parts of Holy Writ, that they afford a great
pleasure even to some, who are less Observers of the Preceptive Part than they
ought to be. I have known who have been very well versed in the Bible, and
could rehearse, if need were, the chief things contained therein, when yet their
Practice has been as lame as if they knew not a Letter there.


Eubul. These Persons quite mistake what they read, while they find a Pleasure
therein, without a respect to the Divine Law properly as such. All the other
parts of Scripture are, (as before was said,) some way or other, in order to
the Preceptive Part; and if there be who understand them otherwise, they go
contrary to the Mind and Will of their Author.

But yet, how can any one enjoy a Pleasure from that History, which God has
caused to be written as an Encouragement to Obedience, and not be encouraged at
the same time to be Obedient himself? Or how acknowledge the Divine Justice in
the Punishment of Disobedience, and not be prompted to fear Him, who is
Righteous in his Judgments, and will not spare the Wicked? If God be True in
his Predictions, who will not think him so in his Threatenings? And shall so
many Prophecies concerning Him who came to destroy the Works of the Devil, give
any delight to him who is resolved to retain those Works? It would be a strange
Contradiction, that any one should be pleased with the Winning Exhortations
which God uses to engage Men unto the Observance of his Laws, and yet, in the
mean while, be unconcerned whether he observe those Laws or not. And how can
the Devotion of the Saints of old touch his Soul with any delight, who is, and
is resolved to continue, a Stranger unto what he reads them to have been
remarkable for; and who neglects that Obedience, without which their Prayers
and Praises would not have been acceptable with God? Whosoever they be, that,
with no Conformity to the Divine Law, are yet pleased with, and do pretend to
love, the holy Writings, they shall be rewardable in the sight of God no more
than one that loves the Writings of Caesar, or Livy. It is not from a
Principle of Goodness that these Authors are delighted in; but they please the
Fancy, and yield something that hits the Readers Humor. Just so is it with this
Divine Book in respect of these Men. They like it not for the great Design it
has; but they find something, from its great variety, that delights the
imaginative Faculty: Or their Knowledge therein is in Quest of Opinion and
Reputation among Men: Which, how much below the Dignity of this sacred Volume
is it! Opinion and Reputation, even in Obedience, will stand a Man in little
stead hereafter; much less will they, when they are without Obedience.


Theoph. We will let These Men go, and make no Inquiries concerning them. But
what, Eubulus, shall we think of Those who are Conscienciously Obedient to the
Divine Law, yet find not that Delight therefrom, which Earthly Things do
frequently give them; and who hereupon are very apt to interpret their love to
the Divine Precepts to be unsincere, and such as will be rejected?


Eubul. The Divine Laws are indeed worthy the highest pitch of our Affections;
and they are happy Men who find a more quick and grateful Relish from them,
than from all Earthly Objects. Yet I cannot say, but there may be a true love
of them, when it is otherwise.

For our Passions have a very great dependence upon the outward Senses: And
these Senses admitting of strong impressions from Material things, and from
them alone, no wonder that the Soul is visibly affected; and this sometimes the
more, from the unexpectedness, and pleasing surprise with which these External
Objects present themselves; insomuch that it requires Labor and Pains to keep
our Affections within due Bounds.

But the Case is different with the Divine Laws; they, being of a Spiritual
Nature; and in many things above the outward Sense, do not make those
impressions thereupon, which Visible Objects do. So that here, if the
Affections be stirred, they must be so, not immediately from the Things, but
from the Souls own Reasoning, and deliberate Thoughts, inculcating these Laws,
and the great advantages which they give. Add to this, that things future (for
such the Reward of these Laws are,) do not give so quick a Sense, as those that
are present. And because the Soul is at some pains in thinking; and the things
thought of are of old standing to our knowledge, (as the Practicks of Religion
usually are,) there is not that pleasure from surprise, as in those things that
fall out unthought of, or are new unto us.

A Person that is truly Obedient to these Laws, and resolves to continue so,
need not despond, as if his Love to them were unsincere, though he finds not
his Affections raised to such a pleasurable Sense, as he conceives sometimes
from Worldly things. God will not require that things should act upon the Soul,
otherwise than is their Nature to do: And if his Laws obtain their End, by
producing Righteousness of Life, there is a better Evidence of Love to them,
than from inward delight alone there would be. Yea, possibly, if the Man will
cease disquieting himself, and will calmly search his own Heart, he will
discern that the Sacred Laws are very much approved of there; and esteemed far
beyond those Earthly Objects which so highly delighted him. He sees that the
Affections which these outward things did so much heat and raise, do, after a
little while, cool and sink again. But the Divine Law finds a continued respect
within him. And though the Love thereof do not enkindle a flame in Him, yet it
cease not to have Warmth in itself. He sees that his Affections are not
always in his own power to raise them as he pleases: He will therefore
endeavor that his Reason shall supply their Defects: And that the Sacred
Precepts shall never want This to attend them, if he cannot yield them the
Other.

But suppose that there be a great Coldness toward these Laws, and an inward
indisposition to Obedience; yet if notwithstanding he will resolutely Obey;
and, what he cannot do with that pleasure which some others have, will do
through pains and striving, he will not be disapproved by his Lord. An ill
Temper of Soul or Body is one of those Enemies against which he is to Exercise
a Spiritual Valor. And if he shall Fight and Conquer, (and Conquer he does if
his Obedience be still on the upper hand,) he shall undoubtedly have a Crown.
And, for ought I know, it will be as weighty an One, as his, who obeys these
Laws with less Difficulty. This Man, indeed, is much happier in the way, but
the other shall be altogether as happy in the End.


Theoph. What you have said I believe would be much for the quiet of the
Persons we spoke of: Who, by more suspecting their Obedience for its seeming
Coldness, than approving it for its real stedfastness, do want such Lenitives.


Eubul. I should be glad, could I Administer Comfort to any who are truly
Religious. Though, to say Truth, Theophilus, many are too apt to make an ill
use of what is spoken after this manner: And do improve it, not so much to a
right appeasing of their sadder thoughts, as to the reconciling themselves to a
careless or hardened Temper of Soul. I would therefore urge what would certainly
be for the good of all; viz. SVCH A FREQVENCY AND FIXEDNESS OF THOVGHTS upon
the Divine Laws, as the Royal Psalmist expresses; who immediately after he had
said, O how I Love thy Law, adds, It is my Meditation all the Day. By which
we may conceive that the Sacred Variety, and the Wondrous things of Holy Writ,
did find that Constancy of Entertainment in his Heart which was worthy of them.

And where, Theophilus, is there such satisfaction to be met with, as the
Sacred Scriptures reach out unto us! And how little may other things, and how
wholly may These, engage our Thoughts! The being Happy, you know, is that which
every one looks after. To this all Men's Aims and Endeavors are bent; though
in Paths much different one from another; and, for the most part, at the
greatest distance from what is sought. And well may they be so, since none of
them reach beyond the Grave.

Not to mention those things which are of a grosser Nature, relating to the
Body; and which Men vigourously contend for, rising early and sitting up late;
view let us, Theophilus, those things which the more thinking sort of Men do
pursue. Books and Learning I would not be thought to plead against; you know I
very much esteem and honor them* But what is it generally, that Men employ
their Thoughts and Studies about? Are they not better skilled in one another
Ignorance and Errors than in the knowledge and Truth of things? And those
Truths which with great pains and long searches they find out, how mean are
they if thoroughly considered? They satisfy not the Man when he comes to Dye;
who would have something else than some Truth in History, or some Demonstration
in Mathematics, or some Rules of Policy to cheer him; for they will stand him
in no stead then. Nay, even those parts of Philosophy, which tend chiefly to
the beating down the Fears of Death, how cold and insipid are they? The best
that any of the Heathen Moralists have spoken amounts only to this, That the
Souls surviving the Body was, at the most, but an Opinion; and a thing which
some of them rather wished should be, than were sure that it was* Equidem saepe
emori, si fieri posset, vellem, ut ea quae dicam liceret invenire. Vtrum autem
sit melius vivere an mori Dii immortales sciunt, Hominum quidem scire arbitror
neminem, says Socrates, (in Cic.) one of the strongest Pleaders for the Souls
Immortality. I would, were it possible for me, often die, if so I might at last
find the things I speak of: But whether it be better to live or die, God alone
knows; I suppose no Man living can tell. Small Satisfaction does this give to
a Man, who, to his earnest desires of having his Being continued, has, at the
highest, such mean grounds for his hope.

Nor does he find himself any more at ease from its being said, That the Man
who is dead, in his having ceased to be, is altogether devoid of Misery. For if
he perceives no Misery, he is altogether as far from perceiving any thing of
Pleasure. And surely the falling from a place amongst Men, into a Condition no
better than that of a Stone, or any other senseless thing, may incline him, who
considers it, unto pensiveness and sorrow.

And does it make any jot more for his content to be told, That he shall go the
same way that all Men before him have gone, and that all after him shall go?
Certainly it does not. For may it not rather increase his Complaints, in that
not only all Men thus die, but are also denied that length of Life which is
granted to many other Creatures inferior unto Men? Fain would he when he comes
to lie on his Deathbed, not wholly perish. Earnestly he desires that his Soul
may yet further live, and find elsewhere that Happiness which in this World he
sought in vain. And, might it be, he would wish that his Body, which he has
taken so much care of, and which has been instrumental to those Actions that,
commended both to God and Men, should not have an utter end in the Grave.

Now all these things are by our Lawgiver affixed as Rewards to the Obedience
of his Laws: Rewards, though vastly great, yet not greater than the Excellences
of those Laws are, which, and only which, through God's Mercy, can make the Man
fit for so boundless an Happiness.

And when Life and Immortality are brought to Light, and are, as wished for by
Men, so, thoroughly made known unto them; in so much that they have not the
Liberty now of thinking either way, but are in Duty to believe these things so
to be, as being established by such Arguments, than which in Modesty and Reason
greater cannot be desired, how should they with earnestness be thought of? And
how the Laws, betwixt which and them there is so close a Connection, be, with a
more than ordinary intentness, contemplated? Surely it is but meet it thus
should be, since a Man's chief Welfare deserves his settled and constant
Thoughts; and since, through the infinite Mercy of our Lord to us in the
Observance of those his Laws, the least and most inconsiderable part of our
Being, and Happiness, is in this World; and that which shall be in the next,
is, in Comparison of it, no less than a whole Ocean to a single Drop.

And such Meditation, Theophilus, we the rather may exercise, not only because,
if we did not know these things to be true, nothing could be more desired by us
than that they should be true; but also because, being, even while Children,
instructed in them, and never remembering the time that we were altogether
ignorant of them, we are apt thereupon to be the less affected with their
Greatness and Excellence. It is pity that the sense of these mighty Favors
should lose any thing of its quickness, by our long acquaintance with them;
which ought rather to heighten our esteem of, and thankfulness for, them. A
very great Imperfection in our Nature this is, but may in good measure be
cured; and no better Method can we use for the doing it, than frequent and
devout Contemplations, which will bring us to ourselves, and give us a lively
relish of the things which belong to our Everlasting Peace.


Theoph. They doubtless will be of very great avail. And possibly this
Consideration may be some persuasive for the daily use of them; viz. That
Thinking or Meditating is so proper to the Nature of Man, that no Creature upon
Earth may seem to have any share in it besides himself. Some indeed have been
forward enough to grant that other Creatures have something of Reason in them,
and a Power of Thinking, such an one as it is. But then to difference them from
Men, and to set them in a lower Rank, they have allowed to none but Men such a
Rational Nature as is capable of Religion; and such a Faculty of Thinking as
can conceive what Righteousness, Goodness, and the higher sort of Truths are.
And therefore, since Men alone, of all Earthly Beings, are endued with this
Faculty, we cannot but think that it is to be laid out, and not lost by neglect.


Eubul. And who is it that would leave a Power unexercised, in which Man's
proper Excellence is so much seen; and which affords him a pleasure befitting a
Reasonable Soul? In This, when it is employed in Sacred things, he finds a
sweet retreat from the Cares and Toils of Life; from the Enmities and Falsness
of the World. And whatsoever Discomposure his Mind has suffered by them, he
hereby rectifies, and sets all strait again. He can, in This, behold, as at a
distance, the Irregularities of others; and solace himself that he is out of
the reach of bad Example. And though a true reflecting on the Covetousness,
Pride, Ambition, and such like Evils, which prevail so much abroad; and on the
Troubles, which they betray those unto whose Vices they are, and sometimes those
whose Vices they are not, does raise some concernedness and grief within him;
yet he perceives a satisfaction not altogether unlike unto his, who seeing
others tossed on troubled Waves is himself safe at Land: Or who, discerning
whole Armies engaged in Fight, is secure himself from the Danger. And not only
so, but, by such Meditation, he dresses and adorns his Soul for an Holy
Converse with God; and secretly enjoys the Communion of Blessed Spirits in
things so resined and Heavenly, that no Earthly pleasure is to be compared with
them.


Theoph. I wish this seemed not to have been the Pleasure and Privilege of the
Ages past, chiefly; and, for the most part, little to appertain unto Us; who
have so far degenerated from the Saints of Old, that we find much tediousness
in that which they placed their greatest delight, and spent most of their time,
in. When some of Them have laid down their Lives amidst Torments for their
Religion, we think much to spend some serious Thoughts about the things which
relate to our Eternal Welfare; yea, we look upon it as a Task and Trouble to
meditate even upon the infinite Love of God to us; and can hardly do it, though
but for a few Minutes, without Weariness and Distraction.


Eubul. Our Lawgiver may justly take it ill from us, that, when we can with
earnestness fix our Thoughts, the greatest part of our Lives, upon poor Earthly
Things, which perish in the using, we should be backward to Contemplate his
Laws, which alone bring a durable Peace unto us, and would requite us
abundantly, if even all our time should be employed in them.


Theoph. Happy it would be, if Men could be prevailed upon to Love their own
Happiness, and to place their Thoughts thereon. A thing this is, which, one
would think, should not need many persuasions to move them to do it. But they
mistake Trifles for Happiness; and leave the Fountain of Waters to trust in
broken Cisterns.


Eubul. To such Men as These are, I would urge only this one thing. Let them
betake themselves to frequent and serious Considerations; and if upon due
search into the Holy Scriptures, and an humble and constant repairing unto God
by Prayer, that he would open their Eyes for the discerning the wondrous things
of his Law, they shall repent of their Pains, as being either lost or not well
requited; let them then forsake the Divine Laws, and seek elsewhere for Peace
and Rest.

But if, after such Search, and such Prayers, any should forsake these Laws,
might not our Lord say unto them as Pharaoh said unto Hadad, 1 Kings 11.22.
What have thou lacked with me, that thou seek to return into thine own
Country? What is it that you have wanted with me? Could greater Love be showed
you? More Holy and Righteous Laws be given you? Or more desirable Rewards be
held forth unto you? That you should leave me, and return to the World, where
you will find nothing but Dissatisfaction?

We may with Truth say unto Men, That there are the greatest Excellences in the
Laws of our Lord; and an Happiness yielded by them, which no where else can be
found. But whoever shall with Reverence and Singleness of Heart look into them,
may say of them as the Queen of Sheba said of Solomon, 1 Kings 10.6.7, 8. It
was a true Report that we heard of the great Wisdom and Goodness that were in
these Laws. We believed not until we came, and our Eyes had seen it; and behold
the half was not told us. The Wisdom and the Excellency of them exceeds the
Fame which we heard. Happy, O Lord, are thy Children; Happy are thy Servants
that stand continually before thee, and hear thy Wisdom.

And thus, Theophilus, according to your desire, we have closed the Seventh
Evening.


Theoph. I wish that all my Days might be spent as much to my advantage, as
these Seven have been.


Eubul. I doubt not but they will, to so much the more, by how much Practice is
better than Discourse.


DISCOURSE the Eighth, Concerning the Deformity of Disobedience to the Divine
Laws.
Quis est tam dissimilis homini, qui non moveatur offensione Turpitudinis? Cic.
de Fin. l. 5.
The Contents.
DIsobedience is a Pollution. It brings Disorder into a Man. It tends to make
the Almighty to minister to his Creatures in the vilest Offices. How God cannot
be made to serve, How he may. He is pleased in Holy Writ to speak after the
manner of Men, that so He may condescend to our Understandings, and excite our
Affections. How He is made to serve in His Holy Name. How in His Works. The
Creation sensible of this Slavery, and God very much displeased with it.
Disobedience of an Extensive Nature. It affects a kind of Eternity. It Is highly
Disingenuous. God necessitates none to Disobedience. Why He will not force Men
into Obedience. Why he generally cuts them not off.

THEOPHILUS. I Had thought, Eubulus, when last I bid you Goodnight, to have
left to your choice the Matter of this Evenings Talk. But, reflecting on the
Excellency of the Divine Laws, and the great Happiness that Men have in them,
my Thoughts at length run on to the Consideration of Disobedience thereunto.
Sure, said I, if these Holy Laws are in themselves so amiable, and do make him
who observes them, to be, with the King's Daughter, all Glorious within; the
disobeying of them is, in itself, Odious, and renders the Man inwardly very
Deformed. I pray you therefore, Eubulus, let this Ungrateful Thing be the
Subject of one Discourse. It may not be devoid of Profit to us, since the
Foulness of This, if thoroughly discerned, will, possibly, no less, one way,
secure our Obedience, than the Beauty of the Divine Precepts will, another way,
allure it.


EVBVLVS. INdeed, Theophilus, Sin, Iniquity, or Wickedness, (or whatever Name
besides evil Actions have,) all of which are nothing else but Disobedience, or
Transgression of the Law,) are Charactered in Holy Scriptures by Pollution and
Filthiness. And as a Signification of such Defilement, were those Numerous
Washings under the Old Law. And those Sacrifices, which had the Sins of the
People confessed over them, were, by reason of those Sins, so polluted, that
they were commanded to be burnt out of the Camp; and they who burnt them there,
were by them in such manner defiled, that they could not return into the Camp
till they had washed their Clothes, and bathed their Flesh in Water, Levit.
16.28. And answerable hereunto did the Prophets afterward speak; Wash me
thoroughly from mine Iniquity, and cleanse me from my Sin, Psalm. 51.2. They were
defiled with their own Works, Psalm. 106.39. Though thou wash thee with Nitre,
and take thee much Soap, yet thy Iniquity is marked before me; how can thou
say, I am clean? Jer. 2.23. And upon the account of the Filthiness of Sin, God
is said to be of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, Hab. 2.13.

Neither does the New Testament speak otherwise of Disobedience. Out of the
Heart proceed evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts,
False-witnessings, Blasphemies; these are the Things which DEFILE the Man,
Matthew. 15.19. And hence the Blood of Christ is said to cleanse us from all Sin.
And Baptism is not only a Rite that does initiate us into Christianity, but is
termed the Washing of Regeneration, as purifying us from the Pollutions of our
Natures. And truly so odious and foul is Sin, that when St. Paul would set it
off most in its own Deformity, he could find no worse word for it than itself;
for he calls it sinful Sin, Romans 7.13. The whole Nature of it being nothing
else but Pollution.

Disobedient Persons may, indeed, in outward shape, appear to us Comely and
Beautiful: And their Discourse and Deportment may, in some things, be taking
enough. But could we thoroughly discern a Soul Deformed, as to all its
Faculties; could we rightly see the Loathsomness of that Body, whose every
Member has been made the Member of Unrighteousness, and wholly infected with
the Poison of Sin, all the World could not afford so bad a sight, as this.


Theoph. Nay, Eubulus, such a stain do vile Practices cast upon a Man, that
though perchance we never may have seen his Face, or he himself may have lived
many Ages since, we yet shall have abject thoughts of him, and a great
Disrespect to his Memory. And if he be of our own Age and Neigbourhood, that
our Eyes have sometimes a sight of him, how do his Ill Morals infect even his
outward Shape? That whether we will or no, we cannot but have some secret
aversion from his Person, though by reason of his Degree, or Place, we dare not
always show it.


Eubul. It is even so as you say, Theophilus. But as Disobedience to the Divine
Law throws a Pollution upon every Faculty of the Soul, and Member of the Body;
so it also gives a further Deformity, by bringing a Disorder into the Man; and
causing that which should be superior, and have chief command in him, to be
brought under, and made to serve; His sensitive Appetite getting above his
Rational, and his Body bearing sway over his Soul. Neither when such Disorder
is at home, and in his own Breast, is it like to stay there alone; but, in all
probability, it will spread itself abroad, and in the Community: For the
Discomposures, which are there, arise first from private Iregularities.

But not only does Disobedience to the Divine Law overturn all order in the Man
himself, and breed Confusion in Kingdoms; but (what is abundantly worse,) it
induces a yet higher Disorder into the World; Subjecting, as it were, the
Great God of Heaven and Earth, and making him to Minister unto his Creatures in
the vilest Offices. They are his own Words to his Disobedient People of Israel,
Isai. 43.24. Thou have made Me TO SERVE with thy Sins; And what greater
Deformity can there be thought of, than such Disorder as this, that shall
reach, not only so wide as the Earth, but even unto Heaven? And who would not
hate Disobedience, which is the Cause and Source of it?


Theoph. I can easily grant, that, from Disobedience to the Divine Laws, there
arises such Deformed Disorder, as you speak of, in Private Men, and in
Communities also on Earth.

But how can it extend itself unto Heaven, for the bringing of God under? It is
his Name, I am that I am; which denotes the Immutability of his Being, and such
a Perfection, as cannot any way be diminished. As he is Omnipotent, He cannot
be overpowered by any; as He is the All-wise God, there is none can Circumvent
him. As he is perfectly One in his Essence, without any the least mixture, He
can no way be subject to any Alteration. And as He is Eternal, He not only can
never cease to Be; but also, he cannot ever be less than infinitely perfect,
and infinitely Blessed: Which is, altogether inconsistent with serving; for
that supposes Weakness, and Deficiency.

Therefore, Eubulus, since I see you intend it as the chiefest Brand on
Disobedience, that it makes the Almighty to be Inferior, and Servile, I
desire you would explain it to me. For the Almighty's saying, That by Men's Sins
(i. e. by the Breaches of his Laws,) he is made to ^^^e, is the highest Infamy,
and Reproach to Disobedience; and may render it loathsome to any considering
Person: And so, is Worthy to be insisted on something largely by you.


Eubul. In respect of his Nature, and Person, Theophilus, God cannot, for the
reason you have given, be made to serve. Sin we with never so high an Hand, we
cannot put any restraints upon his Nature; and be we never so Righteous, we
cannot render his Person more Blessed. And to this Sense is that of Job 35.6.
If thou be Righteous, what give thou Him? Or what receives he of thine Hand?
If thou Sinnest, what do thou against Him? Break his Laws thou may, and
provoke his Justice, but thou can never render Him less Perfect, or less
Blessed.

But then we must know, that God is pleased in Holy Writ, to speak after the
way and fashion of Men; not so as is perfectly agreeing with his own Nature,
but so, as is most suitable to our Understandings, and may most prevail with,
and move, us.

Thus Eye, Ear, Mouth, Arms, Heart, Feet, and such like Members are in Sacred
Scripture, attributed unto God, not that there are any such, in reality, in
Him, (for He is a Spirit, and altogether Incorporeal.) But that we might, by
these Sensible Things, the better conceive those Perfections, which are
shadowed out by them. For it is not unworthy of Observation, That there are no
Members nor Parts of a Man ascribed unto God, in Holy Scripture, but what do
betoken some Excellence, or other in Him; as his Power, his Wisdom, his
Knowledge, his Love, and such like. And none of those Parts that are (as the
Apostle terms them,) (...), or (...), more feeble, less honorable, or
uncomely, are any where attributed unto Him.

The Jews have a Saying Lumen Supernum nunquam descendit sine Indumento;
Heavenly Light never descends without some Vail. It, otherwise, would be too
bright for our weak Eyes. So these Members of the Body, which God is pleased to
admit of, when he speaks of Himself unto Us, are but as Coverings to those
Excellencies, which we could not so well understand, should He have spoken
sutably to Himself, without any respect had unto us.

And, as God does condescend to our Understandings, by speaking unto us after
an Human manner, and in a way below Himself; so in other things He speaks to
move, and excite our Affections; when yet his Words are not to be thought
properly to agree unto him. Thus does he in a favorable Sense, Isai. 45.11.
Concerning the Work of my Hands, Command ye me. Sovereignty we know Essentially
belongs unto Him; and He can as soon lose his Being, as He can That: But that
He may the more win upon us, He thus expresses Himself; as if He had said, you
shall not find me Lofty toward You: But so far condescending, as, in your
Reasonable Requests, to serve you.

Thus also he is said to be Angry, to Repent, to be pressed with Men's Sins, as
a Cart is pressed with Sheaves: Not that there can be in Him any such thing as
the Passion of Anger, or of Repentance, or of Grief; for then there would be
some alteration, and change in God: Which cannot be to the better, because he
is infinitely Blessed; nor to the Worse, because then He would lose of his
Perfection. And so, no alteration can there be in Him at all; and therefore the
expressing himself thus, in Scripture, is the more to prevail with us.

The intent of what I have said is this: To wit,

That God may be said, though not properly, yet, after the way of Human Speech,
to be made to serve by Men's Disobedience. And those his Words in Isaiah, are as
much as if he had said; Thou have done, what in thee lies, to make me serve by
thy Sins. Which way of Speech is highly moving, by showing, that could he have
been brought under, and made to serve, they, by their untoward Carriages, had
done enough to effect it. Had he been a Man, this would have been the fruit of
his Favors to Them; this their Gratitude to Him.

And truly, Wicked Men do in a sort effect, that the most High shall serve them
even in his Person; by putting him off from time to time, and causing Him to
attend their Leisure. Thus when He, as St. John speaks, stays at the Door and
Knocks; earnestly calling upon them to turn unto him, that they may Live; they
are not yet at Leisure; with Felix, they are apt to say, Go thy way, for this
time; when we have a Convenient Season we will send for Thee. After so many
years are past; or when such businesses are done; or such designs accomplished;
or such Sins acted; then, it may be, they will hearken unto him; and is not
this a making him Serve, when he must thus wait their Motions; as if their
Wills were Superior unto his; and he were rather to observe Them, then They
Him?


Theoph. It is abundantly sufficient for the setting forth the hatefulness of
Disobedience, that it tends to invert the Universe; and to reduce Him into
Servitude, whose very Being it is to be Supreme of the World. Neither is the
Violation of the Sacred Laws the less odious, because it does not actually
effect this. The Perfection of Gods Nature which cannot, in reality, suffer the
least Diminution, does not render the Nature of That the less Foul, which, were
it possible, to do it, would trample upon his Majesty, and make him Serve.


Eubul. But I think, Theophilus, that God's being made to Serve by Men's Sins,
may have a more proper Signification, if we consider Him not as to his Person,
and Nature, but as to his Name, and Works. The former (as has been said,)
cannot be more or less Glorious than they are; but the later may be Exalted, or
Deprest among Men; had in Honor, or Vilified in their Words and Practice.

And after this manner, God, in Sacred Writ, is said, to be magnified, though
in himself, he be so Great that his Greatness can admit of no Addition. O
Magnify the Lord with me, (says the Psalmist,) that is, as the next Words
have it, Let us exalt his NAME together. And thus Exalted, and Magnified he may
be, by being had in Reverence, inwardly, of those who draw near unto Him, and
outwardly, by being celebrated in a Religious Manner; in the Hearing, and View
of Men.

Thus, likewise may he be Less'ned, or brought Lower; for, while we are called
upon to Magnify, and Exalt the Lord, it would be a fruitless Exhortation,
unless it were possible that God should be thus Undervalued, and Vilified among
Men.

He is brought under, when Men do use his Holy Name for the promoting those
Designs which are contrary to his Infinite Purity, and Righteousness. He is
also made to Serve, when his Works are pressed for the carrying on of Evil
Actions; contrary to that of Job 36.24. where we are bid to remember that we
Magnify his Works.


Theoph. I acknowledge what you say to be so: But should more cheerfully do it,
would you insist something largelier on these Things.


Eubul. As for his Holy Name, Theophilus, how do they make the Almighty to
Serve their Turns only, when they use it for the appearing, in some Actions, to
be Religious; not that they may bring any true Glory unto God, but that they
may advance their Secular Interest, or their Reputation, among Men? Or yet
worse, when they shall pretend Piety, for the more secure acting of Wickedness;
abusing the Holy One into a Mist, as it were, which they will throw before Men's
Eyes, that they may not be discerned in their shameful Deeds?

And the same thing do they, when, for the obtaining their own unjust Cause,
they shall procure others to Swear that which is not so; or when they shall
lend their own false Oaths for the advantage of their Friend, or the Damage of
their Enemy. Or when in some Evil Actions which they have been Guilty of, they
shall make dreadful Imprecations, that God would Exemplarily punish them, if
they be not Innocent as to the Thing they are charged with; presuming, it will
not be unto them according as they have Cursed.

Add to this, The frequent Usurping of Gods Sacred Name, upon almost every
trivial occasion, to Vows or Oaths, or to a Vain swaggering, and the shameful
Credit of not appearing to be strict and religious. When that Great Name, the
Reputation of which God stands so much up for, and which is the greatest
Argument in our Exigences, for our prevailing with Him for Aid, (What will thou
do to thy Great Name?) when that, which should establish all Truth in the
World, is haled to the confirming the quite contrary: When that, at which the
Devil trembles, shall be forced for the carrying on of his Hellish Service, do
they not bring the Great and Holy God into the worst of Slaveries, into that
which his Soul does perfectly loath?


Theoph. By what Stains can we sufficiently conceive the Foulness of
Disobedience? I have small reason to think, that what is so deformed in
relation to God's Name, will be any jot the better in relation to his Works.


Eubul. Altogether as odious is it in These, as in the Other. Look we first,
Theophilus, upon Men; who, as they are Men, are the Chief of God's Works on
Earth; his Image being lively impressed upon Them only; and we shall find that
the transgressing of the Divine Precepts does debase Them, and, in Them, the
Image, and Work of God, to the vilest of Drudgeries.

When the Understanding, which is capable of the Knowledge of God, and should
be exercised to the right conceiving of all Virtues, and the best Methods of
bringing them forth into Action, shall be filled with Impure Conceptions, and
wrought up to the Knowledge of all Wickedness, and of the readiest ways of
reducing it, upon all occasions, into practice.

When the Will, which ought to be bent to the pleasing of God, in an Universal
Compliance with his Laws, shall be forward in the desiring and prosecuting of
Evil, and shall rest satisfied in the accomplishment of it.

When the Memory, which is so well fitted for God's Service, shall be far from
retaining the great Mercies he has showed to Men in general, and to ourselves
in particular, in various Circumstances of our Lives. When the excellent Things
of God's Law are allowed no room in it; but, on the contrary, when itself is
chiefly employed in the remembering of those things which are light, and vain;
in the preserving present to our Minds the readiest ways of bringing about ill
Actions; and in the keeping fresh those Injuries which by others have been done
us, whether through Imprudence, Passion, or Design; that we may never, upon
Opportunities, forget to revenge them.

When the Affections, which should be engaged in an Holy Joy at the great
things which God has done for us; in an Unfeigned Love to Him for his being so
loving and gracious unto us; in a Delight in those Commandments, which are so
agreeable to the Nature and Souls of Men; in an Ardent Longing for that Blessed
State, where we shall be wholly freed from Sin: When these Affections, I say,
shall be turned into Coldness toward God and the Things of Heaven; into an hot
and eager persuit after those things which minister only to Worldly Advantage,
or Sensual Pleasures; into Ill Wishes toward others, Envy at their Welfare,
Delight in their Troubles or Miscarriages.

And likewise, when our Bodies, which are Temples of the Holy Ghost, shall be
alienated to profane Uses; when our Members, which are the Members of Christ,
shall be made to become the Members of Unrighteousness; our Eyes in beholding
Vanity, our Tongues in uttering Deceit, or those things which Minister not
Grace to the Hearers; our Hands in doing that which is Evil; our Feet in being
swift in running to Mischief; all of which were made for better Ends.

When Men, which were Created in the Similitude of God, and should, in their
Actions also, be like him, shall through Disobedience have their Bodies and
Souls brought under to such vile Offices, is not the Great God made to serve in
the Principal of his Handy-Works on Earth? Certainly he is.

We know, among Men, there may be a suffering of Indignities in Effigy; in
something that shall represent the Man, though his Person be absent or
untouched; and the Discredit shall redound to him, in great measure, as if he
himself had in Person suffered. And will it be otherwise with the Almighty God?
We are his Image and Likeness, in respect of our Souls; and both in our Souls
and Bodies, we bear the Image of his Son our Lord, who was pleased to take upon
him our whole Nature. If therefore Disobedience shall throw such Dishonor on
his Image, and Workmanship in us, although it reach not his Person to hurt
that, it yet makes him, through his Works and his Image too, (as we are his
Works and Image,) to serve.

Neither does it, Theophilus, any more spare the Almighty, in the other visible
things of the World.

The Sun, and Moon, and Stars, in their Light and Influences; The Earth, and
Sea, and all the Creatures thereof in their several Capacities, He made
instrumental to the Life, and Virtuous Actions of Men; and, through them, to
his own Praise and Glory. And therefore since They (as of themselves being
Mute,) cannot Celebrate the Praises of their Creator, Man's Mouth is to be
theirs, and to offer up Praise unto God in their stead. Thus did the Royal
Psalmist for them; Praise the Lord, ye Sun and Moon: Praise him all the Stars
of Light. Praise the Lord, ye Heavens, and ye Waters that be above the Heavens.
Praise the Lord from the Earth, ye Deeps; Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapors, Wind
and Storm, fulfilling his Word. Mountains and all Hills; Fruitful Trees and all
Cedars; Beasts and all Cattle; Creeping things and Flying Fowl, Psalm. 148.

So likewise, since these Visible Things, of themselves, are unable to do any
Virtuous Deeds in relation unto Men, our Hands are, in some sort, to become
theirs, through which they are to promote Actions of Justice, of Kindness, and
of Mercy. These are the Ends for which they were made; and, in them all, they
are to do Service unto God.

But, Theophilus, our Disobedience to the Divine Law turns all these things
another way; and makes the Holy God, in his Creation to be Instrumental unto
Services which are quite contrary unto Himself.

When the Sun shall rise, and make the Day, only that those Sins may be acted,
which require Daylight in the Commission; When it shall set, and Night come on,
merely for the accomplishing of those Vices, which need secrecy chiefly, and
darkness. When Malice and Ill Nature shall strengthen themselves, by calling to
their Aid whatever we possess, rather than fall unactive to the ground. When
what should in Sobriety be employed for the good of ourselves, and in Charity
and Friendship for the Benefit of others, shall be abused to Intemperance,
Covetousness or Ambition, is not God, through the Works which he has Created,
made to Serve? Yea, to Serve the worst of Beings, his greatest Adversary, in
the worst of Services?


Theoph. Were it not that the Creation is by some Religious Men improved to
right Ends, we might not wonder, if it should give Signs that it rather would
be reduced to its first nothing, than be thus abused to the Dishonor of its
Maker, and of itself.


Eubul. This Slavery, Theophilus, the Creature is, in a manner, sensible of,
for the Apostle says, Romans 8.22. The whole Creation Groaneth, and travelleth
in pain together until now; and all upon the aceount that it is made Subject
unto Vanity, and brought under the Bondage of Corruption. It is not willingly
that it thus serves the Prince of Darkness. It groaneth and travelleth in
pain: Which expressions denote the State it is now in, to be a State of great
Misery; and speak forth the greatest longing, and the most earnest Expectation
to be delivered from it, into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God: Where,
as those Sons of God shall be freed from Sin, and shall do Service pure, and
uncorrupted unto God; so the rest of the Visible Creation, which has too much,
and too long been forced to minister unto Vain Ends, and Ungodly Practices,
shall be asserted also into that Freedom, where it never shall be employed more
but in the true Service of God, whose Service is perfect Freedom. This, I doubt
not, but those words the whole Creation groaneth, do signify, not only Men,
but the rest of the Creatures also, which have been for so long a time abused
to Unrighteousness.


Theoph. If thus it be in respect of the Creatures, whose Being, as to a great
part of them, is of the more insensible sort, we may be sure that He who is a
Jealous God of his Honor, is more nearly concerned.


Eubul. Yes, Theophilus, he is thoroughly Sensible, how Unworthily, in the
Creations Thraldom, he has been dealt with; and therefore all these things
must have the Pollution, which has been thrown upon them, to be purged off.
The Heavens shall pass away with a great Noise; and the Elements shall Melt
with Fervent Heat; and all the Works therein shall be Burnt up, 2 Pet. 3.10.
and so shall be purified from their Corruption, and Stains. For v. 12. it is
said, We look for a new Heaven according to his Promise, and a New Earth,
wherein dwells Righteousness; all which Expressions, though by some they be
made to signify the Dissolution of the Jewish State, and the Establishment of
the Gospel of Christ in the World, yet certainly they have relation to the Last
Day, the Day of Judgment also; if not only unto That. And the Fire is denoted,
as to destroy the Vain Works of Men on the Earth, so likewise to purify those
parts of the Creation, which have, by Men, been abused unto Sin, and Vanity.


Theoph. Were the Foul Nature of Disobedience rightly discerned, surely,
Eubulus, all Men would abhor it. For could any one on this side Hell, be
willing to bring such Servitude on God, such Thraldom on the Creation; and
thereby, such unspeakable Deformity on Themselves?


Eubul. Such Evils are there in Disobedience, that when we think the worst of
it, we think not bad enough, but we have as yet only in part seen it, of such
an Extensive Nature is this hateful Thing, that it would spread itself beyond
all Time, and Place. And so the Actors of it, although something shorereach'd
they be in their Deeds, yet are not so in their Will, and Desires. Yea they may
truly be said, to affect a kind of Eternity in their Sins.

The Pleasures of Wickedness in which they make God to Serve, (as has been
said,) how sorry are they, that they are of no greater a length! And, did they
but know how to do it, how forward would they be to stretch them out into an
Infinite Duration; and bind the Almighty all the way, to minister to their
Polluted Conversations! If Conscience within does check them, full gladly would
they remove it for ever out of their Breasts that it might disturb them no
more. And Him, who in Heaven is the Lord of All, they would either wholly
Dethrone, and Dispossess of all his Sovereignty; or else would entrust him with
it no farther than to Serve their Humors, as they, upon occasion, should call
for it.


Theoph. Pray give a particular Instance, or two, of what you now say.


Eubul. Take, Theophilus, the Malicious Man first, he cannot, it may be, do
much against them whom he Hates; but he has a Will to punish them Eternally,
knew he but how. And this, methinks, those severe Curses too much speak out,
when he Dreadfully, upon any Displeasure, bids God to Damn Them; and, as far as
his Words and Wishes will do it, gives them over unto the Devil to be taken.

Neither is it any better with the Ambitious Man. He would be always rising
above others; and the Great God must for ever administer to his Proud Wishes
and Designs. If he, at any time, be disappointed in his Hopes and Enterprises,
he inwardly rages, and is, in effect, sorry that the Power of the Highest is
not, so much, at least, in his Hand, as that he may exalt himself above all
other Men; and continue there, without any fear of ever being Lower; thus far
God must always Serve him; and when he should be accustomed for some time to
the greatest Height on Earth, we have reason to think he would next wish to be
the Supreme of Heaven too, and to extort the whole Power from the Creator of
the World.

Some Men perhaps would think, that what I have spoken borders too much upon
Fancy; but, Theophilus, in Reality, it does not. And, well for us it is, That
there is a God above, who will not let go his Power; That his Laws are fixed,
and that his Authority in them will never, can never, be overthrown: Happy are
we, that Heaven will always be his Gift, and Hell be never otherwise than in
his Disposals. Alas, what should we do, if we, and all things else were in the
power of some Men! How miserable would their Malice and ill Nature make us to
be on Earth! Upon what light Offenses should we be sent quick into Hell! How
would Heaven lie open to Pride and Ambition! How all the Work of our Redemption
be trodden under foot! And those sacred Laws, in so much Righteousness and
Mercy given us by our Lord, how turned into Confusion! Nothing is so evil, but,
might they have their Wills, God's Power should serve for the accomplishing and
perpetuating of it. And not only his Holy Name and his Works, but his Person
and Glorious Attributes should be brought under, and made Vassals to their
wicked Imaginations, and uncontrolled Impiety.


Theoph. What could Disobedience do more, if God were an Intruder in the World?
If he used his Power in an Oppressive way, and if Man were least of all
Creatures fitted for his Service?


Eubul. Here it is, Theophilus, that Disobedience has its Loathsomness: For so
far is the Almighty from being an Intruder, that there was no God formed before
him, neither shall there be any after him, nor is there any besides him. He is
the only Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and so he usurps the
Right of none, affects no unjust Power. The Heavens and the Earth were the
Works of his Hands; nor has he ever made over his Right to any other. None
then can say, that he intruded into the World, and by Injustice holds the
Dominion thereof.

Neither does he Rule in an Oppressive way. At the first, ^^nstrain'd by no
necessity, nor owing any thing to any one, and needing the Services of none,
but prompted by his own Goodness alone, He, through his Power, gave Being unto
Men. When he had this done, He honored them with the Dominion over all Things
in this Lower World; but much more he honored them in making them such, who
could discern Him, that Created them, and could do him Service.

Indeed the meanest Creatures upon Earth, however senseless in their Natures, do
yet serve God: Even Snow and Hail, Wind and Storm, fulfill his Word; but then
they know not that they fulfill it, and so their Obedience, in respect of
themselves, is less worthy. God may more truly be said to serve himself of
them, according to the Expression of the Prophet, Jer. 34.10. than they be said
properly to serve him.

But Men he endued with a Reasonable and Intelligent Soul, by which they
conceive what it is they do, and why they do it: And so having a sense of
themselves and their own state, and, in some sort also, of the Greatness and
other Infinite Excellences of the Lord whom they serve, Their Obedience alone,
of all Earthly Creatures, may be termed the Grace of Obedience; and They only
have the Honor to be, in strictness and propriety of Speech, serviceable, and
obedient unto God.

Yea, when Men had deserved the Punishment of Death by breaking the Command of
God, He, in infinite Mercy and Wisdom, contrived a way for the saving them from
Destruction, by the precious Death of his Son.

And in relation hereunto, He has, by that his Son, given them Commands that
are not grievous, Laws that are righteous and good, perfective of their Nature,
and truly useful to Society. He vouchsafes Assistances from Heaven for the
Performance of them, and promises Everlasting Salvation after Death to those
who sincerely observe them. And lastly, He sustains and preserves them, even
while they sin against Him; when they could not breath, did not his Providence
afford them Air; nor live, did not he give them Bread?

So that God may say to These, as he did to his Vineyard, Isai. 5. Judge, I
pray you, between Me and Them: What could have been done more unto them, that I
have not done? And for which of all these good Works do you throw Servitude
upon me? What should more excite your Honor to me as a Father, your Fear to me
as a Master, and your Love to me as a Friend, than these things? And if I am
your Father, where is mine Honor? If I am your Master, where is my Fear? And
if I am your Friend, (as none possibly can be more,) is this your Kindness to
your Friend? Do you thus requite the Lord, ye foolish People and unwise, to
make him to serve by your Sins?


Theoph. You said truly, that here it is that Disobedience has its
Loathsomness. For where Disingenuity and Ingratitude do rise so high, (as here
they infinitely do,) what deeper Stain can there possibly be?

And as one would wonder, how any should be willing to carry it so ill toward
a gracious God, who has beyond Expression deserved well of them; so one would
no less wonder, that it could ever enter into the Heart of Man to say, That God
by his Decrees has necessitated them to Disobedience: That He cannot justly
find fault, because who is it that has resisted his Will?


Eubul. A Man would admire indeed, that any should be so absurdly unreasonable.
For who would ever designedly bring himself into Dishonor, and be the chief
cause of that, which is most odious in his own Eyes? This, no wise Man, no, nor
one but tolerably in his Wits, would ever do.

Let us but Attribute that Wisdom to Him, whom we acknowledge to be infinitely
Wise, which, in these Circumstances, would never be wanting to any Man who has
Common Sense and Reason, and we may be quickly satisfied that God compels no
one to Vilify his Holy Name, his Image, and his other Works; and to bring them
into the Service of the Devil; to the great Satisfaction and Delight of that
his Enemy.

Let us not therefore say, It is through the Lord, that we have done thus; for
we ought not to do the things which he hates. Let us not say, He has caused
us to Err; for the Lord hates all Abomination, and they that fear God, love it
not; as the Son of Sirach excellently speaks, Chap. 15. Verse. 11, 12, 13. Or
as the Holy Ghost himself says in St. James, Let no Man say when he is
tempted, (unto Evil,) he is tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted with
Evil; neither tempts he any one. But every Man is tempted when he is drawn
away of his own Lust and enticed, Chap. 1.13.14. God has no need of the Sinful
Man; and he hates Evil, even while it shall seem to be done that good may
come. And whosoever shall say, let us do Evil that Good may come, the Apostle
tells us, their Damnation is just. How can any one then imagine, that God
should necessitate Men to those Sins that strike directly at his Honor? And
bring him as far as possible, and would yet further bring him, could it be
done, into the worst of Servitudes?


Theoph. They highly dishonor God, who by their Disobedience do carry
themselves Contemptuously. But yet those Persons, who make Him Himself to be
the moving Cause of all this, do the more dishonor him; because they represent
him as such an one who is not worthy of better Services than Wicked Men would
Subject him unto.

Most Horrid abusers they Both are of the most Righteous and Holy God. But why
(if I may lawfully enquire so far,) will he permit such things against Himself?
Why will he not rather force Men into due Obedience, or else Cut them off?

A Wise Governor on Earth, when he sees himself struck at; his Favors abused;
his Laws vilified; yea, the Ruin of his Person wished, will think the present
time not too soon to punish such Notorious Offenders. And while God lets
those alone who thus Sin against him; using no restraints toward them; nor
making them Exemplary in their Punishments; may he not seem to act below the
Wisdom of Prudent Governors among Men? Are not the Criminals encouraged to
continue in their Wickedness? And others also drawn by their Example into the
same Excess of Iniquity? And may not Gods Government of the World hereby seem
remiss?


Eubul. There is a great deal of difference, Theophilus, between God and Those
who are Governors upon Earth. The Frail Condition of These, in the possibility
of their Persons being really brought into Servitude, or destroyed; and their
Governments being weakened or wholly overthrown; requires often times the
speedy Punishment of Those who are Notorious Offenders.

But God in his Person is secure from all the Evils that can be wished or
attempted against him. And however his Government may, in appearance, be
less'ned, yet, in reality, his Power and Dominion can never be endangered, or
diminished. For (as before was said,) he is infinitely perfect, and so is no
way subject to any Change for the Worse, and therefore there is no need that
God should make that haste to restrain or punish the Disobedient as Earthly
Princes must oftentimes, in Prudence, do.

Add to this, That many of those Sins against God, which deserve the severest
Punishments, though they, by no means, can be for the Welfare of Society on
Earth, yet do not immediately strike at, and disturb the Peace of the
Community; or, at most, not in any eminent degree. And so the Necessity of
Human Affairs does not presently call for God as a Revenger.

Yet notwithstanding these things, we may with Truth say, Theophilus, That some
of those who do with an high Hand sin against Him, God sometimes makes Examples
of his Wrath; and in them does vindicate his own Sovereignty and Power, which
they, as much as in them lies, have brought under and trampled upon. And this
he so does, as that they themselves may look upon it to be God's just Hand; and
that others also may acknowledge it his doing.

But then, Communities of Men, which, by their public Sins, make the Almighty
to serve, are always, when those Sins are ripe, punished in this World; for
they cannot with any reason be thought punishable in the next; because, all
Bonds of Civil Society are utterly broken and evacuated by the Death of the
Whole. Yea, and those Private Men, who have contributed their share to the Sins
of a Nation as such, are also oftentimes, in some respect, punished in this
World, even after Death, by Public Calamities reaching their Children, or
other Relations, in whom themselves are, in a manner, still here continued.
Which, to one who rightly considers it, shows forth God's Righteous Judgments
upon them.

But because it is not always safe to pronounce, That the untimely Deaths, or
unexpected Miseries of some particular Persons, are an immediate Stroke of God
upon them for their Disobedience; (for our Christian Charity will not permit
this, when we know no signal Crimes by them.) And the great Afflictions of
some, who are not greater Sinners than other Men; and of some, whom we have
reason to esteem as good Men, may caution us, in this point, not to be
over-forward to Judge: And because also we see a great many wicked Men to live
and become old; to be in no Troubles as other Men; to die in peace, and leave
the rest of their Substance for their Babes; Therefore we may affirm it as a
Truth,

Viz. That God sees it fit generally not to cut off those Men; nor yet to
force them into Obedience, who by their Disobedience do thus make him to serve.

He sees it fit generally not to cut them off, that they may have space for
Repentance. Thus did he to the Church of Thyatira; I gave her, says he, space
to Repent of her Fornication: And for this end may he spare these, dealing with
them as the Lord did with the Barren Fig Tree, hoping that though they be not
fruitful this year, they will grow better the next. And this the rather,
because from the thoughts of this Goodness of God unto them, they may the more
effectually be prevailed upon to repent. Despisest thou, says the Apostle, the
Riches of his Goodness and Forbearance, and Long-suffering, not knowing that
the Goodness of God (in this his Forbearance and Long-suffering,) leads thee
to Repentance? A Sorrow for former Sins, and an Acknowledgment of God's
Sovereignty for the future, in Men's giving themselves up to his Service, may
arise from other Considerations; but from none more directly or more forcibly,
than from that of his sparing them, and suffering them to live, that they may
Repent and Turn unto him.

Neither may it be a small Motive for his not generally Cutting them off; that
in case they do not Repent, there may, from their Freedom from Punishment in
this Life, be afforded unto us a strong Proof that there will be Another Life
after This; in which, those Sins which are here spared and Unrepented of, shall
most surely be punished.

God is a Righteous God, and he has told us plainly by his Prophet Nahum,
Chap. 1.3. That he will not acquit the Wicked. And it is not Unobservable, that
These Words are put thus; to wit, The Lord is slow to Anger, and great in
Power, and will not acquit the Wicked: As much as to say: Though he forbear
long, yet it is not as if he could not punish; yea, if they shall go on in
their Disobedience, and not Repent them of their Misdeeds, they most certainly
shall have the Reward of their Doings.

Now, in that These Wicked Men, who, to the utmost of their Power, make God to
Serve, do often live and dye without Punishments, they must necessarily be
punished after Death; or else God will, contrary to his Word, acquit the
Wicked. But the Judge of the Earth will do Right; though all Men shall be
Liars, yet God cannot but be True: And therefore he will not Cut them off, that
he may make them a strong Argument that there will be a Day of Punishments,
when this World is at an End with them.

And Lastly, Theophilus, we may not amiss think, he will suffer them to Live,
that if They Repent not. here, they themselves may hereafter, in the Other
World, confess that they are justly punished.

Though Gods sparing their Lives in so much Mercy, when they had deserved to be
struck Dead, or sent Living into Hell, were little minded by them on Earth, it
yet shall, at the Great Tribunal, have this effect upon them, viz. To make them
acknowledge that their Damnation is Just; because They had so much favor
showed them, and they shut their Eyes upon it.

And surely as Gods Gracious Designs of Men's Turning unto him, and being happy,
do take off whatever can be Objected against his not presently destroying the
Disobedient; So the Reputation of his Justice, which will by this means be
Exalted, even among Those that in Hell shall suffer it, may abundantly
Vindicate Gods Government of the World from being slack and remiss, though he
do not immediately Condemn unto Death those who make him to Serve by their Sins.


Theoph. You have thoroughly satisfied me, why God does not presently Cut those
off who are Rebellious.

But since all Power is his, and with a Word He can do it, why does he not
Force them into Obedience; that his Sovereignty may be acknowledged by all; and
not opposed, so much as in appearance, by any?


Eubul. One Reason may be; Because he would have their Obedience to be their
Virtue; and such as shall become Rational Creatures to give. He, as Elihu
says, Teaches Them more than the Beasts of the Earth; and makes Them Wiser
than the Fowls of Heaven, that they may know what Good, and what Evil is; and
may be sensible of the Favors that are showed unto them. He has given them a
Will to choose, or refuse, what things are before them: And has planted
Affections in their Souls, by which Love and Gratitude may be Exercised.

Now, when they shall endeavor to Understand what is truly Good, and also what
Gods Loving Kindness to them is; when they shall choose that which is best; and
shall willingly serve Him whom they know to be the Lord of the World, and their
Lord; Loving him for his Goodness, and striving to express Thankfulness to him,
so far as they are able; when, I say, they shall do this, they will be
Virtuous, and show themselves such as their Nature and Make require they should
be.

But how unagreeable would it be for these Men to be forced contrary to their
Mind and Will? Wherein would they be Commendable, should they do that which
they could not help? And how unsuitable to Love and Gratitude is Violence and
Constraint?

It is Love, that is chiefly acceptable from Men unto God: For He has Loved
them; and his Love should be answered with Love again. But true Love proceeds
by the Persuasive Way; and never shows itself aright but when it is Willing and
Free; and is wrought upon by kind Inducements, and endearing Motives; which are
things that are at the greatest distance from Force.

Now, this persuasive Method God generally takes with Men, as being most
suitable to their Natures; and the proper way to prevail with them for that
Obedience, which, as it arises from their Willingness and Love, will be
pleasing in his Sight. He multiplieth his Favors upon them; sends his Holy
Spirit to quicken and excite him, by Sacred Allurements, and taking
Suggestions; but never, with a mighty force to compel them; or, at most, very
rarely; and that, upon very signal Occasions.

Yea, sometimes he uses the Severer Way; partly out of Judgment, but yet out of
Love too: Commissioning-Afflictions to fall upon them, if, by this means, he
may prevail with them; yet always so, as that he leaves room for their Will;
without which their Obedience would be of no worth with Him; and not their
Virtue in the least, nor any way fit for Rewards.

This may be one Reason.

Another, why God will not Force them into Obedience, we may conceive to be
this; viz. That if they shall not by these gentle Methods be wrought upon, but
shall still persist in their Sins, He may show his Power and Wisdom, in
improving into his Service, and to his Glory, those their Sins, by which They,
in appearance, made him to serve.

Thus did he in the King of Assyria, Isai. 10. Highly proud this King was, and
very great; and his Greatness, which consisted in large Possessions, and
Multitudes of Men, (the Works and Gifts of God both,) must be employed to no
other Ends but the bringing under others; though by the most unjustifiable
Methods of Unrighteousness and Cruelty.

Well; God sees the Designs of this Haughty Man, and he will not presently
check him. The Jews were a Nation that had behaved themselves so ill, that God
styles them the People of his Wrath. Against these now will God improve the
Pride and Cruelty of this Assyrian; making Him his Rod to scourge Them: O
Assyrian, the Rod of mine Anger, I will send him against an Hypocritical
Nation, and against the People of my Wrath will I give him a Charge to take the
Spoil, and to take the Prey, and to tread them down like the Mire in the
Streets, Verse. 6. But that you may see this King had no good Design, but the
quite contrary, it is said in the next Verse, Howbeit he means not so,
neither does his Heart think so; but it is in his Heart to cut off Nations not
a few: And therefore when God has performed his whole Work upon Mount Sion and
Samaria, in punishing them thus by the Pride of the King of Assyria, then will
he also punish the stout Heart of that King, and the Glory of his Looks, Verse.
12.

Thus those Actions that are least intended by Men to God's Service, will He by
his Wisdom engage for his own Service; yet so as that they shall remain Sins
still in the Actors, and shall at the last have the Recompense that is due unto
them.

After the same manner also is it in other Sins: In the Covetous, God's Gifts
must serve their greedy Desires; and must be heaped up for this End chiefly,
that the Owners may have as little a Dependence upon Providence as may be. And,
could they think their Treasures should ever administer to Free-handedness, and
Liberality, it would be their Trouble. Yet these Men's sordid Desires and
Actions, God, in his secret Wisdom, sometimes will order to serve, after some
years, in the good Offices of Charity and Pity; in that He, who by Usury and
unjust Gain increases his Substance, shall (when he little intends so,)
gather it for him that will pity the Poor.

Innumerable Instances might be given of God's improving the contrary Designs
of Men into his Glory. I will only say this; That the Wisdom of the Almighty
is, on Earth, in nothing more seen than in this I now mention. His Service is
hardly more frequently carried on by the pious and righteous Actions of good
Men, than it is by the indirect and crooked Practices of the Disobedient: God,
as it were, secretly arresting their ungodly Contrivances, and bringing them
about, without any virtue of theirs, or thanks to them; sometimes that the
Crafty may be taken in their own Craftiness; sometimes that the Welfare of Good
Men may be the more promoted; and, in all, that it may be known, That however
Evil Men may endeavor to make Him, in his Holy Name and Works, serve their
wicked Ends, He yet Himself is the Great God that Rules over all: And though
many Devices may be in Men's Hearts, yet the Counsel of the Lord That shall
stand.

And whosoever considers This, together with the other Reasons, before
instanced in; why God does neither Cut these Wicked Men generally off; nor
force them into Obedience, will have no cause to say, that God acted below the
Wisdom of Prudent Governors on Earth; That Criminals are encouraged to continue
in their Sins; and Others to come in, and be partakers with them, by their
Example.


Theoph. I confess, what you have said, I cannot but assent unto: And do
heartily acknowledge, that God is Merciful and Wise in his Dealings with the
Children of Men.


Eubul. But though God does sometimes abstain from punishing their Disobedience,
and sometimes does improve it for the effecting of what He himself would have
done, yet it is not thereupon the less Loathsome in its own Nature, and
Deformed. It tends, as far as possible, for ever to Dissolve the Community
betwixt God as a Lawgiver, and Men his Subjects.

And perchance we hence may not unmeetly discern, how agreeably Rebellious Men
are requited in being Eternally punished in Hell. Their will would have had
their wickedness uncontrolled; and the pleasures thereof extended to an
infinite Duration; and God must thus for ever have Ministered unto them, to the
Eternal Overthrow of all that is Sacred. They suffer therefore no longer than
they would have Sinned: And it is not Incongruous that they should for ever
bear his Wrath, who, might they have had their Desire, would for ever have made
Him to Serve under Them, for the maintaining of their Iniquities. But,
Theophilus, it is time to conclude.


Theoph. The coming on of Night tells us it is. Yet I cannot, Eubulus, but make
one Wish first, viz. That Men would be willing not to be imposed upon by the
false appearances of Disobedience, (for very deceitful Colors it often
wears,) but would consider the true Nature thereof, in its Genuine
Vncomeliness and Deformity.


Eubul. It would be well if they would so do. For I dare appeal even to wicked
Men themselves, whether it would not seem grossly ill in their Eyes, if those
Servants, who, by duty, and many particular Favors, are obliged to Honor,
Reverence, and Love their Good Master, should, instead of doing That, cause Him
to gird himself, and to Serve Them till they have Eaten and Drunk; and
afterward bid Him to Eat and Drink. Whether yet it would not seem much worse
to them, if these Servants should constrain their Lord to those shameful
Actions, which the vilest of Slaves would be thought too good for. I doubt not
but such Servants they would abhor; and think no punishments great enough for
Them.

The Case stands worse in their own making God Serve by their Disobedience. For
no Earthly Master can deserve so much Honor and Love of a Servant, as God does
of Them. Neither can any Servitude, even in the most noisome Circumstances, be
so loathsome to a Master here, as the Service of their Sins is unto God. And is
it a becoming thing, that He, who is God over all, should be thus Vilified by
his own Creatures? That He, before whom the Angels Cover their Faces, and whose
Courts, We, even in our best Services, are to approach with Fear and Reverence,
should be so far profaned, as, without any regard to his Greatness and
Holiness, to be brought lower than the meanest of all his Works; into a
Bondage, of itself, useful to no good End? Sure, the Horrid Villainy of the
thing may make them abominate it. Especially, since They, who, of all this
lower World, are the meetest to Serve God, are the alone Creatures that Disobey
him. All things here, even to the meanest Worm that creeps, do his Will in
their several places; and shall Men be the failing, yea, the Rebellious part of
the Creation? And, instead of serving God with the rest of his Works, shall
they force those his Works from his Service; and themselves make Him, by their
Sins, to Serve?


Theoph. In good Truth, while they thus do, they bring the greatest Slavery
upon Themselves; in that they Serve many Masters; and those such as are
contrary the one to the Other. This Vice bids go; That, at the same time, wills
them to stay. Covetousness prompts them to hold fast; Ambition urges them not
to Spare; Pride makes them to despise Others; and yet, to their great
uneasiness, to fawn that they may rise higher. A most uncertain Slavery it is,
and no less difficult. What underhand Contrivances! What Glozings with those
they cannot abide! What Infidelity to them whom thy pretend Friendship unto!
What Fears of being found out! What Evil Industry to keep all private! No
Servitude can surely be worse.


Eubul. But, Theophilus, we will now leave these Men: Putting up Prayers to God
for them; that they may remember such things as these; bring them seriously to
their Minds; weigh them in their most deliberate Thoughts; and, by so doing,
instead of being Transgressors, show Themselves to be Men.


DISCOURSE the Ninth.
The Contents.
THe Plea of those is vain, who say, they never sinned maliciously against the
Almighty; nor wished his Greatness and Power to be less. The Difference betwixt
Rebellion against God, and that against a Temporal Prince. Disobedience a
defilement in whomsoever it is. Not the same Pollution in all Sins. What the
Sins of Good Men are; and how known to be theirs. The Sins of wicked Men of a
deep Dye; wherein they differ from those of pious Men. The Difference between
wicked Men; How, of the worst sort, some are more open, some more secret, in
their Sins. How the Sins of the less evil sort are to be measured. The same
fairness of Converse not equally innocent unto many. A Sin may be a pardonable
one to some, when the very same, to the Eye and Opinion of Men, will not be so
to others. What we are to think of the Heinous Sins of Good Men, Registered in
Holy Scripture. No reason from them for wicked Men to think better of their own
Sins. God will not esteem the Sins of his Children, which are in themselves as
great as, and the same with, the Sins of other Men, to be therefore the less,
because they are committed by those who are his Children. How to make a
Judgment of our own Sins.

THEOPHILUS. THE great Deformity and Disorder which Disobedience carries along
with it, are not things made probable by Discourse only, and then growing less
or none, when second Thoughts and retired Contemplations are engaged in them.
The serious Reflection upon what you here last said, gave Strength and
Confirmation thereunto: And from thence my Resolutions against Disobedience, as
a thing, in its own Nature, foul and deformed, grew the more strong also.

But, Eubulus, I have heard some, of none of the best Morals, endeavoring to
extenuate the illness of Disobedience, by saying, That they never maliciously
sinned against the Almighty; Never wished his Greatness and Power to be less;
and by indulging themselves in some things prohibited by the Sacred Laws, they
gratified indeed their own Inclinations, but did no great Injury unto Men, much
less designed Ill unto God. Will the Plea of these Men stand them in any stead
for the making their Disobedience to be no such thing, as yesterday you
discoursed of?


EVBVLVS. NO indeed, Theophilus, will it not. For what Quietness soever there
may seem to be in their Sins, they will be found of dangerous Consequence, if
nearlier looked into. It is not in Men's Rebellions against God, as in those
against an Earthly Governor. There, Tumults are raised; Arms are taken up; and
the Diminution, or, it may be, the Destruction of the Prince wished and
threatened, because he is not out of a possibility of being weakened and
destroyed; and such Methods are oftentimes likely enough to effect it. But God,
because he both is, and is acknowledged to be, Immortal, and out of the reach
of all Force, has no Swords drawn against Him; no Designs laid for his
Overthrow; nay, is not by many so much as wished not to be, because they know
such Wishes are to no purpose.

Their way therefore of Rebelling is to break his Laws; To think him such an
one as themselves are; One who either cannot, or who will not, take any notice
of them: Or, it may be, to Own Him, as to his Attributes, to be such as he is,
yet hoping thereby that their good Opinions of Him will make amends for bad
Practices.

But how little do such Thoughts mitigate their Sins? If they shall imagine God
to be such who cannot see them, is the Robbing him of his Omniscience so small
an Offense? Because it makes no Noise, and with Calmness lays Dishonor upon
Him, whose Eternal Glory it is to know all things, is it therefore an
excusable, good-natured fault? We may as well call Joab's Carriage to Amasa
excusable and good-natured, when he said, Art thou in Health, my Brother? and
then smote him under the fifth Rib. For God's Omniscience cannot more surely be
overthrown toward a Man, than by such Imaginations; which, though in
appearance mild, are deadly in the issue.

If they shall think, that God will not take notice of them; is it such a
moderate and harmless Transgression to make the Holy and Good God, to favor
Intemperance? to look slightly on Unchasteness? to be at good terms with
Idleness and Sloth? I remember that Plutarch, in relation to Men's Evil Thoughts
of the Deity, says, He had rather it should be said, There is no such Person
as Plutarch in the World, than that it should be said, He is after such and
such a manner Vicious. And surely, these, who imagine God so vile as to approve
of those things which in Men are shameful, are no less wicked than they who
deny there is any God at all. For his Being cannot be conceived to be Dear to
him, without his Holiness.

If lastly, they shall own him, as to his Attributes, to be such as he is,
hoping that their good Opinions shall make amends for bad Practices, what a
strange Contradiction is this? They acknowledge him to be Just, that he may not
punish Unrighteousness; Holy, that he may favor Impureness; True, that he may
overlook Falseness; Good, that Evil may not be discouraged: Can there be
greater Indignities offered unto the Holy One and the Just, than these are? Can
any one be so wicked as to think, that because he is not edged with a sensible
spite in these things against God, he therefore is a very pardonable Sinner?
Or can he be so foolish as to imagine, that these his Sins are wholly free from
Maliciousness? Were it so that Malice could effect any thing against the
Almighty, it would quickly show itself openly; but since it cannot, it lies
hid; yet has the same pernicious Tendences, as if it appeared more in view;
and, in other Garbs, does act the very same things.


Theoph. But is there, Eubulus, the same Pollution and Defilement in all Sins?
I therefore enquire this, because there is no one living that can say, he has
not Sinned. And some, I am sure, would by no means bring such Defilement upon
themselves, nor such Disorder into the World through their Sins, as you have
mentioned to be the effects of Disobedience.


Eubul. I cannot say that there is the same Pollution and Deformity in all
Sins. There is somwhere in Scripture (I think in Deuteronomy. 32.5.) such an
Expression as This; Their Spot is not the Spot of his Children. Which shows
that there is a greater Pollution in some Men than in Others; but yet that Sin,
wheresoever it is, is a Defilement; a Spot both to the One and the Other Sort.


Theoph. Since there is none that is wholly free from Disobedience, and
Disobedience has a different Deformity in different Sorts of Men, Good and
Bad; pray, Eubulus, tell me, what is the Spot of each; and wherein it is that
they differ.


Eubul. I will endeavor to do it; and the rather because it is of Material
Consideration as to what we have been discoursing.

As for Those that are Good Men, They are Partakers of Original Sin as much as
any other: Since they were no less than others in Adam's Loins, when he
transgressed Gods Command. And if a Clean thing cannot be brought out of an
Unclean one, there is a Pollution belonging unto Them. Their Nature, as they
are Men, is Corrupted; Darkness and Error is in their Understandings: Their
Wills and Affections are Irregular, and Prone to Evil; and their Bodies join
their Allurements to the Evil Inclinations of their Souls.

And as thus they are not Clean from Original Sin, so they have many actual
Sins springing therefrom. David asks a Question at large, Who is it can tell
how often he offends? Even He, that most takes heed to his ways, can He tell
how often he sins? Besides the Faults which he may have observed in himself,
there are many secret ones which he may pray to be delivered from. St. Paul
says, Though he knows nothing by himself, yet is he not thereby justified;
and so may every good Christian say also. Though he be not conscious to
himself, that at such a time he sinned; in such a Concern he failed of his
Duty; yet he cannot certainly plead innocence before God. For his Offenses
reach further than his Knowledge; His Understanding, by reason of the first
Parents Sin, being so imperfect, that many times he cannot discern the Failures
he has been guilty of.

But then the Disobedience of Good Men, whether Natural or Actual, is, through
the Grace of God, the occasion of many Virtues in them, whereby they become
acceptable in God's sight.

The Imperfection of their Nature rendereth them humble. They, observing the
many Defects that are in their Souls, and the depraved Constitutions of their
Bodies, do see a great deal of reason for Humility of Spirit.

As their imperfect State in this World is a Punishment just upon them, they
will bear it with Patience, and not be tumultuous, and unquiet, as if God had
dealt hardly with them. They will not behave themselves proudly toward others,
as knowing that Pity and Kindness rather become those who are in the same
Condemnation. Thus will they do, and thus be, while they consider their
imperfect State in this World to be their Punishment.

As it is their Sin also, and a Defilement upon their Natures, they will be
affected with Sorrow; yet will not be desponding and idle; nor so contented
with their Sin, as not to endeavor to correct it by a Religious Carefulness
and Industry; knowing that it is the part of Negligence to let Original Sin he
unmeddled with; and to rest satisfied both in that, and in their other Sins; as
if these did necessarily flow from the Imperfection of their Nature, and could
not any way be helped. They will make it their business to clear their
Understandings, to rectify their Wills; to reduce into order their untoward
Appetites; and to bring under their Bodies; that though they cannot wholly wipe
off their Original Pollution, yet the ill effects of it may be as few and as
small as they can possibly make them.

As for their Actual Sins, these stir up in them an Hearty Sorrow; an holy
Indignation, and Revenge. Troubled really they are, that they have offended so
Good a God, and so Gracious a Father. Thoroughly angry with themselves that they
have made such ill Returns to One who has infinitely obliged them; and
Revenging it upon themselves by unfeigned Acts of Mortification.

These their Sins will also occasion their more frequent and fervent Devotion.
They will freely, and without so much as hiding one, confess their Iniquities
before God: Heartily acknowledging themselves less than the least of his
Mercies. Earnestly begging that He, through Jesus Christ, will forgive them.
They will not let him alone, will give him no Rest, till they have obtained his
Favor. And so, by how much they heretofore have, in the Commission of Sins,
been at a distance from God, they now, by seriously calling them into
Remembrance, and truly repenting of them, will the more, and the oftener draw
near unto God, in Prayers and other Acts of Religious Worship.

Their former Sins beget in them the Resolution of never Sinning knowingly and
presumptuously for the time to come. Those Words in Job they will heartily say*
and think them but meet to be said unto God; I have born Chastisement, I will
not Offend any more That which I see not, teach thou me: If I have done
Iniquity, I will do no more. The Remembrance of their past Offenses will
quicken them to new purposes, and firm Resolves of Upright Walking for the
residue of their Life. They will say, I thought on my Ways, I considered my
former Sins, and I am resolved to turn my Feet to thy Testimonies. And as it is
my full resolution never more to commit Sins Willingly, so do thou by thy
Restraining Grace preserve thy Servant from Presumptuous Sins.

If they through Frailty and Oversight, or through any Eminent Temptation fall
into some Sins, they will not continue in them, but get out of them as soon as
may be. They may, as Travelers, (for themselves are such; they are Traveling
toward Heaven,) they may, I say, as Travelers, sometimes by Chance, and
against their Wills, slip into the Dirt; but they will quickly step out of it;
accounting it their Unhappiness that ever they were sullied with it. Nay, if
they fall into Sin, they not only will not continue in it, but from their
Failings will become the more earnest Persuers of that which is good. As we
often see our Beasts (if I may be allowed to use the Comparison,) after a
stumble to go the faster, so will they, after a slip, make the more haste in
Heavens way. They will love God the more, because by these new Offenses they
have the more to be forgiven them. From their own Sins against God, they will
the more readily forgive the Sins which others have committed against them.
They will redeem the Time, and do much in the few Years that remain, for those
good Actions which they have left undone, and for those Offenses which they
have committed. And if ever Sins can be improved aright, it is when they are
made Incitements to more Duty.

And, lastly, The Sins which they, through frailty, daily run into, and cannot
by all care and diligence be wholly free from, do excite and prompt them to
long for that happy State after this Life, in which they shall be fully
cleansed from all Sin, and never shall give God the least Offense more. When
will the Time come that they shall be no more troubled with daily Failures in
their Duties! How long will it be that their Souls shall be perfectly bent to
all Goodness, and their Bodies have the Imperfection of Temper and Constitution
taken away! O that they should be constrained to dwell in Mesech, and to have
their Habitation among the Tents of Kedar! O that they had Wings like a Dove;
then would they fly away and be at rest! They Will say, Come, Lord Jesus, come
quickly; that so, They, with all those departed this Life in the true Faith,
and Fear of God, may have their perfect Consummation and Bliss both in Body and
Soul. Such earnest Desires do their frail and imperfect Conditions, and their
every days Failings stir up in them.

Thus, Theophilus, the Sins of good Men have a Defilement in them; but such as
is easily discerned from that of others.


Theoph. Much different, I must confess, it is from the Deformity of
Disobedience, as you yesterday Charactered it. The Sins of good Men owing more,
as may seem, to the Frailty of Human Nature in common, than to the Wills of
themselves in particular. But I will now desire you to speak to the Sins of the
other sort of Men, viz. Those who are Wicked.


Eubul. The Sins of these, Theophilus, are of a far deeper Die; and carry a
much greater Deformity than the Sins of good Men do.

The Scripture speaks of them as Scarlet and Crimson ones; not for the Beauty
of the Color, we may be sure, but for the Depth of the Stain: For who can make
Scarlet as Snow, or Crimson white as Wool?

See we first the Sin of their Nature. And this indeed is not, in itself,
greater than that of the better sort of Men. For all Men in Adam sinned
equally; neither is one more guilty of that Sin than another.

But then herein consists the greater Deformity of wicked Men in respect of
Original Sin. They are contented and well enough pleased with it. What evil
Inclinations they have are not grievous to them. They esteem their imperfect
State as no unhappiness at all: Are not in the least affected with it; see no
Punishment at all in it. Yea, they increase the Defilements of their Nature
thus.

The Ignorance which from the Womb they have of Divine things, they improve
into a Willingness that there should be no God; and into a Readiness to Dispute
him out of their own Hearts, and out of the World too: And would fain imagine
him to have no Being at all, that they may not have such an one to Reign over
them.

They encourage their depraved Wills by Obeying them as far as they can; and
they would do it further, if Fear, and Shame, and Loss from Human Laws and
Customs did not prohibit them: And that they are thus prohibited it is their
inward trouble.

Their Corrupt Desires they are so far from repressing and keeping under, that
they foster and cherish them. It was an ill Character of one of the Roman
Emperors; Jacentes excitavit Libidines; He stirred up, and used Arts to awaken
his Lusts, which otherwise would have been quiet and asleep. So is it with
these: They give no rest to their vile Affections; and spur their depraved
Nature to a greater height of Depravation.

If we consider their Outward Actions, we shall find they are not equally
notorious in all: But yet in all they are much different from those of good Men.

Wicked Men, Theophilus, are of two sorts. Those that are more wicked, and
those that are less. For we read in Holy Writ, of a greater Damnation; and in
Hell, we believe, there are Degrees of Torments, more intense for some, and
less intense for others: And yet those, who are in the lesser Degrees of
Torment, have been wicked Men.

As for the former and worse sort, the Scripture speaks of them thus: They
proceed from Evil to Evil. They weary themselves to commit Iniquity. They bend
their Tongue like their Bow to speak Lies. They lie in wait for Blood. They
hunt every Man his Neighbor with a Net. They do Evil with both Hands
earnestly; Corrupt are they, and have done abominable Iniquity; They are
altogether become filthy.

Now the Deformity of These is sometimes more open; sometimes more secret.

Some, were their Lives thoroughly looked into, I Fear, without uncharitableness
used toward them, they would be found to have wholly laid out themselves in
the Service of Sin. Could the Time be Computed rightly which they have spent in
Defraudations and Oppressions; in Surfeitings and Drunkenness; in Defaming and
Evil Censuring; in Telling Lies of, and unto, their Neighbor; in Begetting and
Fomenting of Differences; in Acts of Unrighteousness and Dishonesty; and, at
the best, in giving up themselves to Earthly Profits, or looser Recreations; we
may doubt the rest of their Days would be very few; and their whole Lives
little less than a continued Blot.

These are They generally, that are careful to avoid the being thought to be
any whit Religious; and do Vilify with Derision the Constant and Sober
Exercise of Devotion; being Strangers to the Name of God, unless in an Oath or
Curse, or other Vain ways of Speaking. Not unlike to those in the Prophet,
their words have been Stout against God; in that they have said it is in vain
to serve God; and what profit is it to keep his Ordinances? Mal. 3.14.

Such Spots as These, are to every ones Eye of a deeper Stain than Those of
Good Men are.

But then the Pollution of some of These, who are of the worse sort of Wicked
Men, are more Secret than those I have mentioned are. Secret indeed, in respect
of Men; but altogether open to the Eyes of God.

Such is theirs, who will use a plausible Deportment that they may the more
securely carry on, and act the worst Designs. Sometimes that their fair Demeanor
to some may be as Bribes to make them overlook their Enormities to Others.
Sometimes that they may be the least suspected by those, whom they intend most
Mischief unto. Of These the Psalmist may seem to Speak; in saying, the Words of
their Mouths are smoother than Butter, having War in their Hearts: Their Words
are softer than Oil, yet be they drawn Swords. They Bless with their Mouth, but
Curse inwardly. Such as These our Savior means, when he bids his Disciples to
beware of Those who come in Sheeps Clothing; but inwardly are Ravening Wolves.

If they shall use Pretenses of Religion, while they do such things, they are
the more deformed by appearing like Christians. As we justly account an Ape the
more ugly for being like a Man, the handsomest of Creatures, and not being One.

And if they shall for Religions Sake do these things; Contrive the Ruin of a
Nation; Delight in Blood; Trample upon Laws, Government, and Governors; Stifle
the Dictates of Nature; and, in a Word, turn out all Religion, that they may
introduce That which they miscal Christianity, (for This, sure, is quite of
another Spirit, and instructs us in the Exercise of Righteousness and Goodness;
Kindness and Mercy,) I say, if for Religions Sake, They shall do these Things,
so Black is their Spot, that we have very good reason to say, it is not the
Spot of Gods Children.

A Spot it is of the worst sort of Deformity: Since it does, in a manner, cast
a Blot upon the pure, and peaceable Religion of Christ; and renders it, in the
Eye of those, who are without the Pale of the Church, and who value the
Goodness of Religion rather from the Practice of its Professors, than from the
Precepts which it gives; I say, it renders it in the Eye of Those to be Vile
and Odious. For, how secretly soever such actings are carried on and
maintained, they, for the most part, are found out at last; and Gods Providence
does in an especial manner engage itself for the Detecting them; But yet though
they be justly punished, in being laid Open, and Condemned before Men, yet the
Enemies of Christianity look not so much on the Justice of their Punishment who
were the Actors, as on the Religion which they professed; and so, that Holy
Name is Blasphemed, by which they were called.

I must confess, that Wickedness when it walks bare Faced, and has an Whores
Forehead, is loathsome, as for its inseparable Stains, so for its Accessional
Impudence. But there is the like Difference between the Sins I am now speaking
of, and those which to Men are more Visible, as there is between a Rock in the
Sea, which appears above Water, and That which lies under it. They are both
dangerous; and if Tempests arise, the Sailers may suffer Shipwreck on the One,
as well as on the Other: But in a Calm Sea, that which is seen may be avoided;
when upon the Other, while no Danger is feared the Vessel may Split.


Theoph. Such Deformity do These Sins include, that they need not an
over-Discerning Eye to tell us what Persons they are to whom they belong. But,
Eubulus, you were saying, that of Wicked Men, some were less Wicked. Pray, who
are they? And what their Sins?


Eubul. They may be such as in their Converse with Men are sometimes not much to
be found fault with. But their Sins may be understood from the Consideration of
these following Things. 1. The Internal Obedience, and Cleanness of Heart,
which the Precepts of Jesus Christ require. 2. The Excellent Ends for which all
the Actions of Men are commanded to be done. 3. Those many particular
Obligations which may lie upon them, for the being Righteous and Holy Persons.


First, then, though the outward Deportment be not Incommendable, yet if
Internal Obedience, and Cleanness of Heart, be wanting, the Sins are those of a
wicked Man.

It was the Character of the Covenant which God made with Men under the Gospel;
to wit, I will put my Law in their inward Parts, and Write it in their Hearts,
Jer. 31.33. And therefore what ever good Action they do outwardly, if they
approve not of it in their Hearts; if they look upon their Civility and
Honesty, their Charity and Mercy, and other such like Virtues, to be a Debt due
to Custom; and do within their own Hearts esteem it their Slavery; and could
wish themselves rid of it, as of an Unhappiness; secretly grudging at those
things, which yet they would have others Praise them for; their Sins are much
different from those of good Men.

For they who are in reality good Men, are to have their outward Actions to be
the Expressions of inward Integrity; and in no respect to be contrary unto it.
And unless the Soul shall cast a Beauty upon their External Practice, however
it may seem fair among Men, who cannot search and know the Heart, yet in the
Sight of God there will be such Pollution, as none that belong unto Him are
stained with.

And so it will be, if (in the Second Place,) their Actions be not designed to
the Excellent Ends the Gospel speaks of.

Nothing should be done by a Man, but what is intended to Gods Glory. Whether
ye Eat or Drink, or whatever you do, says the Apostle, do all to the Glory of
God. And every thing also, which Men professing Christianity are to do, is to
be done with an Eye to the Recompense of Reward; which is the Salvation of
their Souls. And indeed whatever is to be done for the Glory of God, must be
done for their Eternal Happiness also; since the Glory of God is in nothing
more seen than in the Everlasting welfare of Men.

Now if God and his Glory be not in all their Thoughts; if some Under-Ends be
the Chief Design of their Actions; and they can look no higher than to the
obtaining something in this World; if Praise or Profit, or Pleasure be the
Vltimate of their Endeavors and Aims; if the Life and Immortality, which by
our Lord are brought to Light, be little accounted of, and not permitted to
have any share in what they do, their Sins have a Pollution beyond what Good
Men's have.

I do not say, that even Religious Men must necessarily, with an Actual
Intention, in every the least Action, have respect to Gods Glory, and their own
Eternal Welfare. The Imperfection of their Nature; the many Circumstances they
may be in; and the quickness which is requisite to many of their Actions, will
not permit this. But an Habitual Intention for Gods Glory, and their own
Happiness after this Life is done, is absolutely necessary. And where this is
wholly wanting; where Temporal concerns are the only things that engage the
Thoughts; where the good Actions that they do are steered only by Earthly
Inducements; how little Discommendable, yea, or how much Commendable soever
these Actions may seem to be, they are deeply polluted in the Judgment that God
will make of them; and are peculiar to none but the worse Sort of Men.

Thirdly, If the many particular Obligations which are laid upon them be not
looked into: If they are no more taken notice of than if they belonged not at
all unto them: If the Knowledge which they have, and the greater Capacities
with which they are endowed, have no better Effect than the Ignorance, and weak
Abilities of the meaner sort: If signal Mercies received make no Impressions of
Gratitude upon them: If peculiar Motions, and strong Inclinations from God's
Holy Spirit, to such and such Duties, be not complied with; Though all their
Behavior in the sight of Men be fair and innocent, yet I cannot say that their
Spot is the Spot of God's Children.

For although we are apt to think, that Sin consists only in doing those
Unrighteous Deeds, which would be discernably bad in every one; yet I suppose
that those Actions which would save some Men of a Low Rank and Mean Capacities,
would not be acceptable unto God in some other Men, were they not improved, in
good sort, according to those Measures of Knowledge and Abilities which God
has given them. And, in the way of Life, the same fairness of Converse shall
not be alike innocent to many: But these shall be defective and unrewardable in
the sight of Him who is the Judge of the Earth, and will judge Righteous
Judgment, while the others shall be commendable and accepted.

I may give you this familiar Instance. If some Real Objects of Charity shall
offer themselves unto Two Men; the One of a Mean Estate, and the Other of a
very Great One; and these Two, in the constant Tenor of their Lives, should do
thus; viz. The Meaner according to his Abilities supply the Indigences of the
Miserable; the Other give also, not according to his Abundance, but just as the
Meaner Person has done; you would, Theophilus, pronounce the former to be
charitable and good, but not so the later. Just so, greater Capacities and
Endowments; larger Assistances, especial Favors, and peculiar Engagements to
higher Degrees of Duty, will be looked upon by the All-wise God, to be, as it
were, a larger Spiritual Estate which such or such a Man possesses. If then
with all this he shall do no more than just so much as ordinary Men, whose
Abilities are much less, Engagements much fewer, and Mercies less signal; as
you rightly condemned the Uncharitable Rich Man in those Instances which were
open to your view, so we shall not think amiss, if we conceive that the Just
God will not be pleased with This Man, who, in his Eye that sees the Heart,
stands not in unlike Circumstances with the Other. For to whomsoever much is
given, of him shall much be required; and we have no reason to doubt but He,
who has received much, and returns but little, will be hardly more, if at all
more, excusable, than He who has received little, and returns nothing.

Thus may it be in the ordinary seeming innocent Lives and Converse of Men
amongst one another. A Pollution there may be, when yet we cannot discern it,
and when we are bound to judge according to the best appearance; it being no
more than Justice, and ordinary Charity to interpret things well, whenever we
see nothing of ill.

And from what has been said, Theophilus, the Case, in those things, which are
acknowledged by all to be Sins, will be Evident.

That Sin may be a Pardonable Sin in one Man, when the very same to the Sight
and Opinion of Men, will not be so in another. If the Man has had close and
Earnest Warnings of his Conscience before; if there has been, as it were, a
Voice behind him, saying, This is the way walk in it; if the Motions of God's
Spirit have more vigorously acted his Soul; if his Mercies have pointed
directly to what he ought to do: And notwithstanding all these things, (which
are discernable only to God and himself,) he shall commit the Sin; The Sin,
though the same in the common repute of Men, with what another commits,
shall yet be a much deeper Stain to This Man, than to That it would have been.


Theoph. But, Eubulus, there are very heinous Sins of some more than ordinary
Good Men, registered in Sacred Scripture: As the Adultery and Murder committed
by David: The Denial of Christ by Peter; as also the grievous Cursing and
Swearing, which he, together with that his Crime, was guilty of. I pray you,
what are we to think of these Sins? and what would you reply to those unhappy
Inferences, which too many Men are apt to make therefrom? As for Example, they
will say;

First, That none of the Sins which they indulge themselves in, are so great as
David's and Peter's were; and so they have reason to be confident, that their
own Sins are not the Sins of wicked Men.

Secondly, That the same Sins, in full as aggravating Circumstances in God's
Children as in others, will yet not be looked upon as so great Pollution in
them, as in those others; and this, merely upon the account that they are his
Children. For Numb. 23.21. God has not beheld Iniquity in Jacob; neither has
he seen Perverseness in Israel. And so, if they can persuade themselves that
they are the Children of God, (which many times they easily can do,) how great
soever their Sins already be, or, at any time hereafter, shall be, yet their
Spot, they will think, will not be more than the Spot of good Men.


Eubul. It is observed of some, that they are more skilful in the Failings of
their Governors, than in their Virtues, or in their own Obedience. And after
the same manner may we say of these: They are better versed in the Faults of
good Men in Holy Writ, than in their Virtues and Graces; or in that Obedience
which themselves owe unto God.

In relation therefore to those Sins of good Men, and also the ill Inferences
which these Men are apt to make from them, we say, Theophilus,

1. That those Sins, though great they were, were yet rather single Acts than
Habits of Sin. They were not approved of, nor contrived for, every day of their
Lives; nor did they last for Years.

Now, single Acts are rightly esteemed not to carry so much Pollution as Habits
do: Because an Habit is acquired by Actions often repeated; and so includes
the Defilements of many single Acts put together.

If it shall be said, that the single Acts of some heinous Sins may possibly
carry a stain with them as great as some Habits of lesser Sins; and that the
Sins of David and Peter were gravioris Notae, of a deeper Dye; it cannot yet
but be granted, that a single Act of a grievous Sin is less polluting than the
Habit of the same Sin.

But then, Secondly, Those Sins, though very great they were, had Repentance
following them, (...) was truly great.

Look we upon David, and we shall find him grieving in earnest, and heartily
affected with his Misdeeds: Psalm. 38.2. Thine Arrows stick fast in me, and
thine Hand presses me sore; There is no soundness in my Flesh by reason of
thine Anger, neither is there any rest in my Bones because of my Sin. For mine
Iniquities are gone over mine Head; as an heavy Burden they are too heavy for
me. I am feeble and sore broken, I have roared by reason of the Disquietness of
mine Heart. And in Psalm. 51. (which Psalm he made, (as the Title has it,) when
Nathan the Prophet came unto him, after he had gone in to Bathsheba,) he mourns
thus: Wash me thoroughly from mine Iniquity, and cleanse me from my Sin: For I
acknowledge mine Iniquity, and my Sin is ever before me. Deliver me from
Blood-guiltiness, O Lord: Thou desire not Sacrifice, else would I give it:
The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit; a broken and contrite Heart, O God,
thou will not despise. I have the more largely spoken David's words, that you
may thereby see how great his Grief was; how earnest his Prayers for pardon;
and how deep an Anxiety had seized him, lest God's Favor should for ever have
been withheld from him.

Nor was St. Peter's Sin without a remarkable Repentance. It is said, Matthew.
26.75. Peter remembered the words of Jesus, who said unto him, Before the Cock
crow, thou shall deny me thrice: And he went out, and WEPT BITTERLY. It was not
a light grief, and a Tear or two that were quickly dried up; but a Bitter
Weeping; which words certainly do denote a very great and deep Sorrow.

Now those that think so well of their own Sins, from the thoughts of David's
and Peter's Sins being so much greater than theirs; are they as ready to
consider these good Men's Repentance? Do they grieve for their own, as these did
for theirs? Is the Burden of them heavy? Are they earnest in the begging pardon
for them? If not, the greatness of some good Men's Sins in Holy Scripture, will
be a mean Argument for the concluding their own not to be the Deformities of
wicked Men.

I may truly say, that the great Sins of David and Peter, if considered with
their Repentance, are much less than those Sins, which in themselves are not so
great, without Repentance. And so, there is small reason for any Person, from
the Failures of these Holy Men, to infer his own Spots to be none other than
those of Gods Children.

Thirdly, There are more Ends than one, for which God has caused those Sins of
his Children to be registered in Sacred Story.

I cannot say but one End might be, that those who, in the like manner, have
grievously fallen, may, through the Exercise of a like Repentance, have hope
that they also shall not be refused. Thus Romans 15.4. What things were written
afore-time, were written for our Learning; that we through Comfort of the
Scripture might have hope.

But then, a no less End is this; viz.

That those who now live, and those who shall live in the Generations to come,
may, from the Falls of others, take the more heed that they fall not also. And
if they shall fall, they may well think, that their case is not so good;
because they have had such warning before, and yet have not been prevailed upon
by it, for the being more careful.

And then yet further; Another End, altogether as great as the other Two, why
the Sins of good Men have been recorded in Scripture, is this; to wit,

The showing how God hates Sin even in those whom he loves; and how he will
punish it, not only in their Persons while they live, but in their Names and
Memories when they are dead, even to the End of the World.

Some other things, besides those that have been well pleasing unto God, (as
Mary's Ointment was unto Christ,) shall wheresoever the Gospel is Preached
throughout the World, be spoken of also for a Memorial. To make it known that
Sins of a deep Die are in his Children altogether as Odious to his Purity and
Holiness, as their Pious Actions are acceptable to his Love and Goodness.

And now, who is it that can have favorable Thoughts of Sin, when God has put
so many Examples in Holy Writ, as Warnings against Sin, on purpose that we
should have the more care to avoid it? Who is it that may flatter himself in
his Iniquities, who shall rightly consider, how God punishes the Memory of his
own Children, and sets a Mark of Disgrace upon them, which shall last till
Heaven and Earth do pass away?

He surely very slightly, or very partially, looks into the Bible, who from the
Sins of Good Men there, can encourage himself in his own Sin; and think that
its Pollution is small to Him, when it has laid such a Blot upon their Names,
as must not, as cannot, be rased out by any. Rather let him Hear, and Fear, and
do himself, neither in the same, nor any other kind, so wickedly: As knowing,
that though none need now to Fear that their Misdeeds shall be Registered in
Books, which shall be of equal Authority with, and shall last as long as, the
Bible, (for God therein has wholly declared his will; and so, Divine Writings
are not further to be expected,) yet the All-powerful, and infinitely just Lord
has other ways of punishing them; and of manifesting the Pollution of their
Sin, both to themselves and others, to be very great; how small soever they at
present think it.

But Fourthly, Theophilus, we may truly affirm that God will not esteem the
Sins of his Children, which are in themselves as great as, and the same with,
the Sins of Others, to be therefore the less, because they are committed by
those who are his Children.

That is, if any who are his, shall be unjust in their Actions; False in these
Words, Intemperate, Unchaste, or any other ways vicious; their Injustice,
Falseness, Intemperance, Unchastity, and whatever other Crimes they shall
commit, shall be esteemed as carrying the same Pollution in them, which the
same Sins in others do. For no Relation that a Man can stand in unto God, can
make Injustice to become Righteousness; Falseness to become Truth; Intemperance
Moderation; and Uncleanness Purity, And the Reason is; Because the Relation
which they have unto God as Children, lies chiefly in an Internal Likeness
unto him; and a partaking of the Divine Nature in its Imitable Perfections. Now
These consist in a Spiritual Remoteness from Sin, and an hatred of it; as being
themselves contrary unto it. And therefore they can in no respect be thought to
Extenuate, much less to cast a Beauty upon That, unto which they are so
extremely opposite.

Gods not beholding Iniquity in Jacob; and his not seeing perverseness in
Israel, can never be rightly interpreted of their Sins being overlooked, or not
taken notice of by him, upon the mere account that they were his Children. For
how grievously has God complained of them? I have seen (says he to Moses,)
this People, and behold it is a Stiff-Necked People; now therefore let me
alone, that my Wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them; and
I will make of Thee a great Nation. And how often has he threatened, and
severely punished their Iniquities? Surely Balaam himself understood not Those
his own words, as These Men are too forward to do. For had he so done, why
should he have Counseled Balack. That the Israelites by the Midianitish Woman
should be allured to Trespass against the Lord, that thereby they might be
excluded from his Favor.

Iniquity therefore in Jacob, and Perverseness in Israel, are not to be
understood of their own Sins, against either God or Men; but of the Iniquity
and Perverseness of Others against Them. Which thing the next Verse, but one,
does very well show: Where the very same Preposition in (which the Margin
retains,) with Relation to the very same Words, Jacob, and Israel, is rendered
against. Surely there is no Enchantments (in) against Jacob; nor Divination
(in) against Israel, Numb. 23.23.

And Gods not Seeing, and not Beholding denote his not approving, or not
enduring it to be. So that the Sense of the Words is; not that he will not see
Iniquity and Perverseness in Them, if they shall be Guilty; but that he will
not suffer Iniquity and Perverseness against Them, if they shall be Innocent.

Nay, so far will the Relation of being Children unto God, be from lessening
the Pollution of any Heinous Sin, that it will be a very great Aggravation, and
Heightning of it; and will render it the more displeasing unto Him.

That Those who have given up their Names unto Christ; who have seen the Beauty
of Holiness; who have tasted of the good Word of God, and have been washed and
cleansed, should commit Sin; lose their first Love; fall away; and wallow in
the Mire again; how Odious in the Sight of God will it be! These, though they
should be the Signet on his Right Hand, He, without their unfeigned Sorrow and
Repentance, would pluck them thence; as he spoke of Coniah, Jerem. 22.24. God
is no Respecter of Persons; But as in every Nation He that fears Him, and
works Righteousness, is accepted with him; so He that works Wickedness is
rejected by him. As he is Judge of all the Earth, he will do right; and by no
means will clear the Guilty.

He may sooner put off the Title of Father to such or such an One, than he can
lay aside the Name of Holy and Just. His being a Father to any Man, is with
Relation to his Obedience, which is mutable, and may be withheld: And if
Obedience shall be wholly withheld, the Man cease to be his Child; and God is
no longer unto him a Father, in a Sense that betokens Love and Delight in
him; But He who is most contrary unto God, puts on that Relation: Ye are of
your Father the Devil; says our Savior.

But then Holiness and Justice are Essential unto God; and cannot by any
Condition or Carriage of Men be parted with. And so, by These, be Wickedness
and Pollution in what Persons soever they will, He rightly will discern, and
punish them.

God indeed is said to Love with an Everlasting Lvve; Jer. 31.3. Which yet is
not so to be understood, as if he were a fond Father, that could not spy the
Faults of his Children; or would think them lighter or less than they are; but
He is said to Love Everlastingly, in that he will never fail Those that
Obedientially seek unto, and depend upon him; and will always afford sufficient
means for their abiding in his Love; as well as, at the last, infinitely Reward
them for Loving and Obeying him.

And He is pleased also to say, he Loves with an Everlasting Love, in
opposition to those Earthly Parents, who sometimes have no natural Affection,
and so do not Love; and sometimes may want means and abilities to express their
Love. Thus when my Father and Mother forsake me, (i. e. either for want of Will
do not love me, or for want of Power cannot show it as they would,) the Lord
takes me up.

But yet if his Child shall grow disobedient, requiting his Love with
Presumption, and carrying it quite otherwise than a dutiful Child ought to do;
Gods Eyes are open to the Faults of such his Son, and he will use his Rod of
Correction toward him.

Yea, if his Son shall grow stubborn and disobedient; Shall not hearken unto
his Voice, but be a Drunkard or a Glutton, (as it is in Deuteronomy. 21.20.) or any
other way profane and dissolute, He will cast him off, and disinherit him; and
it will not be the failing of his Love, but the Expression of his Justice and
Holiness so to do.

Agreeable hereunto is that of Ezekiel, Chap. 18.24. When the Righteous turns
away from his Righteousness, and commits Iniquity, and does according to all
the Abominations which the wicked Man does, shall he live? All his
Righteousness which he has done shall not be remembered; in the Trespasses that
he has trespassed, and in the Sin that he has sinned shall he die. And in
this his dealing, God appealeth to the House of Israel, if his way be not equal.

And thus, Theophilus, I have considered the Sins of good Men in Holy
Scripture, together with the ill Inferences which some Men are apt to make from
them.

They look not upon them as the Sins of good Men, who take not the Repentance
together with the Sins. And they are much mistaken, who think that those Sins
are there mentioned only to show how far God's Children may fall; and do not
consider them rather as Punishments to their Names, who thus offended God; and
as greater Cautions to us, that we, from their Falls, may stand the surer.

Yea, They deal treacherously with themselves, who, from the Sins of God's
Children in Holy Scripture, will flatter and encourage themselves in their own.

And they most grossly and dangerously err, who, (thinking that God will esteem
the Sins of his Children, which are the same with those of others, to be less
in them, merely because they bear the Name of his Children,) will strongly
imagine themselves to be Gods Children, that so their Sins (though great they
be, and are like never by true Repentance to be less,) may not be the Spots of
wicked Men. These much wrong the Righteousness and Purity of God. These make
Faith in Christ, which works by Love, to be the spurious Issue of their
Fancy; and by thus untowardly thinking their Sins to be the Sins of God's
Children, they the more surely make them the Sins of the worst sort of wicked
Men.


Theoph. Your Discourse, Eubulus, has been very satisfactory unto me. I yet
could wish that some others had with me been partakers of it; because, I think,
they thence might have learned to make a better Judgment of their Spiritual
State, than now they seem to do.


Eubul. Would Men from such things as these, deal impartially with themselves,
some dangerous Mistakes, which they are willing enough to foster, might be
corrected.

And what, Theophilus, if they should seriously ask themselves these, or such
like Questions? viz. Are we contented, and well enough pleased with our
Original Sin, and the Imperfection of our Nature? Are we at no time affected
with sorrow at it, as being our Sin? and do we never with a relenting Eye
account it our Unhappiness, as being our Punishment? Can we sit idle under it,
and not endeavor to correct it, by purging our Understandings of their
Ignorance, our Wills of their Pravity, and our Affections of their Corruption?
Does the sense of it never incline us to Humility? And are we never thereby
excited to pity others, who are thus polluted and unhappy as well as we? Or yet
worse than so: Do we increase the Defilements of our Nature, and studiously
promote and stir up our vile Affections, which otherwise would have been more
quiet?

And then for Outward Actions. Are our Lives almost wholly lived out in Sin?
Can we proceed from one Wickedness to another; and do Evil with both Hands
earnestly? Or else, if outward Shame hinder us from Evil Practices openly, and
in the Sight of this Sun, do we Clandestinely Act them? Or is our behavior
Plausible and Civil, merely that we may the more surely, and with less
Suspicion, carry on Evil Actions and Designs?

Or, if there be none of these outwardly notorious bad Actions, nor secretly
Wicked Designs, yet are the chief Ends nothing looked unto, in what we do? Is
the Glory of God justled out by the Under-Aims of Earthly Profits or Pleasures?
And does the Salvation of our Souls, through Unbelief or Carelessness, weigh
little or nothing with us, in respect of Advantage, or Reputation among Men?

Have the particular Obligations, by Almighty God laid upon us, not been
minded, or not taken notice of by us to any good effect? Have our greater
Knowledge and Abilities been improved to no higher Services, than the Ignorance
and Weakness of the meaner Sort have been? Have the stronger Motions from Gods
Holy Spirit fallen Fruitless upon us? And those Suggestions, which, at some
times, we in a more than ordinary manner have had, and in which the Hand of God
has peculiarly been, have they been refused, and not complied with? In the
Sins which we have committed, has there been no Unfeigned Sorrow? No
Indignation at ourselves for making such ill returns to so Gracious a God, and
Father? Have our Devotions been none, or very Faint and Cold ones after our
falling into Sin? Have our former Faults begot in us no Resolutions of not
Sinning knowingly and Presumptuously for the time to come? Do we, when tempted
to commit a Sin, not only yield to it, but continue in it? Are we never after
it more earnest persuers of that which is Good? And do the Frailty and Weakness
of our Natures, and the Sins, which, while we are in the Body, we shall never
be free from, at no time prompt us to long for that Happy Day, when we in
Heaven shall do Gods Will, without Carefulness, Drowsiness, and Imperfection?
If, Theophilus, they should thus question themselves, and should find it no
otherwise with them than what might be reducible to some or more of the
particulars now mentioned, they might make a Judgment, whether their Sins are
such, as belong to the Worse, or less Evil Sort of Wicked Men; but would have
no reason to think them only the Failures of Good Men.


Theoph. Indeed, Eubulus, should Men thus be Judges of their own Misdeeds, they
would not be more, than what they well might. Some of their Sins, possibly,
which cannot so well bear the being looked into, least their Pollution and
Deformity should be discovered, might be apt to say, ye take too much upon you;
and who made you Rulers and Judges over us? But certainly Men have a Power over
their own Doings; and may search their own Hearts; and Examine the Rise, and
Progress, and Design of their own Actings; and need not fear that any should
say unto them, Why do ye thus?


Eubul. And this they may the rather do, Theophilus. because they are the
better able, in many respects, to make a Judgment of their own Sins, than other
Men are. For they can see those things in their own Breasts, which are hid from
Men's Eyes abroad: And, it may be, they can also conceive those deep Deceits
there, which they cannot by their Words so well express, and give account of to
others. Well, surely, it would be, that in those things, which they are unknown
in unto Others, they should not be unknown to Themselves.


Theoph. It is, I confess, not the least part of Learning for Men to know
Themselves. The being skilled in the works of Nature, and in the Arts and
Sciences. The seeing into future Times; and understanding all Mysteries, and
all Knowledge, would be of small avail with them, without the Knowledge of
their own Sins. For where these are not known, there is very small hope that a
Cure and Amendment will be wrought. And what would it profit a Man, to be
otherwise, in all respects, accomplished, and yet to go out of the World with
his Sins unknown, and so not repented of?


Eubul. I am persuaded, Theophilus, that the great reason of so many Men's
continuing in their Sins, is because they are not willing to search into them.
Let them be thoroughly looked into, and the Cover taken off from their
Deformity, and they will find few that will not loath them.

When David had considered his ways, i. e. had found the Spots and Defilements
which his Sins carried in them, he turned his Feet to Gods Testimonies. He made
have and delayed not to keep his Commandments. And would Men generally do as He
did, I have no cause to doubt, but, through Gods Blessing, there would be the
same good Issue to Them, as to Him there was. Nay, I am sure, if Pollution and
Deformity will Create a Loathing, they would perfectly Loath the Disobedience
they have so long Indulged.


Theoph. Happy it would be, if Men, from the Motives of Fear or Shame, would
cease to be Disobedient; but, surely, the Defilement and Deformity which Sin
casts upon them, should prevail with them most. And where they, from this
Consideration chiefly, shall abstain from Iniquity, they will be, if I may so
speak, the more generously Innocent.


Eubul. They, by so doing, will turn those Spots that marked them as wicked
Men, into the Spots of God's Children. And, at the last, when their Bodies
shall be raised Spiritual and Incorruptible, they will leave even these Spots
also behind them. Ascending up into the Heavenly Jerusalem, where nothing shall
in any wise enter that defiles; and where they will be for ever arrayed in
fine Linen clean and white, the Righteousness of the Saints.

To which Heavenly Purity, Theophilus, and Inheritance Undefiled, GOD, of his
infinite Mercy, bring You, and Me, and Them, through the Blood of Cleansing;
even that of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST.


FINIS.
An Advertisement of Books sold by Joseph Watts at the Angel in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
SPeed's Maps, Folio. Cowley's Poems complete, Folio. The Confession, Prayers
and Meditations of Lieutenant John Stern and George Borosky, Published by Dr.
Burnet and Dr. Horneck, Folio. The Trials of Thomas Walcot, William Hone,
William Lord Russel, John Rouse and William Blagg for High ^eason, Folio. That
the Bishops may, and ought to Vote in Cases of Blood, Folio. Pierce of Gods
Decrees, especially of Reprobation, Quarto. Perinchief against Toleration,
Quarto. Parson's Sermon at the Funeral of the Earl of Rochester, Quarto. Dr.
Jane's Sermon before the Commons, Quarto. Cave's Sermon the 30th of January,
Quarto. Beverley's Disquisition upon Tithes, wherein the whole Case is
impartially stated and resolved, Quarto. Stubb's Justification of the Dutch
War, both Parts, Quarto. Horneck's Best Exercise, Octavo. Lassell's Voyage
through Italy, Octavo. Smyth's Unequality of Natural Time, with its Reason and
Causes: With a Table of the true Equation of Natural Days, Octavo. Reformed
Devotions in Meditations, Hymns and Petitions for every Day in the Week, and
every Holiday in the Year, in two Parts, the second Edition. At which place all
Persons may have most sorts of Acts of Parliament, Proclamations, Declarations,
Orders of King and Council, Speeches in Parliament, etc. Pamphlets of all
sorts, viz. Pamphlets relating to the State, Sermons, Controversies, Tracts of
Divinity, and other Miscellaneous Tracts: Also Trials, Narratives and Gazettes.
FINIS.

