I Appoint Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, to Print this Information,
According to the Order of the HOUSE of COMMONS; And that no other Person
presume to Print the same.

November. 10th. 1680. Wi WILLIAMS, Speaker.

THE INFORMATION OF Stephen Dugdale, GENT.

Delivered at the BAR of the HOUSE of COMMONS, Monday the First day of
November* In the Year of our Lord 1680.

Perused and Signed to be Printed, according to the Order of the House of
Commons, By me WILLIAM WILLIAMS, Speaker.

^DIEV^ET^MON^DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
C2 R
royal blazon or coat of arms

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1680.

THE INFORMATION Given at the BAR of the Honorable the House of Commons, BY
Mr. Stephen Dugdale, On the 30th day of October, Anno Dom. 1680. viz.
THAT about two or three and twenty years since, I was brought over from the
Church of England to the Church of Rome, by one Mr. Knight a Priest, continuing
some years under his care, till at length he the said Mr. Knight, through
infirmity of body, not being able to Officiate his Priestly Function, he
delivered me to the care of one Francis Evers a Jesuit, who did not only take
care to instruct me in matters relating to a future State, as to a future
State, but in all things as far as he could in temporal things. Likewise he the
said Mr. Evers laid an injunction upon me to visit him every day once, if I was
^t home: and so by such means we grew to such an intimacy, that scarcely any
thing that the one knew, but the other was privy to it. So that sometimes as we
were talking of affairs of State, and the Revolutions of Governments, we came
to discourse of our own. And he the said Evers often has told me, that it
would not be long before we might expect good times, for the Duke of York
having declared himself to be a Roman Catholic, had given a good assurance to
the Pope; besides he was a Prince of that resolution and worth, that if ever he
made any engagement, he would never revoke it, particularly in so high a
Concern as this, where his Soul lies at stake. So that never more Hopes than
now of dispersing the dark Clouds of Heresy. He has not only engaged himself
solemnly to us for the Establishing of Religion, but that he would restore Us
to all our Church Lands, and other Privileges taken from the Church formerly.
And this I had not from Mr. Evers alone, but from several private Gentlemen,
besides Priests. For my great intimacy with Mr. Evers did get me great
acquaintance with most of the Gentry of our Religion. So by that means I came
with several of them to their private Meetings, where it had been debated, what
the Duke of York's pleasure was, that as he had given them an Assurance of his
Part, they should not be negligent to do theirs. And that they should be in all
readiness with all necessaries when the King should dye, to assist the Duke
against the Protestants. For they must expect some opposition from the
Protestant Party: but good Care beforehand might prevent a great deal of
Mischief, and that it was thought fit that every Landlord amongst his Tenants
and Servants have some twenty, some thirty, some forty Catholics, and the
Priest to instruct them, That they should be ready at an hours warning, and
this was the course resolved upon. And that the said Evers told me, that there
had been great care taken for an honest Gentleman to be Confessor to the Duke
of York, and they had found one, a friend to the said Evers, who was a worthy
honest Gentleman; one Mr. Moumford, otherwise called Beddingfeild. He was
presented to the Duke sometime before the Dutch Wars, and was with the Duke,
being his Ghostly Father, in the Dutch Wars on Shipbbard. Mr. Evers has showed
me Letters from him dated from on Shipboard, commending the Duke, how good and
zealous he was in the Roman Catholic Religion: he thought him to be the
hopefullest and zealousest Prince in the whole Universe. I saw in one of those
Letters from on Shipboard to Mr. Evers, that he the said Beddingfeild had given
the Duke the blessed Host twice, in order for the Engaging himself with the
Enemy. That in the year 1677. Mr. Evers and I being in discourse, Mr. Evers
told me, There were great fears and jealousies, that the King would outlive the
Duke of York, and then all our hopes were at an end. But to prevent that, he
told me, that Cardinal Howard had sent a Letter, that they had Excommunicated
the King as an Heretic, that he was deposed from being King, and that any One
that killed him might merit by it. That he maintained a Damnable Heretical
Doctrine; and so consequently was an Enemy of Christ. At this time I had all
the Letters directed to me for the carrying on this Plot, which were for Mr.
Evers, some of which I opened and read, which all tended to lay hold of this
Opportunity; for if they missed this Point, they must never look to have the
like again for the Establishing of their Religion. And about the Month of July
or August 1677. soon after I was by Mr. Evers admitted into the secret of the
Design for the Romish Government, there came one Carrington to Tixall, whom the
Jesuits thereabouts employed as a Messenger of Trust in their Business. He
brought a Letter to Mr. Evers from Mr. Vavasor, who was then at Wolverhampton
or Boscobell, and meeting me in the Hall, desired me to give it to Mr. Evers,
which I presently did. The Letter from Mr. Vavasor did enclose in it several
others, as one from John Grove in London, who in a part of the sheet of Paper
writ some News in short; but underneath his signing Mr. William Harcourt began
a long Account, how he lately had received the two enclosed Letters, one of
them from St. Omers, which was signed by Monfort, Warner, and Peter's, as I
remember, and four more whose names I remember not at all. And this Letter did
refer to another Letter from Paris, to the three Parties first named, and the
same was signed from Paris by two names, whereof I think Clifford was one. This
Letter did contain the Opinion and Advice of those at Paris, upon a Letter
which it seems had been first writ from England to St. Omers, and from St.
Omers transmitted to them. The scope of which Advice was this, That by all
means care should be taken not to let any Arms appear, or any appear in Arms
till after the Death of the KING, because they had fully considered, that when
any sudden Death should befall the KING, it might be easily laid to the
Presbyterians, who had killed the late KING, and were still Enemies to the KING
and Government. Therefore they advised, that all ways should be taken to give
out and possess the People beforehand, that the Presbyterians were the only
Enemies, so that when the KING should be killed, those of the Church of ENGLAND
would presently be incensed, and take up Arms to Revenge it, and rather crave
the Aid of the Catholics, than be afraid of them: And therefore it was fit
they should be in a Readiness to make the first Alarm, and give out, that all
was done by the Presbyterians, and then by a little Assistance from abroad the
Work would easily be compassed. This was the substance of the Letter from
Paris: and they did further desire to have the same sent into England, with the
Opinion of those of St. Omers upon it; and those of St. Omers did in their
Letter much praise the Advice from Paris, adding nothing else of their own unto
it, besides Commendation, but passed unto other of smaller concerns, as, that
one Mr. Evers should call to one Gerard of Lancashire, and Gerald of Hilderson
for fifty pound due for teaching of their Children or Relations there, and such
like things.

Master Harcourt further added, that this Letter from Saint Omers being
directed unto him, he had Communicated it, as also that from Paris, unto Master
Bedingfield, and Master Ireland, and likewise to the Lord Arundell, Lord
Bellasis, Lord Stafford, and six or seven more whom I have forgot, by all whom
it was highly commended as good Advice, and that all should endeavor upon any
Differences in Parliament, or any other Disorders, still to give out, That it
was those Blood-sucking, King-killing Presbyterians, that were the Authors of
it.

That Master Evers did show them the said three Letters sent from Master
Harcourt, and then soon after, the same day, sent them by the same Messenger
Carrington, under a cover to Mistress Heveningham at Aston, to be shown to her
Husband, and to Sir James Symonds their Son-in-law, and to come back that night
with the same Letters, as he did; for that I did see Evers show them to the
present Lord Aston in the Parlour after Supper, his Lordship having been abroad
before, and he believes them to be the same Letters he had seen in the morning:
for the Messenger was then come back, and two of the Letters lay by on the
Table, and the third they were reading by the fire. And I do verily believe
they were the same Hands, and the same Letters, and the Messenger was there
detained all Night, and made much of by Me, according to Order; and in the
Morning Master Evers sent him back with an Answer to Master Vavasor, but Master
Evers kept still the Letters from Master Harcourt. And I did afterward hear
Master Evers and Master Gavan discourse together touching the said Letters, and
in Commendation of the said Advice, and they named several Friends in their
discourse that were engaged at Paris, whom I remember not. And Master Evers did
tell me, that the Letters from Saint Omers were brought by a particular
Gentleman into England, and from London to Master Vavasor by some Friend, which
I do the rather believe, for that I took notice, there was no Post-mark upon
the said Letter to Master Vavasor.

That about February 1677/8; there came a Letter to Mr. Evers, to acquaint him,
from a Friend of his in Paris, that he had received a Letter from Rome, which
did require the said Mr. Evers, together with the said Cotton's Company in
London, with Mr. Gavans, Mr. Peter's, and Mr Vavasor; And accordingly Mr. Evers
did come to London, and Mr. Peter's, but whether the other two were there I know
not. And when Mr. Evers came home, he told me, Mr. Ireland and Mr. Symonds
would be in the Country the latter end of June, for considering the best way
and means for carrying on the great Work, as it was called. And in July 1678. I
received a Letter from Mr. Evers, which came from Sir John Warners, to acquaint
him that all the Arms were ready that were bespoke, and wanted now nothing but
their Orders how they should be disposed of.

In August following a Meeting was appointed at the Lord Aston's House at
Tixall, where was present the Lord Aston himself, and my Lord Stafford, Sir
James Symonds, Mr. Dracott, Mr. Heveningham, Mr. Symonds, Mr. Ireland, Mr.
Vavasor, Mr. Gavan, Mr. Peter, Mr. Fitter, Mr. Fitzherbert, and Mr. Manley,
with several others; which Meeting was for carrying on the Plot, the Death of
the KING, with several other things relating thereto. At that time it was
Agreed, That the said Lord Aston and Sir James Symonds should go beyond the
Seas in the beginning of October, to dispose of the Arms that were provided,
but the Plot breaking out, their journey was stopped.

In September following my Lord Stafford sent for me several times into his
lodging Chamber at Tixall, where we had several private Conferences, amongst
which he told me, That Mr. Evers had commended me to him, that I was true and
trusty to any thing that I undertook, and that now was the time: That they
stood in need of such Men as I was: And that if I would I might make my self
happy; And if I would be one that would undertake to Kill the KING, he would
give me Five Hundred Pounds for a present supply; which I faithfully promised I
would do: And he told me I should go up to London with him in October, and
sometimes I should be at Standon, and sometimes in London; And should receive
Instructions from Mr. Harcourt, Mr. Ireland, and himself. And going to Mr.
Evers and acquainting him of it, he told me he knew of it before. I must renew
my Oath of Secrecy, which I did do: And the Fourteenth of October I received a
Letter from Mr. Harcourt for Mr. Evers; the Contents of which was, This night
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey is dispatched. Sir, said I to Mr. Evers, do you think
that this will not destroy all our Designs? Sir said I, if it do not destroy it
I will be hanged. Not so, said Evers, be not so passionate, not so, for he was
a man that did use to punish Lewd and Debaucht people; And it will rather be
cast on them, than any of us.

Another time I being in company with Mr. Evers, I pressed of him, to know the
reason why they should Kill Sir Edmundbury Godfrey? He told me, That the Duke
of YORK had sent a Message to Coleman, after he was taken, that he should not
Confess any thing: He returned the Duke an Answer back, That it had been his
misfortune, to declare all that he knew of the Matter to Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey; and he heard the said Sir Edmundbury Godfrey would come in a Witness
against him, in regard he had been so diligent in taking Examinations: The Duke
returned him Answer back again, That bid him be sure he did not Confess, and he
should not need to fear Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and that there should be care
taken, or to that purpose. I saw a Letter from Mr. Whitebread, directed to Mr.
Evers, but enclosed in Groves Letter to my self, wherein was, That there was
great hopes now, that things will go on well, if there be diligent care taken
in the Management of it, which can never be, if it be communicated to every
idle Fellow. Therefore be sure you do not trust any, but whom you have made
trial of: for if it should be discovered, we both ruin our Design, and all
concerned in it. For those persons which are for the People, no matter whether
Gentlemen or not, so they be cunning, desperate and trusty, which choice made
here I fear not: for there has been especial care taken that no opportunity
might be lost; and what persons you think fit, let me have your Answer next
Week. Send to Boscobel, and there will be a Messenger to bring them to me. I
need not say much more to you, in regard you are fully acquainted with the
business, and how it is to be carried on by Mr. Ireland. I hope you put the
Gentlemen in mind, for the getting what Money you can. Pray send me word by the
next, how my Lady is. I think to be at St. Omers next week.

Those Gentlemen that Subscribed for carrying on this design about us in
Staffordshire, were as follows, (viz.)

Sir James Symonds subscribed 1000l Mr. Heveningham 2000l Mr. Dracot 3000l Mr.
Gerrard 500l Mr. Howard 2000l And as Master Evers told me, my Lord Aston paid
One thousand pound for carrying on this Design to Master Bedingfield: and that
what was paid was returned toward the discharging the Accounts of Arms, which
were provided beyond the Seas, and every of the aforesaid Gentlemen was to have
a share, and Offices appointed. But in all our Meetings it was never agreed,
what their parts should be, and the Noted'st Gentlemen of all those was ever
Sir James Symonds, being as they said, a very active person, and one that would
be found a well qualified person. But as far as I ever understood, their places
were to be appointed here in London by some of those Great Ones whom I have
formerly mentioned; but there are several persons names, besides those I have
named, in that same List; and there are other persons that entered their Names
beyond Seas, for this Note was only for Master Evers private use. And to that
end Master Evers and Master Cotton were sent to Saint Omers about two or three
years ago, for the sake of other persons which were very fearful, and some
others paid their money to Master Bedingfield, Master Ireland, Master Harcourt:
and Master Evers has been appointed to receive. Acquittances for them; which
Acquittances I have seen come in Master Evers Letters, one to Sir James Symonds
at one time was for three hundred pound, which was noted in the Acquittance for
a Charitable Use, but it was for the carrying on of this Wicked Design, or
Master Evers told me not true. Most of the persons about Woolverhampton, Master
Gavan took care to receive of, and discharge them. I asked Master Peter how the
rest must be had, for these Gentlemen when they were all together, would be but
a few. He Answered me, I need not fear, there was care taken for that, and such
a care, that at one hours warning they would be ready. But as he said, they had
formerly told, that none, except the Gentlemen, were so much as to tell one
another, till the very time, of which I never enquired after that time, but I
perceived that a great Number were knowing, by their fear when I was taken.

Stephen Dugdale.

FINIS.

