OBSERVATIONS On the Mineral WATERS OF FRANCE, Made in the ROYAL ACADEMY Of the
SCIENCES,

By the Sieur DU CLOS, Physician in Ordinary to His Most Christian Majesty.

Now made English.

VERITAS IN PUTEO.


LONDON, Printed for Henry Faithorne, and John Kersey at the Rose in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1684.



THis Treatise being the Product of that Ingenious Assembly, the French Royal
Academy of the Sciences; and Curious both in Subject and Method, has been
thought not unworthy to speak the English Tongue.

It may be hoped, that Our Nation, which is so good Natured, as to imitate,
sometimes even the Follies of those our Neighbors, may hence be excited by a
Generous Emulation, to a like, if not greater Performance in this kind.

Some may object, what is Here done, arrives not to the Exactness of Certain
Knowledge; which tho granted, hinders not, but such a numerous Collection of
faithful Experiments may find a favorable acceptance.

The Subject Matter lies Dark and Deep, in the very Bowels of our Mother Earth;
and the Great Chain of Causes and Effects is perfectly known, only to that
All-Wise Being, whereon it depends.

OBSERVATIONS On the Mineral WATERS OF FRANCE, Made in the Royal ACADEMY Of the
SCIENCES.
THe Use of Mineral Waters having deservedly obtained a great Esteem and
Reputation for the Cure of many Chronical and Rebellious Diseases; some
Physicians have applied themselves to search out, by Experiment, their Nature
and Principles; thereby to judge how far they are proper for certain Diseases,
and the particular Constitution of the Diseased: While others have been
contented to refer themselves to common Opinions founded on the Observations of
some Effects.

This Matter being subordinate to Physical Speculation, the Royal Academy of
the Sciences have determined to employ themselves in the Enquiry of the
Qualities of those in this Kingdom, which are most considerable. And till
favorable occasion may offer to make Observations at their Springs, they have
caused these Waters to be brought from several Provinces, with much care, to
examine them in the usual Assemblies of the Naturalists of this Academy.

The Resolution to proceed herein has not been taken without much
consideration; the Reasons from the advantage of these Waters for the restoring
Health in many Diseases, being counterbalanced by those of the Difficulty in
knowing the Causes of their Proprieties, which depend particularly upon the
Mixtures of certain Substances which meet together in their Passages in the
Earth, or in the Cavities and Interstices of Rocks, which are various and many,
as Vapors, Juices, Salts, Earths, etc.

The greatest part of these substances, wherewith Mineral Waters are
impregnate^ cannot be discerned; and the different Mixture which is made of
several together, may constitute so great a Number of Kinds of Mineral Waters,
wholesome or unwholsom, that it is impossible to give any knowledge or
determination of them all. The Waters of the same Springs may, at diverse times,
receive considerable Alterations, either by new Mixtures, or by the Cessation
of those which have been formerly made.

It is not probable that these Waters, called Mineral, should be produced alone
by Mineral Vapors condensed, or that there is in the Earth Mines sufficiently
abounding to furnish continually Vapors capable, being condensed, to maintain
a perpetual Course of these Waters in Springs which dry not. But it may be that
some Mineral Vapors or Exhalations do mix with common Waters, which traverse
the Earths where they meet and are condensed, and that these Waters are
impregnated with their Qualities, and of some other Volatile Salts not
Concrete, elevated in these dry Exhalations or humid Vapors. The
distinguishing the Qualities of these Exhalations and Vapors is not easy; the
Diversity of their Principles is very great; the Rencounter of their Mixtures
is casual; the Conditions of the Places through which they pass, and wherein they
are retained, are not evident; and the Alterations which they produce in the
Waters wherein they insinuate themselves, are not always very manifest.

There is no less difficulty to know and distinguish the Juices which are mixed
with Mineral Waters, and particularly those which receive nothing of
Concretion, and which communicate to these Waters no sensible Quality; for
these liquid Juices, and wholly Volatile, pass in distillation with the
substance of the Water, and are no otherwise manifest than by Effects which
simple Water cannot produce.

The Juices, which are called Concrete, because they are Condensable and
Resoluble, leave Sediments which render them visible and palpable after the
Distillation or Evaporation of the Water wherewith they are mixed. But it is
difficult to discern their Kinds and Proprieties, if they have no resemblance
to those which are already known, or if they are many conjoined.

The Salts and Earths are the most sensible and most common substances which
mix with the Waters of Springs and Wells. There is almost no sort of Earth
which participates not of some Salt dissoluble in the Waters which pass through
it; and the Current of these Waters carries away always some fine Earth. This
is found the most manifest in these Waters: But the knowledge of these Salts and
Earths mixed in these Waters, is not always so distinct as to determine their
Species, and make a certain judgment of their Properties.

There are few Concrete Salts known to us: There may be many which have no
resemblance with Common Salt, Nitre, Alum or Vitriol, which are the four most
common Genders of Concrete Mineral Salts. Those whose disposition toward
Concretion is not yet completed, and which are yet in Embryo or their first
Seminal Being, are less distinguishable in that State: And those which are more
formed, and either already Concrete, or capable of Concretion, by some called
Enix, that is to say, born and come forth out of their Matrixes, have not
substances Simple and Homogeneous in each kind.

The Salt which goes under the Name of Common Salt, contains two different
Parts mixed together; whereof one is Condensed and Chrystalliz'd, through Cold in a
Humid, after Evaporation of one part of the Water, wherein this Salt has been
dissolved; the other is not Chrystalliz'd or Condensed, but by a total
Evaporation of the remaining Water. The former Part is most Sulphurous, and by
its Sulphureity mixeth with the Sulphurous Salt of Tartar Calcined and
Dissolved by the Moisture of the Air, or in common Water, without trouble and
without Coagulation: But the other Part contains an Acidity which Coagulates
in an instant the dissolved Salt of Tartar, and all other fixed Salts,
Sulphurous and Nitrous.

Vitriol, which shoots forth by the Humid Air on Sulphurous Marchasites, has
likewise a Succulent part, Condensable only by a total Evaporation of its
Aqueous Humidity, of a taste very Acrimonious, of a consistence Unctuous and
easily dissoluble by a humid Air, which Part is much different from that which
first is Condensed and Chrystallized through Cold in Water wherein this Vitriol
has been dissolved. These Chrystals are Pure Acid-Austere Vitriol, whence
there is precipitated much Mineral Earth by the mixture of Sulphurous and
Nitrous Salts, with which the other Part can mix without trouble, having not,
as the first, this Acidity whereon the Sulphurous Salts may act. The contrary
whereof happens to Common Salt, whereof the first Part is the most Sulphurous,
and the second most Acid.

The true Nitres are likewise composed of two different Saline Parts; the one
more Sulphurous, which is Chrystalliz'd through Cold in a Humid; the other, which
remains dissolved after this Chrystallization, and which is not condensed but
by a Heat strong enough to drive away all the Dissolvent Humid, is less
Sulphurous, and has a certain Acidity which the other has not.

The first Beings or Embryo's of Mineral Salts are nothing else but Vapors, or
Juices Unconcrete, wholly Vapourable, whereof some may be Condensed, and in
part fixed by the force of Fire; or be disengaged from their Matrixes, and
rendered capable of Concretion by the means of the Air; which is observed in
certain Nitrous, Aluminous and Vitriolic Salts. The Sulphurous Salt which is
found in the Calx of certain hard stones burnt in the Fire, and which is a kind
of true Nitre, had its Seminary in these stones Crude; and in this state of its
first Being is much different from what it acquires by the Fire, which from
being Cold and Coagulative renders it Caustic and Resolutive. The Cold and
Coagulative Quality of this stony Salt in its first Being is manifest enough in
the Water of the Springs of some Rocks, which are very Clear and Cold, and
which produce Gouts and Cold Scirrhous Tumors in those who ordinarily drink of
them. This Seminary of stony Salt is rendered Nitrous, Sulphurous, Caustic and
Resolutive by the Fire, which is able to exalt it, but not to produce it in the
Calcination of these Stones, no more than in burnt Oyster-shells, whereof is
also made a Calx, which has no less of a Sulphurous Salt. This Embryonate Salt
in the Chalk-stones is a stony Juice, which mixeth it self with Waters which
pass between the Beds and Interstices of these Stones in the Rocks, but is not
easily discerned in the Waters impregnated therewith.

The Seminary of Alum and Vitriol is also necessarily in the substances whence
these sorts of Salts are drawn* by the means of Water, after their Calcination
in the Fire, and Maceration in the open Air. The Fire and the Air which are
able to exalt them, cannot produce them. The Seminary of Alum in the Aluminous
Stones, and that of Vitriol in Sulphurous Marchasites, are not in this state
manifest to our senses; and oftentimes they are not known in Mineral Waters but
by some Effects, and that without certainty, because these Effects may be
Equivocal.

All these Diversities of Mineral Salts, Embryonate, Enix, Chrystalline,
Succulent, Sulphurous, not Sulphurous, of the first and of the second
Concretion; those also of their Genders, Species, Mixtures, Proportions,
Alterations, etc. render the Judgment of the Proprieties of Waters partaking of
them very difficult and uncertain.

The fine Earths which also are mixed in Mineral Waters may be of several Kinds
difficult to be distinguished: they being of diverse Colors; White, Gray,
Yellowish, Ruddy, Brown, etc. and also of different Qualities. Some are
dissoluble in distilled Vinaigre, others indissoluble; some may be melted,
others not, by Fire; wherein also they receive diverse Colors: Some resemble
Marle, others Clay, others Chalk, others Bole, some Sand, others Talk, and
others Calx; some are produced by the Concretion of certain Juices Saline or
Sulphurous, others not; some simply Mineral, others Metallic. The most part of
these Species being difficultly distinguished when single, are much more when
mixed.

The simple Infusions of certain Mineral-Sulphurous Earths may remarkably alter
the Waters of Wells and Springs, notwithstanding there may remain no Sediment
from these Earths after Distillation, as happens in Liquors rendered Emetic by
the simple infusion of Antimony.

The Hot Mineral Waters may contract some alteration by Sulphurous and
Bituminous substances meeting in their Course; for these substances participate
of certain subtle Salts, which these Waters may dissolve and carry with them.

Some Mineral Waters, Cold or Tepid, have a Taste somewhat Aigre, or Vinous,
which is not observed in any of those which are remarkably Hot; but this Taste
is so easily lost by the least Heat, and even by the Air, that it is difficult
to know what produces it. This is found not only in Waters esteemed Aluminous
and Vitriolic, but also in those which are manifestly Nitrous, and which abound
in a Sulphurous Salt opposite to Acids.

The Causes of the Heat of certain Mineral Waters are little known. There is
reason to doubt whether there be Subterraneous Fires capable of heating them,
or whether they receive this Heat from the Exhalations of certain Mineral
Juices Fermentable, or wherein there is caused an Effervescence by the mixture
of other Juices.

All these Difficulties have hindered, these four years, the advantage which
the Public might have received from the Communication of what the Naturalists
of the Academy have been able to observe on Waters which have been sent them
from several Provinces; and which they have examined according to the
opportunities which they have had.

The Method which has been taken in this Enquiry was to observe,

1. From what Place they came.

2. In what Time and Disposition of the Air they were taken from their Springs.

3. How long they had been put up in Bottles to be sent away.

4. Whether they were preserved in Bottles that were clean and well stopped.

5. Whether they had made any Sediment in the Bottles, and of what sort.

6. Whether they were clear or muddy.

7. Whether they had any manifest Scent or Taste.

8. Whether their Weight differed remarkably from that of simple and Common
Waters.

9. Whether they took any Tincture or Color by certain Powders, as of Galls,
of Oak-leaves, Pomegranate-Bark, of Myrobalans, etc.

10. Whether having been exposed to the Air, or a little warmed, they would no
more receive the Tincture or Color.

11. Whether being put to Distillation by an Alembic in Balneo Mariae, there
rose and distilled first of all some Liquor more subtle than the rest; and
whether there were found any difference between the several parts of the same
distilled Water taken apart.

12. Whether in Evaporating or Distilling these Waters by a gentle Heat, there
were formed any Films on the surface of the Water; or whether there were made
some Earthy Concretions swimming in the Water in Flakes, or adhering to the
sides of the Vessels, or settling to the bottom; and of what sort.

13. Whether after Distillation, or Evaporation, almost total, of these Waters,
there was made, in the remaining Liquor set in a cold place, any Concretion
Saline, Fibrous, Granous, Leafy, or otherwise figured.

14. Whether the Water being totally Evaporated, or Distilled off to a dryness,
left a Sediment, how much, and of what sort.

15. Whether the Earthy Sediments contained any Portion of Salt, or not.

16. To what sort of Salts commonly known, the Salts of these Waters might be
referred.

17. Whether they caused Mercury sublimate dissolved in common Water to
precipitate in a Red, Nacarate.
deep Crimson, or Yellow color; and whether also they caused the Sulphurous
Earth of common Vitriol to precipitate, as do the true Nitre of the Ancients,
the Natron of Egypt, and fossil Borax, and also the Alcalisate or fixed
Sulphurous Salts of Plants.

18. Whether they changed into Green the Color of Syrup of Violets, and
whether they restored the Blue color of Tournesole made Red by some Aluminous,
Vitriolic or other Acid; as the true Nitres do.

19. Whether they made Tournesole to become Red, as do Alum and Vitriol.

20. Whether they caused the Liquor of the fixed Salt of Tartar dissolved, to
thicken and coagulate quickly; as does the Succulent and second Part of Common
Salt, which is not Condensed but by a Total Evaporation of the Water wherein
the Salt has been dissolved.

21. Whether they made any change in the Water of the Dissolutions of Mercury
Sublimate and Vitriol, or on the colors of Tournesole and Syrup of Violets, or
on the Liquor of Salt of Tartar dissolved, any more than Saltpeter does, and
the first Part of Common Salt which through Cold Chrystallizes in a Humid.

22. Whether the Earthy Sediments of these Waters, after the Separation of
their Salts, were wholly, or in part, Dissoluble in Vinaigre distilled, and
with a certain Effervescence, as do some sort of Chalks, and also the White
Earth of the Coagulum of Nitrous and Alkali-Salts, produced by the Mixture of
the second part of Common Salt.

23. Whether these Earthy Sediments, freed from their Salts, being put in the
Fire, and strongly burnt in Crucibles, were fixed; whether they changed Color,
were Vitrified or Calcined; or by the means of Reductive Salts there might be
drawn forth somewhat Metallic, or not.

24. Whether, if their Salts being purified, after having been melted by the
Fire in Crucibles of good Vitrified Earth, they took any Colors extraordinary.

These Methods of examining Mineral Waters brought to the Academy, seemed very
reasonable to give some knowledge of the Properties of them; and even much
greater than those who have hitherto writ on that Subject have ever had; who
for the most part have grounded their judgment only upon their Effects, which
may be referred to diverse Causes.

According to this Enquiry made upon a great number of Waters from different
Springs, as well Hot as Cold, they have observed particularly Salts and Earths
of diverse Qualities, and different Quantities.

The Salts which have been Condensed after Distillation, or slow Evaporation,
of the Waters which have been brought to the Academy, may be reduced to two
Kinds; the one, to the Nitre of the Ancients, which is a Sulphurous-Mineral
Salt, like to the Alkali of Plants; the other to Common Salt considered in one
or other of its different parts, or according to the mixture of both together.
There has not appeared in any of these Waters either Alum or true Viitriol.

The Waters, as well Hot as Tepid* wherein a Nitrous Salt was found, at those
of Bourbon l' Archambault, Ner^^ Esvahon, Mont d' Or, Chaudesaigue^ Vichy, Vic
le Comte, Martres de Veyr^ and Sail lez Chasteau Morand.

Cold Waters, wherein the true N^tre has been observed, are those o^ Pougues,
S. Mion, Pont-Gibault, S. Fl^ret, Petit Jaude, Jaude au Champ de Pauvres,
Beaurepaire, Josse, Vic (...) Carladois, S. Alban, Andabre, Camarets, and
Prugniez.

The Hot Waters, whose Salt hath^ resemblance with Common Salt, considered in
Conjunction of its two different Parts, are those of Bourbon Lancy, la
Bourboule, Barbazan, Encausse, Balleruc, Bagnieres, and Bareges.

The Cold Waters, which also have the like Common Salt, are those of Capvert,
and some others which have but a little, as those of Besse, Pons en Saintonge,
la Rocheposay, Vaujour, Chasteau-Gontier, Premeau, and Provins.

Likewise the Waters, Cold in their Springs, whose Salt may be referred to that
Part of Common Salt, which is Chrystallized through Cold in a Humid, are those of
la Trauliere, S. Pierre de Clermont, and some few others.

But those, whose Salt seems to be like that part of Common Salt, which is
condensed only by a total Evaporation of the Water wherein the Salt has been
dissolved, are in greater number, and more considerable, as those of S. Reyne,
Chastelguyon, Availles, Digne, etc.

All these Observations of the Diversity of Salts which have been found in
these Waters, are General. The two Genders of Salts, Nitrous and Common,
whereunto those of these Waters are referred, do each comprehend several
Species, whose Specific Differences are not easily comprehended; and the
mixtures of these several Species together are still in a greater number, and
less known.

The Differences observed between the Nitrous Salts of these Waters, by melting
them by Fire in small Crucibles, have been these.

Some have become Blew, as does the Salt of Tartar; such were those of Martres
de Veyre, Josse, and Sail lez Chasteau Morand.

Others took a Green Color, as does Saltpeter Alcaliz'd by Coal; so did those
of the Waters of Neris and Esvahon.

Others became Yellow, as that of the Water of Vichy.

Others became Ruddy, as those of the Waters of Chaudesaigues, Mont d' Or, and
S. Floret.

Others became Tawny, as those of the Waters of Bourbon l' Archambaut, Andabre,
and Prugniez.

Others became Red, as those of the Waters of Pougues, Jaude, Beaurepaire, and
S. Alban.

Others became only Greyish, as those of the Waters of Vic le Comte and S. Mion.

Others changed not their Color, as that of the Waters of Vic en Carladois.

As to the Differences observed between the Salts which may be referred to the
Gender of Common Salt, beside those of the two different Saline substances
before mentioned, whereof the one is Chrystalliz'd through Cold in a Humid, and
which troubles not the Water of the Dissolution of Salt of Tartar; and the
other, which is not condensed but by a total Evaporation of the Water wherein
this Salt is dissolved, and which in an instant coagulates the Dissolution of
the Salt of Tartar, and of true Nitre; there have been remarked few other
Particular differences.

Those of the Waters of diverse Springs of Bagnieres being melted by Fire in
the Crucibles, exhaled forth Vapors which rendered the Flame of the Coals Blew;
and afterward these Salts being cooled became of a clear Lacque-Colour.

That of the Water of Balleruc was difficult to melt, and became Greyish: That
of the Water of Availles crackled in the Fire, as does Sal-Marine.

That of the Water of S. Reyne had a certain subtle Acrimony, as that of Sal
Ammoniac. Others had nothing Particular which was manifest.

There was not had much regard to the Observations of the Forms and Figures of
each of these Salts, as well Nitrous as Common, in their Condensation; because
these did vary in the same Salts, according to the manner and degree of the
Evaporation of the Water wherein they were dissolved in order to be purified.

The Quantity of Salt, as well Nitrous as Common, wherewith each of these
Mineral Waters are Impregnated, cannot always be precisely determined; it
being not always equal in the Waters of the same Springs, according to the
Constitutions of the Air, wet or dry, and other Accidents. It Is sufficient to
remark only the Differences of much, little, or middle Quantity.

The waters which have been observed to have a remarkable and great Quantity of
a Salt like to true Nitre, are those of Bourbon l' Archambaut, Vichy, Mont d'
Or, Vic le Comte, Martres de Veyre, S. Mion, S. Floret, and Andabre.

Those which have but a Mediocrity, are those of Chaudesaigues, Pougues,
Pont-Gibault, S. Alban, Jaude, Beaurepaire, Josse, Vic en Carladois, and
Prugniez.

And those which have little are those of Neris, Esvahon, and Sail.

The Salt which was found to have a resemblance with Common Salt, was abundant
in the Waters of Balleruc, la Bourboule, Chastelguyon, and Availles.

There was a moderate Quantity in those of Bourbon Lancy, Bagnieres, Encausse,
and Digne.

But there was very little in those of B areges, Capvert, Barbazan, la
Trauliere, Besse, Pons en Saintonge, la Rocheposay, Vaujour, Chasteau-Gontier,
S. Reyne, Premeau, Provins, Forges, S. Paul de Rouen, Belesme, Hebecrevon,
Reuilly, la Taille, Menetou, Bourberouge, Vaux, Montigny, Montbosq, and
Pont-normand.

There was no manifest Salt found in those of S. Pardoux, Bardon, Chanonat,
Man's, etc.

There has not been found in any of these Waters, either Alum or Vitriol
discernible in their Sediments. These substances which are reckoned in the rank
of Mineral Salts, are Concrete Juices, condensed by Evaporation of the
superabundant Humidity dissolving them. They participate of much Earthiness
very fixed, and their Acid Spirits are not separated but by great Heat, which
raises them with an Augmentation of a Corrosive Acidity.

The Taste somewhat Aigre or Vinous must needs proceed from other mixtures than
those of Alum or Vitriol, since it is so easily lost in the open Air, when
these Waters are exposed thereto for a few days, and more speedily when they
are a little warmed. In the Distillation of these Waters in Balneo Mariae,
this Acidity is neither found in what is distilled, nor in what remains in the
Alembic, where no other Salts are to be found but Nitrous or Common.

Only the Water of Vahls in Dauphine, from a certain Spring called la
Dominique, left after Distillation, a certain Salt having some resemblance to
White Vitriol. It was of a Taste a little Vitriolic, sweetish, and somewhat
Styptic. This Salt, being dissolved in Common Water, made the Tincture of
Tournesole to become Red, almost as Vitriol does; and being mixed with the Salt
of Tartar, dissolved also in Common Water, became Black as Ink, and
precipitated a Black Earth: It being otherwise with White Vitriol, which does
not so much blacken with the Salt of Tartar. It were proper to enquire whether
this Water of la Dominique be Emetic, as that wherein Vitriol is dissolved; and
whether it produces Effects like to those Waters wherein there is a True,
Complete Vitriol.

The Brownish-Red, or Purple Color, which Acid Mineral Waters take by the
Infusion of certain substances, which with Vitriol make Ink, is no certain sign
that Vitriol is the Cause of the Acidity of these Waters; in the most part
whereof there is no Vitriol, but a Sulphurous Nitre capable to absorb Vitriolic
and Aluminous Acidities.

There were found in certain Sulphurous Earths Vaporous Juices not Coagulable,
which are Acid, and do seem to be Vitriolic Seminaries, which may in time gain,
by degrees, Concretions approaching to those of Vitriols. These Vaporous Juices
meeting with the Waters of certain Springs, may give them a Vaporous Acidity;
but which is easily lost, as those of the Waters of Pougues, S. Mion, Vic le
Comte, Vic en Carladois, Martres de Veyre, S. Parise, la Trauliere, Besse, and
several others. Tho when these Juices have any beginning of Concretion, there
remains some part in the Sediments, after the Distillation of the Water, as in
that of la Dominique, which nevertheless lost its Acidity by Heat.

As for the Earths which have been found in different Quantity in the Mineral
Waters examined by the Academy, the particular Distinction of their Species
has been more difficult than that of the Species of their Salts.

There was found much Earth in the Waters of Petit Bain, Bain de la Reyne, and
the Spring of la Forgue at Bagnieres, also in those of Barbazan, Encausse,
Prugniez, and Chastelguyon.

Moderately in those of the Grand Bain, Bain de S. Roch de Bagnieres, Capvert,
Andabre, Bourbon l'Archambault, Vic le Comte, Martres de Veyre, S. Floret,
Pierre de Clermont, Jaude, Josse, Digne, Pougues, and Passi.

Little in those of the Spring of Salut de Bagnieres, and in those of Bareges,
Chaudesaigues, Mont d' Or, Vic en Carladois, S. Mion, Besse, Vernet, Chanonat,
Pont-Gibault, la Bourboule, S. Alban, Sail, la Trauliere, Vichy, Bourbon Lancy,
Neris, Esvahon, Pons en Saintonge, Montendre, la Fonsrouilleuse, la Rocheposay,
Vaujour, Chasteau-Gontier, Premeau, S. Reyne, Provins, Man's, and in all those
of Normandy.

There was no manifest Earth found in the Waters of Balleruc and Availles, the
Sediments whereof were wholly Saline.

The most part of these Earths were White and Subtle, as those of the Waters of
Bagnieres, Capvert, Barbazan, Encausse, Andabre, Prugniez, Vic en Carladois,
Vic le Comte, Martres de Veyre, Besse, Vernet, Chastelguyon, S. Pierre de
Clermont, Jaude, Pont-Gibault, la Bourboule, Josse, S. Alban, Sail, Neris,
Esvahon, S. Parise, the two Bourbons, and Pougues.

Others were Gray, as those of the Waters of Bareges, Mont d' Or,
Chaudesaigues, S. Floret, Chanonat, Vichy, Bardon, S. Pardoux, la Trauliere,
Pons, la Rocheposay, Chasteau-Gontier, S. Paul de Rouen, Belesme, Premeau, and
S. Reyne.

Others Ruddy, as those of the Waters of Vaujour, Man's, Provins, Forges, and
almost all the other Waters of Normandy.

In Evaporation of all these Waters their Earths were in different Forms; some
in that of Films swimming a top, as those of the Waters of Capvert, Barbazan,
Encausse, Vic en Carladois, Vic le Comte, Martres de Veyre, Vernet, S. Alban,
Vichy, Pougues, S. Parise, and Pons.

Others in Flakes, as those of the Waters of Bareges, Andabre, Prugniez, S.
Floret, Chanonat, S. Pierre, la Bourboule, and Josse.

Others in Mucilages, as those of the Waters of Chaudesaigues, Vic en
Carladois, Montendre, Vaujour, Man's, and Premeau.

Others in Clods, as those of the Waters of Vic le Comte, and S. Mion.

Others in Chaffy form, as those of the Waters of Chastelguyon, Besse, Bardon,
and S. Pardoux.

Others in small sandy Grains, as those of the Waters of la Fonsrouilleuse, la
Rocheposay, and S. Reyne.

Others in a subtle Brown Powder, as those of the Waters of Provins, and almost
all those of Normandy.

There have been also observed some other Differences of these Earths, by
putting them in distilled Vinaigre, and burning them strongly in the Fire.

Some were dissolved almost totally in distilled Vinaigre with an
Effervescence, as does the White Earth which results from the Coagulation of
Natron, which is a Species of true Nitre; which Coagulation is made in an
Instant, by the Mixture of that part of Common Salt, which is not condensed in
a Humid. Such were the White Earths of some Nitrous Waters, as those of
Andabre, Prugniez, Martres de Veyre, S. Mion, S. Floret, Jaude, Pont-Gibault,
Josse, Esvahon, and S. Alban.

Others were dissolved only in part, and but little; as those of the Waters of
Chaudesaigues, Vic en Carladois, Vernet, Chastelguyon, la Bourboule, Vichy, and
Bourbon l' Archambault.

Others were not dissolved at all; as those of the Waters of Bagnieres, Pons en
Saintonge, and Premeau.

Some others did only make the distilled Vinaigre to take a high Tincture of a
Hyacinth-Colour, which was lost in a few days by the Precipitation of a little
Brown Powder, which seemed to be Sulphurous, as that of the Waters of Vaujour,
la Rocheposay, and S. Paul de Rouen.

The Fire has also discovered certain other Differences of these Earths; for
in burning them strongly in the Fire, some have changed Color, others not,
some have been Calcined, others Vitrified.

Of those which were White, and changed Color by Fire, some have become
Dark-Grey, as that of the Water of Vernet; others Yellow, as that of the Water
of S. Floret; others Ruddy as that of the Water of Prugniez; others Reddish, as
that of the Waters of Mont d' Or, Vic le Comte, and S. Alban.

Some others have not changed Color, as that of the Waters of Bagnieres,
Bareges, Capvert, Barbazan, Encausse, Chaudesaigues, etc.

Others were Calcined, as that of the Water of Passi, which was altogether
Plastrous.

Others were Vitrified, as that of the Water of Andabre.

The Sulphurs, and Bitumens, as well Concrete, as Liquid, are not, according to
their whole substance, mixed with these Waters, although there is sometimes found
somewhat of them in certain Springs. There is only their Saline part which is
dissoluble in Water; that which is Fat and Inflammable being easily separated.
And to discover them among these Waters, it were necessary to make Observations
at their Springs and in their Basins. There has been none as yet found in those
which have been sent to the Academy.

The other Mixtures less sensible have not been yet observed: But till
Opportunity shall offer for their Discovery, if possible; the present
Observations of the Qualities, Quantities, Agreements and Differences of Salts
and Earths of so great a Number of Waters, which have been examined in the
Royal Academy of the Sciences, and whereof we now make Public the Particular
History, may be Useful and Serviceable to Physicians, who advise their Use, the
better to make choice of those, which by reason of the mixture of these Mineral
Substances which are more sensible, may sit their Intentions for the restoring
of the Health of Persons Diseased.

Particular OBSERVATIONS On the SALTS and EARTHS OF Mineral WATERS, Which have
been Examined in the Royal Academy of the Sciences.
ALL the Mineral Waters, which have been brought to and examined in the Academy
were in their Springs, some Hot, some Tepid, and others Cold: They also
differed among themselves according to the Observation of the Taste; some being
somewhat Aigre or Vinous, others Austere or Ferruginous; others without any
Savor very manifest, or Insipid. All these sensible Differences, joined to
those which have been most remarkable in the Sediment of these Waters after
Distillation or Evaporation, and principally in the Participation of certain
Salts, whereof some had a resemblance to Common Salt, others to the Nitre of
the Ancients, have given occasion to distribute them into certain Classes,
thereby to dispose in some order the particular History of so great a Number of
Observations which have been made in examining such a Diversity of Waters.

In the First of these Classes are placed the Hot Waters, wherein was found a
Salt having resemblance to Common Salt.

In the Second are the Hot Waters, wherein was found a Salt resembling the
Nitre described by the Ancients.

In the Third are the Tepid and Insipid Waters, whereof some have a Salt,
either Common or Nitrous, and some have not.

In the Fourth are the Tepid, somewhat Aigre or Vinous Waters, which have some
participation of the true Nitre.

In the Fifth are the Cold, Insipid Waters, whereof some participate of a Salt
resembling Common Salt; others in their Sediments discover no Salt.

In the Sixth are the Cold Waters of a Ferruginous or Austere Taste.

In the Seventh are the Cold Waters, of a Taste somewhat Aigre or Vinous, which
participate of Common Salt.

In the Eighth are the Cold Waters, likewise somewhat Aigre or Vinous, which
participate of the true Nitre.

There were no Hot Waters found that were Vinous; nor Cold Insipid Waters that
were Nitrous.

The First CLASS.
Of the Hot Waters, wherein was found a Salt resembling Common Salt.
OF this sort were the Waters of Bourbon Lancy, la Bourboule, Esvahon, or Evos,
Balleruc, Barbazan, Bareges, Bagnieres, Digne, and Bourbonne.

Of the Waters of Bourbon Lancy, in Bourbonnois.
The great Number of Springs, the Magnificence of the Baths, the Antiquity of
the Buildings, and the Care which our Kings have taken since the last Age in
the repairing thereof, give to these Waters the Prerogative to be first
considered.

The Experiments have been made on the Waters of le Lymbe, the Springs of la
Reyne, Escures, and S. Ledger, brought in the Beginning of the Springtime.

The Water of the great Well which is called le Lymbe, is the warmest in its
Spring: It was Limpid and without Taste. Having been slowly distilled, there
was found no difference between what passed first, and what last. It left at
the bottom of the Cucurbites about 1/640 Sediment, whitish and Salt, from
whence was separated 1/10 Earth, the other 9/10 were a pure Salt of the taste
of Common Salt, which was condensed in Grains of a Cubic Figure, like
Sal-Marine. This Water continued always Limpid in the Cucurbites during the
distillation.

To examine the Quality of this Salt, by comparison with Common Salt, They
caused to be dissolved the one, and the other, apart in four times the Quantity
of Common Water, afterward They mixed them with the like Quantity of Common
Water wherein Mercury Sublimate had been dissolved; and it was observed that by
the mixture of the Salt of the Water of le Lymbe there was produced neither any
Trouble, nor Precipitation in the Sublimate Water, as also neither in the
dissolution of Common Salt. The same was observed upon the Dissolution of
Vitriol, which was not troubled either by the Salt of the Water of le Lymbe, or
by Common-Salt. These two Salts being put apart into Common Water tinctured
with Tournesole, changed not the Blew Color, as do Alum and Vitriol, and all
other Acids which make it Red: But they did both alike precipitate the Salt of
Lead dissolved in Common Water, and filtrated through Gray Paper.

Having thus compared the Salt of the Water of le Lymbe with Common Salt, and
observed their Resemblances together, They afterward remarked the Differences
of this Salt of the Water of le Lymbe, from Alum and Vitriol, as well by Sight
as Taste, which they found Considerable; that by the Mixture made of these
three substances dissolved apart in Common Water with the Tincture of
Tournesole, the Blew Color which changed into a Clear-Red by the mixture of
Alum, and into a Dark-Red by the mixture of Vitriol, changed not at all by the
Salt of the Water of le Lymbe no more than by Common-Salt.

In comparing this Salt of the Water of le Lymbe with other Mineral Salts,
which are commonly known, it was observed that it fulminated not in the Fire
with Combustible substances, as does Saltpeter; that the Taste of one had no
resemblance with that of the other; that Saltpeter dissolved in Common Water
caused the Tincture of Tournesole to become somewhat Red; which the Salt of the
Water of le Lymbe did not, and that Saltpeter dissolved in Common Water
troubled not the Dissolution of the Salt of Lead, as does the Salt of the Water
of le Lymbe.

It was also remarked that this Salt of the Water of le Lymbe was different
from true Nitre; forasmuch as the true Nitre, such as is the Natron of Egypt,
and the Natural Borax, precipitated in an Orange-Colour Mercury Sublimate
dissolved in Common Water, which the Salt of the Water of le Lymbe did not;
which did not so much as trouble this Dissolution of Sublimate, as does
Sal-Gemm which renders it a little Milky, and as does the Salt of Marle which
whiteneth it still more.

By all these Comparisons of the Salt of the Water of le Lymbe with other known
Salts, it was observed that it had resemblance only to Sal-Marine, and other
like Common Salts which are used for seasoning and preservation of Victuals.

And because Sal-Gem, and the fixed Salt which is separated from Saltpeter, in
its refining, seemed like to Common Salt, they examined both one and the other,
to see to which of the two the Salt of the Water of le Lymbe had most
resemblance, and it was observed that it did more resemble the fixed Salt of
Saltpeter than Sal-Gemm, and that herein it agreed also with Common Salt.
Sal-Gemm dissolved in Water, and placed to evaporate by a gentle heat, does
incrust on the surface of the Water; it troubles and makes White the Limpid
Dissolution of Sublimate, it turns into Yellow the Green Tincture of the
dissolution of German Vitriol; and in a little time is condensed in long and
transparent Fibers in that Vitriol-Water; which the Salt of the Water of le
Lymbe did not, as neither did Common Salt, and the fixed Salt of Saltpeter.

There appeared nothing Bituminous or Sulphurous in all this Water, nor in its
Sediments.

The other Waters of Bourbon Lancy, which were those of the Springs of la
Reyne, Escures and S. Ledger, and which in their Sources have different Degrees
of Heat; the first being most Warm, but less then that of le Lymbe, the second
less than the first, and the third only Tepid, were found to have like
Sediments and in like proportion. All three had proportionably somewhat less
Salt than that of le Lymbe, but otherwise their Salt was alike. In lb V. of
these Waters there was almost j of Salt.

The Salt of these Waters being melted by the Fire in Crucibles became only
Gray; and the Earth separated from the Salt of the Water of le Lymbe changing
its Color by the Fire became very Brown, and contracted a certain
Brackishness; but that of the Waters of the other Springs changed not.

Of the Waters of la Bourboule, in the Parish of Murat de Quairs.
The Water of the Bath of the Town, and that of the Spring above the Bath are
alike. They were Limpid and manifestly Salt.

They were evaporated by a gentle he at, in Earthen Vessels, the better to
observe the Changes arising.

During their Evaporation, made apart, there were formed Whitish Flakes, which
did swim in the middle of the Liquor, and by degrees were precipitated to the
bottom.

The Total of the dry Sediment was 1/170 of the weight of the Water; it was
almost all Salt, whence was separated only 1/20 Greyish Earth, which suffered
no change by the Fire; but partly dissolved in distilled Vinaigre. The Salt of
these Waters was found to resemble Common Salt; which was experimented, as
before, on the Salts of the Waters of Bourbon Lanoy.

The Water of the Spring above the Bath, had more Salt, and less Earth than
that of the Bath.

These Waters were taken in the beginning of the Springtime.

Of the Water of Esvahon, or Evos, in Combrail. les.
The Water of the great Spring of the Baths was very Limpid and Insipid. It left
after Evaporation 1/768 White Fibrous Sediment, of a Saline taste, the Salt
whereof being separated from its Earth, had a resemblance to Common Salt. It
changed not its white Color by the Fire, and its Earth was found almost all
dissolved in distilled Vinaigre.

This Water was taken in the Springtime together with that of the little Spring
of the Town; and because the Water of the little Spring was found different
from that of the great one of the Baths; the Observations made thereon are
referred to another Class.

Of the Water of Balleruc, in Languedoc.
The Water of the Baths of Balleruc, being sent in the middle of the Summer, was
found to be Limpid, but of a disagreeable Taste, and somewhat Salt.

In Evaporation thereof there were made on the surface of the Water Saline
Films; which being finished there remained 1/128 Salt resembling Common Salt.
It did not precipitate Mercury Sublimate dissolved in Common Water, nor Vitriol
so dissolved, as does the true Nitre. It caused not the Tincture of Tournesole
to become Red, as does Vitriol and Alum. It fulminated not upon Burning Coals,
as Saltpeter, but thickn'd the Liquor of Salt of Tartar dissolved, as does the
second part of Sal-Marine, which still retains a certain Mixture of the
first, that hinders it from Coagulating strongly the Liquor of Salt of Tartar
and Alcalies dissolved by the Air, or in Common Water.

This Salt was not mixed with any Earth, which was separable by its Dissolution
in Water. Being put in a Crucible on the Fire it was difficult to melt, and
became Greyish.

Of the Water of Barbazan, in le Commingeois.
The Water of Barbazan, being taken in the middle of the Springtime, was
Limpid, and without any Taste very manifest. Only it left a certain Roughness
upon the Tongue.

During Evaporation which was made by a Gentle Heat, there arose white Films,
thick, and very like to those made by Quicklime on the Surface of Water. The
Evaporation being finished, these Films remained dry at the bottom of the
Vessels, in their first form. Their weight was 1/566 of that of the Water. They
contained only about 1/6 Salt, resembling Common-Salt. The Earth which was a
sort of White Chalk, received no change by the Fire.

Of the Waters of Bareges, in la Bigorre.
The Water, which was taken up at the two Baths of Bareges about the middle of
Summer, and was three Weeks before it came to our hands, smelt of the Fen and
Mud.

These Waters being evaporated apart had their Surface covered with a subtle
Greyish Film, and there were little Ruddish Flakes swimming in the middle. They
left very little Sediment, Gray, Leafy, of a Saline Taste; which was but 1/4700
of the whole. The small Quantity of Salt which they contained had resemblance
to Common Salt considered according to the Mixture of its two parts; so that
the second, which has an Acidity, may surpass in Quantity the first, which
has none; for this Salt of the Waters of Bareges troubled and thickened the
Dissolution of Salt of Tartar.

Of the Water of Bagnieres in la Bigorre.
The Waters of Bagnieres, taken in the middle of the Springtime, were those of
the little Bath, the Spring de la Reyne, the Bath of S. Roch, the great Bath,
the Spring de la Forgue, and the Spring de Salut.

The Water of the little Bath, which is said to be hot in its Spring, almost to
the third Degree, was Limpid and without any manifest Taste.

In the Evaporation there were formed White and Thick Films on the surface of
the Water, and the dry Sediment made 1/488 of the weight of the Water whence it
was separated. It had 1/3 Salt like to that of the Water of Bareges. The Earth
freed from its Salt was White and very Subtle. It dissolved not in distilled
Vinaigre, and changed not in the Fire either its Consistence or Color.

The Water of the Spring de la Reyne, which is said to be no less Hot than that
of the little Bath, was very Limpid and without Taste.

There were also formed Films on the Surface of the Water, in the Evaporation.
The Sediment was 1/440 containing but 1/4 Salt.

The Qualities of the Salt and Earth of this Sediment differed nothing from
those of the Salt and Earth of the Water of the little Bath.

The Water of the Bath of S. Roch, which in its Spring is likewise very Hot,
was, as the others, very Clear and Insipid.

In Evaporation there were formed fewer Films on the Surface than in that of
the little Bath, tho there was found more Sediment; for there was 1/3745 whence
was drawn 1/5 Salt like to that of the Water of the little Bath, and that of
the Spring de la Reyne. The Earth was also alike.

The Water of the great Bath, which is the Hottest, and which is only used for
Bathing, was likewise without Taste, and very Limpid.

In Evaporation there were formed Films on the Surface, as in that of the
little Bath; but its Sediment was found much less: It was only 1/716 which
contained not above 1/4 Salt,

The Salt and Earth of this Water had the same Qualities with those of the Salt
and Earth of the Water of the little Bath.

The Water of the Spring de la Forgue, which is said in its Source to be Hot in
the first Degree, and fit to drink, was also very Limpid and Insipid.

In Evaporation its Surface was covered with Films like to those on the Water
of the Spring de la Reyne. The Sediment remaining in form of a White Earth was
1/419, wherein was found somewhat more than 1/4 Salt, nothing different from
that of the Water of the Spring de la Reyne: Their Earths were also alike.

The Water of the Spring de Salut, which is also proper for drinking, was, as
the precedent, without Taste and very Clear.

There were formed on its surface very few Films during Evaporation, and it
left very little Sediment, amounting to no more than 1/1600, which was almost
nothing but a Salt resembling the other Salts of these Waters.

These Salts having been put apart in Crucibles on the Fire, to be melted,
exhaled some Spirits which made the Flame of the Coals of a Blew Color; and
being melted and cooled, were found colored with a Redness of Clear Lacque,
except the Salt of the Water of the Bath of S. Roch, which was only Greyish.

Of the Water of Digne, in Provence.
The Water of the Baths of Digne, being taken in the middle of the Summer, had a
little Saltness, which nevertheless rendered it not disagreeable to the Taste,
and was very Limpid.

In its Sediment after Evaporation was found a Pure White Salt, resembling
Common-Salt, the Weight whereof was 1/270 of the Weight of the Water.

This Salt caused the Liquor of the Salt of Tartar dissolved by the Humid Air
to Coagulate in an instant; as does that part of Sal-Marine which is not
Condensed, but by a Heat which causes all the Humidity to evaporate that keeps
it in a Liquid Consistence, after the Chrystallization of the other part through
Cold.

Of the Water of Bourbonne in Champagne.
The Water of the Baths of Bourbonne, taken in the Month of August, was of a
Taste somewhat Saline: After Evaporation there was also found much Salt, to the
Quantity of 1/142, without mixture of Earth, and it had resemblance to that
part of Common Salt which is Condensed and Chrystalliz'd through Cold in a Humid;
for it troubled not the Liquor of Salt of Tartar dissolved.

There appeared to us in this Water nothing Bituminous; but there was found
somewhat of that kind in the Mud of the Baths whence it was taken; it being the
Propriety of Bitumens, not to mix with Water. If they be Liquid, they swim a
top; if they be Thick and Earthy, they settle to the bottom among the Mud,
which they make black, and of an ill Scent, by reason of the Sulphurous Salt
which abounds in those substances. Some of this Mud being put in a
Glass-Retort, and distilled by a Gradual Heat, there came forth a troubled and
whitish Water, of a Scent somewhat Sulphurous; afterward by force of Fire came
over a Water somewhat of a Ruddy Color, and an Oil. This Ruddy Water was
impregnated with a Volatile Salt, which caused Mercury Sublimate dissolved in
Common-Water to precipitate: It precipitated also the Earth of Vitriol, as
Sulphurous Salts do, and made an Effervescence with the Spirit of Salt. What
remained of this Mud in the Retort after Distillation, retained still somewhat
of a Sulphurous Salt mixed with Common Salt.

This Sulphurous Salt was so Fixed in the Earth of this Mud, that it could not
be separated but by a very great Fire: Neither is it mixed with the Water of the
Baths, whence this Mud is taken.

The Second CLASS.
Of the Hot Waters wherein there was found a Salt resembling Nitre, as
described by the Ancients.
OF this sort were the Waters of Bourbon l' Archambault, Chaudesaigues, Mont d'
Or, Neris, the little Spring of Esvahon, the Baths of Vichy, and Sail lez
Chasteau-Morand.

Of the Water of Bourbon l'Archambault, in Bourbonnois.
The Water of the Baths of Bourbon l' Archambault, taken in the Springtime, was
Limpid, and of a Taste somewhat Nitrous.

During the Evaporation made by a Gentle Heat, to observe its Sediment; there
were formed on its Surface White Films, which afterward precipitated in
Flakes. The whole Sediment was found to be 1/316 of the weight of the Water,
containing 1/10 White Earth and 9/10 Salt.

In examining this Salt, it was observed that it had a Lixivial Taste, and was
purely Nitrous. The Nitre whereto the Naturalists of the Academy have thought
fit to refer the Salt of the Water of the Baths of Bourbon l' Archambault, is
the true Nitre described by the Ancients; and commonly so called, which has a
resemblance to the Fixed Sulphurous Salt of Plants reduced into Ashes, and is
different from Saltpeter, which some Chemists take for Nitre. There is a kind
of Fossil Nitre, which is taken out of the Earth in Gray, Compact and Hard
Lumps. There is also a sort Soft, less Compact, White, which shoots forth upon
the Ground in certain parts of Hot Countries. There are also Waters impregnated
therewith, as that of Nile. The Natron of Egypt, and the Natural Borax are also
Species thereof, and the Salt of Marle may be referred thereto, which is also a
Sulphurous Salt, but which has more resemblance to the Volatile Salt of Plants
than to Alcalies. All these Nitrous Salts have something Sulphurous, which is
not found in Saltpeter, unless Alcaliz'd, that is to say, reduced by the means
of the Sulphur of Coals to the Nature and Quality of the Salt of the Herb Kaly.
The Fixed Sulphurous Salts of Plants, and the true Nitres do cause Mercury
Sublimate dissolved in Common Water to precipitate in the Color of the Rinds
of Ripe Oranges: They make Syrup of Violets to turn Green; they restore the
Blew Color of Tournesole, being changed and made Red by Acid Liquors. As also
does the Salt of the Water of the Baths of Bourbon l' Archambault; which
Saltpeter, Common Salt, Vitriol and Alum do not.

There was found nothing Bituminous in this Water, nor any thing of
Sulphureity, except the Nitrous part of its Salt. The Earth of its Sediment had
nothing of Fat; it dissolved in part in distilled Vinaigre.

In lb IV. of this Water there was found jss of Nitrous Salt, which
Qua(...)tity is sufficient to move the Belly a(...) Purge as do Alcalies.

This great Quantity of true Nitre in the Water of the Warm Springs of Bourbon
l' Archambault, may be considered as the Principal Cause of the Effects of this
Water in those who drink thereof. And by the Consideration of the Proprieties
of this sort of Salt, which are to heat, dry, attenuate, resolve, deterge,
purge, etc. one may judge of the Agreeableness of this Water to the
Constitutions of Persons Diseased, and the Quality of their Diseases, in order
to advise the Use thereof.

Of the Water of Chaudesaigues, in the High Country of Auvergne.
This Water, being taken in the Spring time, was Limpid and Insipid, but of an
ill Scent, it being Corrupted in the Bottles.

In Evaporation thereof by a Gentle Heat, there was made a Mucilaginous
Sediment, like to Frog-spawn, of a Taste somewhat Saline, and which thickened
like Gelly of Hartshorn. The whole dry Sediment amounted only to 1/1139 of the
weight of the Water. It contained a little more than the Moity of Salt.

The Salt of this Sediment was found to be Nitrous; for it precipitated Mercury
Sublimate dissolved in Common Water in the Color of the Rinds of ripe Oranges;
as does the true Nitre, and all Lixivial Salts. It changed the Color of Syrup
of Violets into Green, and restored the Blew Color of Tournesole being changed
and made strongly Red by Alum-Water.

This Salt being melted in a Crucible on the Fire, swelled like Borax, and
became Ruddy.

The Earth of this Water received no Change by the Fire, tho strongly burnt in
a Crucible: It dissolved in part in distilled Vinaigre.

Of the Water of Mont d' Or, in Auvergne.
This Water, being sent at the same time with the precedent, was Insipid, but
somewhat Troubled.

It left after Evaporation 1/284 Whitish and Leafy Sediment, which was almost
all Saline, having only 1/9 Earth.

This Salt was likewise of the same Quality with the precedent, that is,
Nitrous. Being put in a Crucible on the Fire to melt, it swelled not; it turned
to a dark Red Color; and its Earth being strongly burnt in the Fire, became
Reddish.

Of the Water of Neris, in Bourbonnois.
The Water of the Baths of Neris, taken in the Springtime, was very Limpid and
without Taste.

Being evaporated by a most Gentle Heat, what remained in a dry Consistence was
in so little Quantity, that it made but 1/6272 of the weight of the Water.

This Sediment was Saline; and having been dissolved in thrice as much Common
Water, there was separated from it a little Earth, and one part of the Water
being gently evaporated, the Salt was condensed through Cold in Chrystals very
like to Saltpeter refined, but they did not fulminate on burning Coals. They
caused Mercury Sublimate dissolved in Common Water to precipitate in an Orange
Color, as does the true Nitre, and by other Experiments it was also found that
this Salt was Nitrous, and had a resemblance to Natural Borax.

The Sediment of this Water being put on the Fire, without separating any of
that little Earth mixed therewith, did melt and contract a Green Color in the
Crucible.

Of the Water of Esvahon, from the little Spring of the Town.
This Water was found to differ much from that of the great Spring of the Baths
of Esvahon. It left after Evaporation 1/808 very White and Leafy Sediment, of a
Saline Taste, the Salt whereof did resemble that of the Water of Neris, and
also contracted a certain Greenness by the Fire.

Of the Water of la Grille de Vichy, in Bourbonnois.
The Waters of Vichy are some Hot, some Tepid, and others Cold. The Hot and
Tepid which were examined in the Academy, did participate of the true Nitre.
They were taken in the Springtime.

The Water of the Grande Grille, which is Warm in its Spring, was Limpid, of a
weak Scent, and of a Taste somewhat Nitrous.

During Evaporation there were formed Greyish Films on the Surface of the
Water. And at last was made a Saline Concretion, which being dry, amounted to
1/176 of the weight of the Water; whence was separated 1/12 Gray, Fibrous Earth.

The Dissolution of this Salt depurated and freed from its Earth, having been
evaporated, the first Concretion was made in Long, White, Transparent Chrystals
like to Saltpeter, but fulminated not upon burning Coals; and what was
condensed last in little Ruddish Grains had a Lixivial Taste. All this Salt was
Nitrous, as that of the Water of the Baths of Bourbon l' Archambault. The great
Quantity of this Nitrous Salt does necessarily conclude this Water more proper
for Bathing than Drinking, for in lb iv. of Water there was found of Salt iij.

This Salt, having been melted in the Fire, became Yellowish. Its Earth in part
dissolved in distilled Vinaigre, and changed not by the Fire.

Of the Water of Sail lez Chasteau-Moraud.
The Water of Sail was Limpid, and agreeable to drink, having no Taste. It was
taken in the Springtime.

Being evaporated, it left very little Sediment, which was Greyish, Leafy, of a
Nitrous and Lixivial Taste. The small Quantity of Salt found therein had
resemblance to true Nitre.

One part of this Sediment, not freed from its Salt, being put in a Crucible on
the Fire, did melt and became Blew, as does Salt of Tartar which has been a
long time melting.

The Third CLASS.
Of Tepid Insipid Waters, whereof some did partake of a little Salt, others had
none.
THe Number of Tepid Insipid Waters which have been examined in the Academy,
has not been great. There were only those of Encausse, Premeau, Bardon, and
two Springs of Vichy. This Class being not large by reason of the small Number
of this Sort of Waters, the other Differences of these Waters taken from the
Diversity of their Salts, have not been so much considered as to make separate
Classes.

Of the Water of Encausse, in le Commingeois.
This Water, being taken in the middle of the Springtime, was very Limpid,
without any Taste very manifest, except that it was a little Austere.

During the Evaporation made by a Gentle Heat, the surface of this Water was
covered with White Films, broad, and thick, like to those which are made in the
Dissolution of Quicklime in Common Water.

The whole Sediment was found to be 1/290 White substance, whence was separated
almost 1/3 Salt, which was like to Common Salt, according to the Experiment
practiced on that of the Water of Bourbon Lancy. Being melted by the Fire it
became Whiter than before.

Of the Water of Premeau, in Burgundy near Nuits.
This Water, being taken at the end of the Summer, was Limpid and without Taste,
agreeable enough to drink; and had a certain Detersive Quality.

To find out whether this Water participated of any Bituminous Substance of the
Scent of Amber, as has been written, it was distilled in Glass-Alembics in
Balneo Mariae. What came over into the Recipients had no Scent, and appeared
not different from that which was not put to Distillation. Neither was there
found any Sediment which had either the Consistence or Scent of Amber or
Bitumen.

It was also evaporated in Earthen Vessels by a Gentle Heat, but what was
evaporated had no Scent. During the Operation there was seen to swim in this
Water certain little Gray Mucilages, and toward the end the Surface of the
Water was covered with a Gray, Sandy Film; and the sides of the Vessels were
lined with a Subtle, Gray Sand. Toward the bottom were Mucilages, which had
nothing Bituminous. These Mucilages being dried were reduced to a Leafy Earth,
and the whole Sediment, as well Leafy as Sandy, was in very little Quantity,
and amounted but to 1/5120 of the weight of the Water.

In this Sediment there was a little Salt of the Taste and Quality of Common
Salt. The Earth was not Dissoluble in Spirit of Vinaigre. Being put on the
Fire, and burnt, it became White.

Of the Water of Bardon, near Moulins.
This Water, being taken in the Springtime, was Limpid and Insipid. Being
evaporated it left but very little Greyish, Leafy Earth, without any manifest
Salt.

Of the Water of the Tepid Springs of Vichy, in Bourbonnois.
The Water of the Great Basin, which is said to be somewhat Acid in its Spring,
was found Insipid being brought hither.

In Evaporation there were formed little Films on the surface, and after
Evaporation the Sediment was 1/176 of the Weight of the Water; which consisted
of a Salt mixed with 1/22 Greyish, Fibrous Earth, which was separated from it.
This Salt was of a Nitrous Quality, as that of the Grille of the same place.
Being melted in a Crucible on the Fire, it took a Tawny Color.

The Water of the little Basins was somewhat Aigre; and resembling that of the
great Basin. Its Salt was alike, and in the same Proportion.

The Fourth CLASS.
Of Waters Tepid, somewhat Aigre or Vinous, which have some participation of
true Nitre.
OF this sort were the Waters of Vic le Comte, Vic en Carladois, Martres de
Veyre, Jaude, Champ des Pauvres, and Beaurepaire.

Of the Water of Vic le Comte, in Auvergne.
This Water of Vic le Comte, from the Fountain du Cornet, taken in the Spring
time, was very Limpid, of a Taste somewhat Aigre and Vinous. It left no
Impression of Dryness on the Tongue.

Because the Acidity of this and other like Waters, which receive a Tincture
with Galls, Pomegranate-Bark, Myrobalans, etc. as do those wherein there is
Vitriol, may seem to proceed from a participation of some Vitriolic Vapors, it
was resolved to see whether by Distillation there could be separated any Spirit
different from the rest of the Water: Wherefore it being put to distill in
Glass-Alembics by a very Gentle Heat, there was carefully observed whether
there did arise any Acrimonious Vapor, like to that which affects the Nose of
them who drink those Waters, which are somewhat Aigre and Vinous at their Rise
from their Springs. But what did rise and distill from the very beginning had
neither Scent nor Taste; and what remained in the Alembics, instead of Acidity,
had only a little Brackishness, which was augmented toward the End of the
Distillation.

By these Experiments repeated on other Waters, which were likewise somewhat
Aigre, it may be judged that the Acidity of these Waters proceeds from some
subtle Mineral Vapor not Condensable, or which easily changes its Acidity
into Brackishness.

This Water of Vic le Comte was also evaporated in open Vessels, and it was
observed that during the Evaporation there were formed on the Surface little
Films, which settled to the bottom in the form of little stony Clods. The
Evaporation being finished there remained 1/192 White Sediment, whence was
drawn almost 2/3 Salt resembling true Nitre. This Salt being melted on the Fire
in a Crucible, swelled not, and became only Greyish.

The Earth of this Sediment, which was White, being burnt in the Fire, became
Reddish. It dissolved in part in distilled Vinaigre.

Of the Water of Vic, in Carladois.
This Water, taken at the same time with the former, was found very Limpid, and
of a Taste somewhat Aigre.

There were formed in Evaporation very subtle White Films on the Surface of the
Water; toward the end whereof there was made a White Sediment, Mucilaginous,
of a Saline Taste, which being Dry, amounted but to 1/920 of the Weight of the
Water; wherein was a Moity of Salt having a Nitrous Quality, which being melted
by the Fire, changed not its Color.

The Earth of this Sediment dissolved in part in distilled Vinaigre, and being
strongly burnt in the Fire, became Greyish and somewhat Brackish.

Of the Water of Martres de Veyre, in Auvergne.
This Water, taken from the Rock of the Baths in the Springtime, was very
Limpid, of a Taste somewhat Aigre and Vinous; leaving on the Tongue a certain
impression of Dryness. There was found in the Bottles a small Quantity of
Ruddish Sediment.

During Evaporation there were formed Films, White and very Subtle swimming
thereon, which settling fixed themselves round about the Vessels. The Sediment
of the whole Water evaporated to Dryness was White, of a Saline Taste, and its
Quantity amounted to 1/18^ of the weight of the Water, whence was drawn almost
a Moity of Nitrous Salt. This Salt having been melted on the Fire in a
Crucible, became of a Bluish Color.

The Earth being placed on the Fire, was strongly burnt, changed its Color
very little; but it became Cloddy, and contracted a certain Brackishness.
Before and after the Ignition, it dissolved almost wholly in distilled Vinaigre,
with an Effervescence, as does the Earthy, White and Insipid substance which
results from the mixture of the true Nitre, or of any Alkali, with that part of
Common Salt which is not Condensed through Cold, and in a Humid.

Of the Water of Jaude in Auvergne.
There were brought in the Springtime, Waters from three Springs of Jaude,
which are the little Spring of Jaude, that of Champ des Pauvres, and that of
Beaure-paire.

The Water of the first was very Limpid, of a Taste somewhat Aigre or Vinous,
and left a certain Impression of Dryness on the Tongue.

In pouring out the Water from the Bottles in order to evaporation, there were
found at the bottom some Sediments of a Feuille-morte Color, which were
separated.

During Evaporation the Water was not troubled; nor had therein either Films or
Flakes. What remained dry, amounted to 1/553 of the weight of the Water; being
a Greyish substance containing almost a Moity of Salt which had resemblance to
true Nitre, and which being melted on the Fire in a Crucible, took a Red Color.

The Earth of this Sediment dissolved almost wholly in distilled Vinaigre, with
much Effervescence; but changed not in the Fire.

The Water of Champ des Pauvres was altogether like to the former, its
Sediments alike, and its Salt also Nitrous.

That of Beaurepaire had nothing different from the other two.

The Salts of these three Waters having been melted apart on the Fire in
Crucibles, took a Red Color more or less deep, according to the different
degree of the Fire.

The Fifth CLASS.
Of Cold Insipid Waters, which participate somewhat of a Salt resembling Common
Salt, and some others in the Sediments whereof no Salt was found.
OF this sort were the Waters of Capvert, Availles, the Spring of Jonas at
Bourbon l' Archambault, S. Reine, Auteuil, Bievre, Passy, Chasteau-Gontier,
Vaujour, la Rocheposay, Pons, Montendre, la Fronsrouilleuse, Man's, Belesme, and
Verberie.

Of the Water of Capvert, in la Bigorre.
This Water, taken in the middle of the Springtime, was Limpid, without Scent
or Taste.

In Evaporation by a very Gentle heat, there were formed on the Surface of the
Water White Films, like to those which are made upon Water wherein Marle
Calcined has been put. The Sediment of the whole Water evaporated was 1/748,
whence was separated 1/4 Salt, resembling Sal-Marine, considered in the
Conjunction of its two different parts.

The Earth of the Sediment of this Water lost not its Whiteness in the Fire,
and remained after a very strong Ignition without any manifest Change.

The Salt also being melted in a Crucible on the Fire, changed not its Color.

Of the Water of Availles, in Poictou.
This Water taken in the beginning of Autumn was Limpid, and of a Taste somewhat
Brackish.

In Evaporation there was formed on the Surface a Film which covered it all
over, the matter whereof was rough both to the Feeling and Taste, as a very
fine Sand, or Cream of Tartar pulverized. There were no Mucilages made therein,
and toward the end of the Evaporation the Water became very Brackish: There
remained at the bottom 1/230 pure Salt, very Acrimonious, partly in great
Cubical Grains, like the Salt of Brouage, partly in a solid Mass. This Salt
caused the Liquor of Salt of Tartar dissolved, to coagulate, as does the second
part of Sal-Marine. Being put in a Crucible on the Fire to melt, it crackled as
Common Salt; afterward it exhaled a Scent of Spirit of Salt; and after having
been melted it became Gray.

Of the Water of Jonas, at Bourbon l' Archambault.
This Water, being taken in the beginning of the Springtime, was Limpid, and
without manifest Taste.

Being evaporated it left only 1/812 leafy Sediment, very White, encompassed
with some Ruddish Earthiness. This Sediment had so little Brackishness, that it
was not sensible to the Taste: Nevertheless it thickened the Liquor of Salt of
Tartar dissolved, as does the second part of Sal-Marine.

This Earth in part dissolved in distilled Vinaigre, but changed not in the Fine.

Of the Water of S. Reyne, in Burgundy.
This Water, taken in the beginning of Summer, was Limpid, without Scent or
Taste, and agreeable to drink.

During Evaporation the Surface of the Water was covered with a Subtle, Gray
Film, Sandy and Insipid; and toward the end it became thicker. The whole being
evaporated there was found only 1/1036 Sediment, partly in White Leaves, very
fine, and partly in Ruddish Gum, of a very Acute Saline Taste, and almost as
Piquant as Sal Ammoniac.

The Salt of this Sediment being dissolved in Common Water, and mixed with the
Tincture of Tournesole, did not turn it Red, as do Alum and Vitriol; neither
did it precipitate Mercury Sublimate dissolved in Common Water, as does the
true Nitre: But it did coagulate strongly the Liquor of Salt of Tartar
dissolved, as does the second part of Sal-Marine; which Saltpeter and Sal-Gem
do not.

Of the Water of Auteuil, near Paris.
This Water, being taken in the beginning of the Summer, was Limpid and Insipid.
During Evaporation it continued Limpid without Films or Flakes. Toward the end
there was separated a very little Sediment, which being dried was found to be
White' and of a Saline Taste. Its weight was only 1/5500 of the weight of the
Water. The Salt of this Sediment had resemblance to that part of Common Salt,
which is Chrystalliz'd through Cold.

Of the Water of Passy, near Paris.
This Water, being taken at the beginning of Summer, was not very Limpid: It
appeared Whitish, and its Taste seemed to be Plastrous: It left a certain
Roughness and Dryness on the Tongue.

During Evaporation it forced out on its Surface certain Little, Gray,
Discontinued Films; and left 1/700 Sediment, partly in Gray Leaves, partly in
Glistering Fibers, like Crude Plaster. This Sediment contained 1/7 Salt, which
had resemblance to the second part of Sal-Marine, and did coagulate the Salt of
Tartar dissolved in Common Water.

The Earth of this Sediment did Calcine in the Fire like Plaster; and by
tempering it with Water, it stuck together, as does burnt Plaster.

Of the Water of Bievre, near Paris.
This Water, which some have judged to be Mineral, was very Limpid, and almost
Insipid.

After Evaporation there remained so little Sediment, that it scarcely amounted
to 1/7700, of the Weight of the Water. It consisted of a White, Leafy Earth, of
a Taste very little Brackish, resembling that of Common Salt.

Of the Water of Chasteau Gontier, in Anjou.
This Water, likewise by some thought Mineral, was Limpid, and without manifest
Taste. The little Sediment which it left, being evaporated, made but 1/2000 of
the Weight of the Water; being a Gray Earth, very Brackish, the Salt whereof
resembled both parts of Sal-Marine conjoined.

Of the Water of Vaujour, in the Duchy of la Valliere.
This Water was Limpid and Insipid. Its Sediment, after Evaporation, was in very
small Quantity; containing a Ruddish Earth, somewhat Brackish, which gathered
together in little Ruddish Mucilages swimming in the Water, that toward the end
did stick to the sides of the Vessels, and, as it were, lined them.

The Salt of this Sediment resembled Common Salt, and its Earth being put in a
little Crucible on the Fire, did half melt, and was reduced into Clods. It
dissolved somewhat in distilled Vinaigre, which took thence a Hyacinth-Colour;
but that afterward precipitated into a deep Brown.

Of the Water of la Rocheposay, in Touraine.
This Water, taken at the beginning of Summer, was Limpid, and without Taste.

During Evaporation the Surface was covered with a White, Sandy Powder, which
also did stick to the sides of the Vessels; there remaining at last but very
little of a Gray, Sandy Earth, of a Taste a little Brackish, which made only
about 1/2700 of the weight of the Water.

The little Quantity of Salt, which was in this Sediment, might be referred to
Common Salt. The Earth being put on the Fire became White. It dissolved not in
distilled Vinaigre, which nevertheless was charged with a Hyacinth Color; but
this Color was dissipated next Day by the Precipitation of some Powder.

Of the Water of Pous, in Saintonge.
This Water, being taken at the end of the Summer, was Limpid and without Taste.

During Evaporation there were formed on the Surface little white Films, very
Subtle, and, as it were, Sandy. There remained a small Quantity of Earthy
matter, Greyish, Light, Fibrous, of a Taste a little Brackish, which amounted
not to so much as 1/3000 of the weight of the Water.

The little Salt which was in this Sediment, seemed not different from Common
Salt. The Earth, separated from the Salt, being burnt in the Fire, became came
somewhat White. It was not dissoluble in distilled Vinaigre.

Of the Water of Montendre.
This Water, taken at the same time with the former, was Limpid, but it scented
of the Fen.

During Evaporation it continued also Limpid; only there appeared toward the
End very few Gray Mucilages; and there remained at last less Sediment than in
that of Pons; consisting of a Gray, Brackish Earth, the Salt whereof had
resemblance to Common Salt.

Of the Water of Fonsrouilleuse.
This Water, being taken at the same time with the other, was Limpid, and
likewise scented of the Fen.

During Evaporation it continued also Limpid; which being finished, the sides
and bottom of the Vessels were found slightly lined with a little Sandy Earth,
Dark-Grey, somewhat Brackish, the Quantity whereof was somewhat more than that
of the Sediment of the Water of Montendre, and less than that of Pons.

The Salt of this Sediment did likewise resemble Common Salt.

Of the Water of Man's.
The Water of the Mineral Spring of Man's, being taken at the beginning of
Summer, was Limpid and without Taste.

During Evaporation there were formed Concretions of little Ruddish Mucilages,
and the whole being evaporated, there remained only a little Ruddish Earth,
without manifest Brackishness.

This Earth having been strongly burnt in the Fire, received no apparent Change.

Of the Water of Belesme, in Normandy.
This Water, being taken in the Month of July, was Limpid and Insipid.

During Evaporation it continued Limpid till toward the end, when there
appeared on the Surface of the remainder a certain subtle Film: There remained
at last very little Gray, Insipid Earth, and somewhat Rugged to the Feeling.

Of the Water of Verberie, near Compiegne.
This Water, taken at the end of June, was Limpid and without Taste.

There was found at the bottom of the Bottles a little Ruddy Sediment, and what
was made by Evaporation was in very little Quantity; being a Ruddy, Leafy
Earth, and without Brackishness.

The Sixth CLASS.
Of Cold Waters having a Ferruginous, or Austere Taste.
OF this sort are the Waters of Forges, S. Paul de Rouen, Bourberouge,
Menitoue, Pont-Normand, Montbosq, Hebecrevon, Provins, Apougny, and Vahls.

Of the Water of Forges in Normandy.
These Waters, being taken at the end of the Summer, had a Taste somewhat
Ferruginous.

The several Waters of la Source Royale, la Reynette, la Cardinale, being
evaporated apart, did all leave very little Sediment, of a Dark-Ruddy Color,
somewhat Brackish, and what little Salt they had was like Common Salt, and had
no resemblance to Vitriol; their Earths were also Ferruginous.

Of the Water of S. Paul de Rouen.
This Water, taken toward the end of the Month of June, was Limpid and without
any manifest Taste, except a light Roughness, which impressed a Dryness upon the
Tongue. There was found at the bottom of the Bottles a small Quantity of Light
Sediment, of a Yellowish Color, inclining toward Ruddy.

During Evaporation there were formed Ruddy Mucilages, which precipitated to
the bottom, and there stuck to the sides of the Vessels a little Ruddy Earth,
the whole in very little Quantity, and without manifest Brackishness.

This Earth, being put into distilled Vinaigre, made it to take a
Hyacinth-Colour, but what gave it that Color, did afterward precipitate in a
Brown Powder.

Of the Waters of Bourberouge, Menitoue, Pont-Normand, near Mortain, in
Normandy.
These Waters of l' Election de Mortain, in Normandy, were taken in the
Springtime. The Water of Bourberouge has received its Name from the Ruddy
Earth, which is found in its Rivulet resembling Rust of Iron. It was Limpid,
and of a Taste somewhat Ferruginous.

Being evaporated, it left about the Vessels a slight Ruddish Crust, of a
Saline Taste, and at the bottom another small whitish and Insipid Crust.

The Waters of Menitoue and Pont-Normand were found altogether like to that of
Bourberouge.

Of the Water of Montbosq, in l'Election de Bayeux.
This Water, being taken in the Springtime, was very Limpid, and of a Taste
somewhat resembling that of Iron.

The Sediment which it left after Evaporation was only a little Ruddy Earth, of
the Taste of Common Salt.

Of the Water of Hebecrevon, near S Lo, in L'Election de Carantan.
This Water, being likewise taken in the Springtime, had a Taste manifestly
Ferruginous.

In Evaporation it left very little Sediment; which was only a little Ruddish
and Saline Earth, sticking to the sides of the Vessels.

Of the Water of Provins.
The Water of Provins from the Fountain de la Croix, being taken at the end of
Summer, was troubled, and of a Ferruginous Taste.

During Evaporation by a gentle Heat, the Surface was covered with many Gray
Films, distinct from one another. There was made a Precipitation of a little
subtle Earth, of the Color of Iron-Rust, which stuck to the sides of the
Vessels, which after Evaporation were found lined therewith; and above this
lining of Rust were the Gray Films. That part of this Red Earth, which stuck
uppermost in Circular form, was somewhat Brackish, and grew moist by the Air;
and what was lowest toward the bottom of the Vessels, was not Brackish, and did
not grow moist. The whole being dried and put together weighed only 1/1194.

There being poured Water upon this Sediment, in order to dissolve the Salt
which it contained, and the dissolution being filtrated through Gray Paper, and
the greatest part of the Water evaporated, there was made a Gray Sediment; and
the Liquor being poured into another Vessel to be still in part evaporated, and
afterward being exposed to the Air, there was condensed a little Salt in broad,
flat Grains, having the Taste of Common Salt. This Salt had nothing Aluminous
nor Vitriolic, neither had it resemblance to any thing but that part of
Sal-Marine, which is Chrystalliz'd through Cold and in a Humid.

The Earth of the Sediment of this Water in part dissolved in distilled
Vinaigre, which it turned Yellow. Being burnt in the Fire, it took a Color
more Brown, and seemed to resemble the Rust of Iron.

Of the Water of Apougny, near Seignelay, in Burgundy.
This Water, being taken in the Springtime, was Limpid, and of a Ferruginous
Taste.

During Evaporation, there were separated Ruddish Earths, very Light, in
Flakes, which did swim in the middle of the Water, and afterward stuck to the
sides of the Vessels. These Earths being dried had a little Brackishness, and
their Quantity was very small.

Of the Water of Vahls, in Dauphine, from the Spring called la Dominique.
This Water, taken in the Month of May, did seem very singular, and much
different from other Ferruginous Waters, having somewhat Vitriolic.

It was Limpid and without Scent; but its Taste was Vinous and Styptic, like to
that of a small White Wind, wherein a little Vitriol is dissolved. Its
Stypticity was strong and disagreeable. It took a Black Color, drawing toward
Blew, with Galls; as does Water wherein English Vitriol has been dissolved. It
made the Tincture of Tournesole of a Red Purple Color, as does the said
Vitriol; but being mixed with the Liquor of Salt of Tartar, it made no
Precipitation, as it does with Vitriol, and the whole Liquor became very Green.
There was made at the bottom of the Bottles a little Yellowish Sediment, as
happens in Water wherein there is a Ferruginous Vitriol.

This Water being put in Alembics to distill by a gentle Heat, as soon as it
began to become Tepid, it lost its first Taste, and was no longer Acid; but
retained only a Ferruginous Taste. What distilled in the beginning was Insipid,
and also what followed, and the whole resembled simple Water. There remained
only 1/1000 Greyish Substance, which had some resemblance to Vitriol lightly
Calcined; having the Taste, but more gentle. This Saline substance being
dissolved in Common Water, and mixed with the Liquor of Salt of Tartar, became
Black as Ink, with a certain Precipitation. Vitriol does not make the like
Blackness with the Liquor of Salt of Tartar.

Those who have drunk this Water, have found it Heavy on the Stomach, and
Emetic, and that it purges downwards, and makes their Stools Black.

The Seventh CLASS.
Of Cold Waters, having a Taste somewhat Aigre or Vinous, which participate of
Common Salt, or have no Salt at all.
OF this sort were the Waters of Chastelguyon, Besse, S. Pierre, la Trauliere,
Vernet, Chanonat, S. Pardoux, S. Parise, and Rueilly.

Of the Water of Chastelguyon, near Rion, in Auvergne.
This Water, taken in the beginning of Springtime, was Limpid, but had made
some whitish Sediments in the Bottles. Its Taste did a little incline to
somewhat Aigre, and was a little Vinous.

During Evaporation there were formed on the Surface White Films, very Thick,
which covered it all over; but afterward precipitated to the bottom of the
Vessels in thick Scales. The Sediment was 1/17^, one Moity whereof was Salt,
the other Earth.

This Salt was very Acrimonious, and might be compared to that part of
Sal-Marine, which is not Condensed through Cold and in a Humid, which was known by
mixing it with the Liquor of Salt of Tartar, which it caused to coagulate. This
Salt being melted in a Crucible on the Fire, fumed and produced a Scent of the
Spirit of Common Salt.

The Earth of this Sediment in part dissolved in distilled Vinaigre. It
contracted somewhat of Brackishness in the Fire, and changed its Whiteness in a
Yellowish Color.

Of the Water of Besse, near Mont d' Or, in Auvergne.
This Water, taken at the beginning of the Springtime, was Limpid, and of a
very strong Vinous Taste.

During a Gentle Evaporation it was observed, that there were formed on its
Surface very little Greyish Films, and that some Ruddish Powder stuck to the
sides of the Vessels. There remained at last at the bottom a Whitish, Leafy
Earth, almost Insipid, which amounted to 1/645 of the weight of the Water.
There could be separated from thence but very little Salt, which did resemble
that of the Water of Chastelguyon.

This Earth being freed from its Salt, and strongly burnt in the Fire, became
somewhat Reddish; and before it was put on the Fire, it in part dissolved in
distilled Vinaigre.

As for the Vinous Taste of this Water, although it was very strong, yet it was
soon lost by the heat of the Fire; as was that of other Mineral* Waters, which
were somewhat Aigre and less Vinous. In the distillation what passed in the
beginning was Insipid, as also what passed in the middle, and end thereof.

Of the Water of S. Pierre de Clermont, in Auvergne.
This Water, taken at the beginning of the Springtime, was Limpid, but had made
some Whitish Sediments in the Bottles. Its Taste inclined to somewhat Aigre and
Vinous.

During Evaporation there were formed on its Surface White Films, which
precipitated in little Flakes. The whole dry Sediment amounted to 1/240 of the
weight of the Water, whence was drawn almost a Moity of Salt, resembling that
part of Sal-Marine, which is Chrystalliz'd through Cold and in a Humid, and which
mixeth without trouble with Alcalies, or fixed Sulphurous Salts of Plants
dissolved in Common Water.

The Earth of this Sediment being freed from its Salt, as much as could be by
hot Water, dissolved with great effervescence in Spirit of Vinaigre. It
contracted in the Fire a Remarkable Brackishness, and its Whiteness became
Greyish.

Of the Water of Chanonat, near Clermont, in Auvergne.
This Water, being taken in Springtime, was very Limpid, and inclining to
somewhat Aigre.

It left after Evaporation a little Whitish Sediment, which was heapt together
in little Flakes, amounting to about 1/1830, without mixture of any manifest
Salt.

This Earth dissolved almost wholly with an Effervescence in Spirit of
Vinaigre, and became Reddish in the Fire.

Of the Water of Vernet, near Senectaire, in Auvergne.
This Water, taken in the Beginning of the Springtime, was very Limpid, of a
Taste somewhat Aigre and Vinous.

In Evaporation its whole Surface was covered with a Fat Film. The Sediment was
in very small Quantity; consisting of a little Leafy, Greyish and Insipid
Earth, which in part dissolved in distilled Vinaigre; and being burnt in the
Fire, its Color was darkened.

Of the Water of S. Pardoux, in Bourbonnois.
This Water, being taken in the Springtime, was also somewhat Aigre and Vinous.

Being evaporated, it likewise left a small Quantity of Insipid Earth.

Of the Water of la Trauliere, near S. Pardoux.
This Water, taken in the beginning of Springtime, was Limpid, its Taste was
somewhat Aigre and Piquant.

It was evaporated without Films, without Flakes, and without being troubled,
and left a little Earthy Sediment of an Ash Color, and of a Taste somewhat
Saline. The small Quantity of Salt which it contained, was found to resemble
that part of Sal-Marine which is Chrystalliz'd through Cold and in a Humid:
Forasmuch as it troubled not the Dissolutions of Alcalies and true Nitres.

Of the Water of S. Parise, in Nivernois.
This Water, taken in the Springtime, was Limpid, of a Taste somewhat Aigre,
which left a certain Harshness on the Tongue.

During Evaporation there were formed on the Surface Broad and White Films. The
whole Sediment was 1/307 of the weight of the Water; consisting of a Whitish,
Leafy Earth, without mixture of Salt. It was dissoluble in distilled Vinaigre,
and changed not in the Fire.

The Eighth CLASS.
Of Cold Waters somewhat Aigre and Vinous, which participate of a Salt
resembling the Nitre of the Ancients.
OF this Quality are the Waters of Pougues, S. Mion, S. Floret, Pont-Gibault,
Josse, S. Arban, Camarets, and Vahls.

Of the Water of Pougues, in Nivernois.
This Water, taken in the Springtime, was Limpid, of an Acid Taste, and
disagreeable to drink.

During Evaporation its Surface was covered with White Films, which stuck to
the sides of the Vessels, according as the Water diminished. There remained at
last a Whitish, Leafy Sediment, of a Saline Taste, amounting to 1/492 of the
weight of the Water; whence was drawn almost 1/3 Salt, having the Qualities of
the true Nitre, which were known by Experiments like to those, which were made
on the Salt of the Hot Water of Bourbon L' Archam bault.

This Salt, being melted in a Crucible on the Fire, took a bright Red Color,
which it kept being cooled. The Earth of this Sediment in part dissolved in
distilled Vinaigre.

Of the Water of S. Mion, in Auvergne.
This Water, taken in the Springtime, was Limpid, somewhat Aigre, and Vinous.

During Evaporation there were formed some White Films, swimming on its
Surface, which afterward by degrees precipitated, and stuck to the sides of
the Vessels, there being also made some little Flakes in the middle of the
Water. There remained at last a White, Cloddy Substance, of a Taste very
Lixivial, the weight whereof was 1/300 of the weight of the Water; whence was
separated almost 2/3 Salt, which was Nitrous as that of the Water of Pougues.

This Salt being melted in a Crucible became only Greyish. The Earth of the
Sediment dissolved with Effervescence in distilled Vinaigre; and being burnt in
the Fire, became a little Reddish.

The Experiments on this Water having been resumed at the instance of a Person
of Great Quality, who affirmed to have received benefit by the Use thereof,
which he designed to repeat; it was observed that the Water sent by him was
Limpid and somewhat Aigre. It took no Color with Galls, and its weight
exceeded not that of the Water of the Fountains of Paris, which come from the
Springs of Rongis, by above 1/502. And although this Water had no more sensible
Acidity to the Taste, yet it turned the Blew Tincture of Tournesole somewhat
into Red, giving it a Purple Color. This Water being put to Distillation in
Balneo Mariae, what passed first in very little Quantity, did turn the Tincture
of Tournesole less Red, but it somewhat troubled the Water of the Dissolution
of Mercury Sublimate; which it did not before Distillation, nor did that which
afterward distilled. What came at last did not turn Red the Tincture of
Tournesole; and although it troubled not the Dissolution of Mercury Sublimate, it
remarkably troubled that of Vitriol, and precipitated thence a Yellowish
Powder. What remained of Earth and Salt, after Distillation, was found like to
what was observed and related before.

Of the Water of S. Floret, near S. Cirque, in Auvergne.
This Water, taken in the Spring-season, was Limpid and somewhat Aigre.

During Evaporation there were amassed together certain little Ruddish Flakes,
which sticking to the sides of the Vessels formed Gross Scales. The Sediment
was found Ruddish, Leafy, and Saline: It amounted to 1/313, whence was drawn
almost 1/2 Salt, resembling the true Nitre.

This Salt, being melted in a Crucible on the Fire, became Ruddy; and the Earth
of the Sediment being freed from the Salt, dissolved almost wholly in distilled
Vinaigre with great Effervescence, and contracted in the Fire a certain
Brackishness, and Yellowish Color.

Of the Water of Pont-Gibault, in Auvergne
This Water, taken in the Springtime, as all the others of Auvergne which were
sent to the Academy, was Limpid, somewhat Aigre, and Vinous.

During Evaporation there appeared no Concretion till toward the end, when
there remained a White Sediment; the weight whereof was 1/556 of the weight of
the Water: Wherein was found a little more than 1/2 Nitrous Salt, resembling
that of the Water of S. Mion.

The Earth of this Sediment in part dissolved in distilled Vinaigre with an
Effervescence; and became a little Brown in the Fire, without receiving any
other manifest Alteration.

Of the Water of Josse, lez Maringues.
The Water sent from Josse in the Springtime, was of two Springs, the one
called le Petit Bouillon, the other le Grand Bouillon.

The former was very Limpid, of a Taste somewhat Aigre, a little Vinous;
leaving on the Tongue an Impression of Dryness.

During Evaporation there were formed on the Surface little Films, which
precipitated in small Flakes, and stuck to the sides of the Vessels. The dry
Sediment amounted to 1/345 of its weight; whence was extracted more than 1/^
Ruddish Salt, of a Lixivial Scent, and which was discovered to be Nitrous. It
became Bluish after having been melted in the Fire.

The Earth freed from this Salt, in part dissolved, with an Effervescence, in
distilled Vinaigre, and changed not its Color by the Fire.

The Water of the latter had a Vinous Taste, stronger than the other; but its
Sediments were alike, and its Salt likewise Nitrous.

Of the Water of S Arban, in Forest.
This Water, taken in the Springtime, was very Limpid, somewhat Aigre, and a
little Vinous.

During Evaporation, made by a gentle heat, there were formed on the Surface
whitish Films, Subtle, Insipid, and Sandy, being Rough to the Feeling and
Taste, as a very fine Sand. The whole dry Sediment was 1/640 Whitish, Leafy
Substance, of a Lixivial Taste; whence was drawn about 1/2 Nitrous Salt,
condensed in Thick Tablets.

The Earth of this Sediment dissolved almost wholly, with an Effervescence, in
distilled Vinaigre, and took by the Fire a small Redness as of Clear-Lacque.

Of the Water of Pont de Camarets, in Languedoc.
At Pont de Camarets, between the Dioceses of S. Pons, Alby, and Castres, there
are two Springs of Cold Water, distant two hundred Paces one from another, the
highest called the Spring of Andabre, the lowest the Spring of Prugniez; the
former, being sent in the Month of May, was Limpid, and of a Taste a little
Vinous.

Being put to evaporate, there were formed no Films on its Surface, but there
precipitated a Whitish Earth in little Flakes. The dry Sediment was found to be
1/262, having more than 3/4 Nitrous Salt.

The Earth of this Sediment being put in distilled Vinaigre, dissolved almost
wholly with an Effervescence. Being strongly burnt in a Crucible on the Fire,
it became almost Vitrified. Another part of this Earth being mixed with an equal
part of its Salt, and put on the Fire to melt, in part pierced through the
Crucible, which was found on the outside, as it were, lined with a Brown Email,
and the inside of the Crucible was covered with a Clear-Red Email. The
remainder of this substance became White at the bottom of the Crucible, after
having swelled very much.

The other Water was very Limpid, and of a Taste more Vinous than the former;
during Evaporation there were not formed any Films swimming on the Surface but
only little White Flakes, which precipitated to the bottom. The wholedry
Sediment was 1/384 of the weight of the Water; and that Quantity was
proportionally less than that of the Sediment of the Water of Andabre. It
contained also less Salt, which was only a Moity; being Nitrous as the other,
and its Earth was less Dissoluble in distilled Vinaigre, and less Fusible in
the Fire.

Of the Water of Vahls, from the Springs la Marquise, and la Marie.
Near Vahls, in Dauphine, there are four Springs of Mineral Water, which are, la
Dominique, S. Jean, la Marquise, and la Marie.

The Water of the first being different from the other, the Experiments thereon
have been referred to the Sixth Class.

The Water of the Spring of S. Jean, said to be a little Tepid and somewhat
Aigre, was not sent to the Academy, because it had the same Qualities with the
latter, being only a little more weak.

The Water of la Marquise, the Spring whereof is near that of S. Jean, is Cold.
It Is said its Taste is somewhat Aigre, and a little stronger than that of S.
Jean; and that it purges more, as well by Siege as Urine. When we received this
Water, its Taste seemed rather Brackish than Acid, and it was judged that the
Acidity which it has in its Spring was weakened by Carriage.

After Evaporation it left only a Nitrous Salt without mixture of Earth; being
1/135, White, and very Lixivial. It precipitated in a Minim Color Mercury
Sublimate dissolved in common Water, as does Salt of Tartar, and made a great
Effervescence with the Spirit of Common Salt, as do the Acrimonious Sulphurous
Salts.

The Water of the Spring la Marie, which is not far from la Marquise, has more
Acidity than the other, according to report, and makes those who drink of it to
urine more. We found therein no Acidity, but only a little Brackishness, as in
the former. The Salt of its Sediment was found alike, and in less Quantity;
being only 1/197.

Additions of the Mineral Waters of Chartres and Spa.
THe designed Impression of these Observations having been a long time hindered;
in order to join this Treatise with other Works of the Naturalists of this
Assembly, has given occasion to add here the Experiments made on a Mineral
Water lately discovered near the City of Chartres, and also on the Water of
Spa, which was brought for the use of the Queen.

Of the Water of Chartres, in Beausse.
This Water being brought to the Laboratory of the King's Library, toward the
end of the Summer, scented somewhat of the Mud. It took not with Galls that
dark Red, which is said that it takes, newly from its Spring* Which happens to
several weak Mineral Waters, which presently lose that disposition in the Air.

Being put to distill by a gentle heat, what passed first differed very little
from what distilled last, and the whole appeared nothing different from Common
Water. The dry Sediment of lb viii. of this Water distilled, weighed only Gr.
xx. which contained but Gr. iv. of a Ruddy and Gummous Salt, of an Acrimonious
Taste, and resembling that of the Salt which is drawn from Common Earth. The
remainder was a subtle Powder of a Gray Ruddish Color, which dissolved not in
distilled Vinaigre. There was perceived in this Water but little of Vaporous
Sulphureity. This Water, according to the Observations made thereon, ought to
be ranged in the Seventh Class.

The Cures, which many Persons troubled with diverse Distempers have said to
have received by the Use thereof, have excited the Curious to examine well its
Qualities upon the place, and the Conditions of its Springs. They have observed
that this Water was found in several places of a Meadow near the Walls of the
City, between the two Arms of the River, in certain Furrows, whence it springs,
and runs toward one of the Channels. This Water being newly sprung out of the
Earth, has the Propriety of extracting a Tincture from Galls; but there are
other Furrows, where the Water having no Course, loses, by standing in the
Air, this Propriety. And because in all the Ditches newly made in this Meadow,
there is found Water having the same Taste, and doing the same effect with
Galls, and that in some places of the Caussey which separateth the Channel of
the River from the Meadow, there runs a Water which has also this Propriety of
extracting a Tincture from Galls, it has been judged that all the Water of the
Meadow comes from this River, and that it takes a Mineral Quality in passing
through this Earth, which renders it wholesome and proper for the Cure of many
Diseases; and that this Water may be so much the better, forasmuch as being
before exposed to the Air in the Channel of the River, it has not that Crudity
which those Waters have which proceed from deep Earths and Rocks.

Whether its Mineral Quality be taken from the Earth of this Meadow, it were
possible to discover somewhat by Experiment on this Earth, observed as well in
its Surface as at bottom, if the soaking through of the Water of the River
hinders not the search.

Of the Water of Spa.
This Water of Spa, brought into France, for the Use of the Queen about the end
of Summer, and sent to the Laboratory of the King's Library, to be examined,
was in four Bottles; one whereof was but half-full, having been ill stopped and
the Water run out. The Water of this Bottle was a little troubled; and although it
was still of a Taste moderately inclining to somewhat Aigre and Vinous, it
tinctured not with Galls. The Water of the other three Bottles, which had been
well stopped and were full, was very Limpid and of a Taste somewhat Aigre and
Vinous. It took a Minim Color with Galls.

Being mixed with the Dissolution of Mercury Sublimate made in Common Water, it
troubled and rendered it Milky; and mixed with the Dissolution of German Vitriol
likewise made in Water, it troubled that also, and in a little time there was
made a Precipitation of Ruddish, subtle Earth; as do those Waters wherein there
is a Sulphurous Salt. The Acidity of this Water hinders it not from troubling
and precipitating Salt of Lead dissolved in Common Water: It made the Tincture
of Tournesole to turn little Red, which a less Acidity turns much: Which
gives occasion to judge that the Acidity of this Water is not Simple.

Being put to distill by a very gentle heat in a high Glass-Alembic, to separate
the more Volatile and Subtle part, what passed first was not found different
from what followed and what remained in the Cucurbite ceasing Distillation,
after having drawn about 1/4; neither was there any Acidity in the whole Water.
What remained in the Cucurbit having been put in an Earthen Vessel upon warm
Ashes to evaporate gently, in order to observe whether there were made any
Concretions during Evaporation; this Water remained always Limpid; and when
there were no more than two Ounces in the Vessel, there were made new Essays,
to know the Quality of the Salt therein, by putting a little of this Water as
well in the Dissolution of Mercury Sublimate made in Common Water, which it
troubled and made Milky, as on that of German Vitriol, which it also troubled
with a certain Precipitation of Ruddish Earth, and also on Syrup of Violets,
which became Green. All which Effects were Proofs of a Sulphurous Salt,
confirming those drawn from the former Essays.

The Vessel wherein the Evaporation was made, was found lined in its upper part
near the edge, and all about, with a Saline Concretion, and lower toward the
bottom it was lined with a Yellowish Earth almost Insipid, but a little
Restringent.

The Evaporation being finished, there remained of the whole Quantity of this
Water, which was lb vij. vj. vj. an Earthy and somewhat Saline Sediment, being
all over the inward Surface of the Vessel. This Sediment being taken thence
weighed only Gr. xlviij. whereof 3/4 were a Light, Subtle, Ruddish Earth, and
1/4 was a Sulphurous Salt, which caused Mercury Sublimate to precipitate of a
White Color, as does the Salt of Marle, and also the Volatile Salts of Plants
and Animals, and not of a Red or Orange Color, as do the true Nitres and
Alcalies. This Particularity would have obliged us to have made a Ninth Class,
wherein to have placed this foreign Water, if we had found the like in France,
to have filled it up.

Advertisements and Corollaries.
THe great Quantity of Mineral Water, which Physicians cause them to drink, to
whom they prescribe the Use thereof, for the Cure of some Rebellious Diseases,
which yield not to Ordinary Remedies; gives occasion to judge that the
Principal Effect which they expect, is the cleansing of the Viscera by this
Inward Washing. This Effect is considerable, because the most part of Chronical
Diseases proceed from the Obstruction of the Viscera, which this great Quantity
of Drink may resolve. The Ease, which many Patients receive, is the reason why
few Physicians give themselves the trouble of searching the particular
Qualities of these Waters; which are nevertheless very different, and
considerable enough to deserve Inquiry, in order to make the better use of
them, according to the Diversity of Diseases, and the different Constitution of
the Diseased.

It Is easy to judge that all Waters of Running Springs; such as are the Mineral
Waters which are used in Physic, may have particular different Qualities; if it
be considered, that some of these Waters come from Places near the Surface of
the Earth, others from certain Places more Deep. Those which have not been able
to penetrate further, because of Beds of Stone, or Fat Earth, which happen
underneath, rest on this sort of Bottoms, and run out only where they find any
Passages. They have their Originals either from the fall of Rain-Waters, or by
the Percolation of the Waters of Rivers and Lakes, or of the Sea, through the
Neighboring Earths, or those which they can reach; and in traversing these
Earths, which are less compact, they dissolve the Salts which are there, and
impregnate themselves with certain Subtle, Earthy Particles which are found by
Evaporation. The Water which comes from Places more Deep, whither its Weight
caused it to fall, according as it could pass, cannot rise again in its Liquid
Consistence without force; but being rarefied by some inward heat of the Earth,
it rises in Vapors; afterward resuming its first and Natural Liquid
Consistence, by the Cold toward the Surface of the Earth, in coming forth it
produces Springs, and also little Lakes on the highest Mountains, whither it
may very well rise, since that it mounteth even to the middle Region of the
Air, where Snow is formed, and whence Rain falls. These Waters being rarefied
in the Profundities of the Earth, whence they rise, receive easily Mixtures of
Mineral Exhalations and Vapors, which are frequent in these Places; but these
Mixtures being not often distinguished in these Waters rising from their
Springs, either by Scent or Taste, cannot be understood but by their Effects;
the Assignment whereof to their proper Causes is not always easy and certain.

The Information, which we give here, of the Salts and Earths of several
Mineral Waters, will not fully satisfy the Curiosity of those who would be
likewise instructed concerning the other Causes of the Proprieties of these
Waters; since that besides the mixture of Concrete substances found in them,
according to the Observations here related, there may also be contained
substances not Concrete, so Subtle and so Volatile, that there can remain
nothing in the Sediments which may be perceived to differ from the Salts and
Earths; and which is not at all found in what passes by Distillation. This
Taste somewhat Aigre or Vinous, which is lost in the Air and by Heat, ought to
have for its Subject a Spirituous and most Volatile Substance, which it were
very desirable, were known. The Heat which some have in their Springs, and at
coming out of the Earth, may be attributed to hot Vapors which are mixed with
them in their Course through Subterraneous Profundities; where the Cold of the Air
has no free access: And some particular Effects of these Waters on diverse
Subjects, give occasion to judge that they are not Pure and Simple. Wherefore
the Academy has proposed to labor, in order to the enquiry of these things,
for the Satisfaction of the Curious and Public Benefit.

In the mean while the Observations of the Salts and Earths of these Waters may
serve as well in Physic as for Mechanic Arts; to make a judgment of the fitness
of some of these Waters for certain designed Uses.

The two Genders of Salts, under which are ranged the Salts of those Waters,
whereof hitherto has been spoken, may possibly have Differences which divide
each of these Genders into several Species; as the Naturalists of the Royal
Academy have remarked in Salts drawn from the Ashes of several Plants; which
have been observed some to resemble the true Nitre, others Common Salt, and to
retain the participation of the Specific Proprieties of their Subjects.

Some of the Earths which are found together with these Salts in the Sediments
of Mineral Waters evaporated or distilled, may have particular Uses, according
to their Differences. Some Germans have remarked that the White Earth of the
Mineral Water of Schwalbach is Purgative. They had in the Academy some Bottles
of this Water, the Taste whereof was Vinous and Strong. The Salt of its
Sediment was Nitrous, and caused Mercury Sublimate dissolved in Common Water to
precipitate in a Nacarate.
deep Crimson, as do the Alcalies of Plants. The Earth separated from this
Sediment was White as Chalk, but there was not Quantity enough to make
Experiment of its Purgative Faculty, and we had neglected to observe this in
several like Earths taken from the Nitrous Waters of this Kingdom. The true
Nitre of the Ancients, being Sulphurous, and having resemblance to the Alcalies
of Plants, has likewise this Propriety, with them, to move by Siege. And this
White Earth which is found with Nitrous Salts of Mineral Waters may participate
of the same Quality, even as the Coagulum of the Salt of Tartar made by the
Second part of Sal-Marine, retains some Properties of its Salt, although it be
Insipid, and not Dissoluble in Water, but only in Acid Liquors, such as is
distilled Vinaigre, which dissolves it with an Effervescence; the like whereof
has been observed in several White Earths of Nitrous Mineral Waters.

As to the Observation of the Tastes of the Waters brought to us, we have been
only able to judge, by what has been remarked by tasting them at their
arrival. They who are upon the Place of their Springs may better make a
distinction, particularly in those which are somewhat Aigre and Vinous, the
Taste whereof is either weakened or lost by being kept or exposed to the Air.
They may also better perceive the Degrees of their Coloring with Powders of
Galls, Oak-leaves, Myrobalans, Pomegranate-barks, and other like substances;
and also judge more precisely of their Consistence and Weight. The Naturalists
of the Royal Academy have not been able to observe exactly all these things in
the Waters which have been sent them from distant Places, and which might have
received several Changes as well by Time as Carriage, both in their Taste and
Disposition to take Colors with certain Substances, and in their Consistence
more or less Thin and Subtle. The Method which they have followed in their
Experiments on the Waters which have been sent them, may be serviceable to
those who will examine them at their Springs, in order to gain a more exact
knowledge of them.

This Vaporous Substance of Mineral Waters, which are somewhat Aigre and
Vinous, is probably the first Being of Mineral Sulphur, and of the Concretions
thence arising. There are found Earths impregnated with this Acid, Vaporous,
Sulphurous Substance, from the Concretion whereof are sometimes made Sulphurous
and Vitriolic Minerals. And for the most part there is not made any Mineral
Concretion discernable in these Earths, where there is not found either Mineral
Sulphur, or Vitriol, or Metal. This Mineral, Vaporous, and Indigested Substance
may very well be the Principle of Vitriol, but in its first state it cannot be
a Vitriolic Product, if it be in those Earths where there is not already
somewhat of Vitriol. It is more easy to observe it in its Products, when it
has received some Mineral Concretion. The Humid Air penetrating into the
Mineral Stones, which are Insipid, but impregnated with a Mineral Sulphur,
which is easily perceived when it is disengaged by Fire, does manifestly give to
the Taste a Sulphurous Acidity, which before was not sensible. And of the
Concrete Sulphur of these Mineral Stones or Marchasites penetrated by the Humid
Air, is made a Concrete, Vitriolic Juice, which is the Product of this Mineral
Sulphur, the Principle whereof has been an Acid and most Vaporous Substance.
Which also has been observed in many Clayie Earths exposed to the Air, which
dissolving into Powder, contracted at first an Acidity more sensible to the
Nose than to the Tongue; afterward there were made Sulphurous and Inflammable
Concretions, and at length Saline Concretions which were reduced to Vitriol.

This Subtle, Vaporous Substance, Acid, or rather Harsh, produces not always
Vitriolic Concretions; and it happens in many Earths that through default of
requisite dispositions it remains in its first Being. Then it is not a Vapor
of Vitriol, and the Mineral Waters which pass through the Earths where this Subtle
Matter is found, and which contract an Acidity by mixture therewith, ought not
to be called Vitriolic. We have observed in many Waters impregnated with this
Acid Vapor, that nevertheless there was not found there any true Vitriol, or
any Substance resembling Alum, and that the Salt which remained in their
Sediments was a Nitre, such as the Ancients have described, and which is as far
different from Vitriol and Alum, as are Alcalies, or fixed Sulphurous Salts of
Plants.

The Salts, Vitriols, Alums, and other Concrete Substances dissoluble in Water,
may be so mixed with Mineral Waters, that they may not be much perceivable
except in their Sediments; but the Sulphurs and Bitumens are always easy to be
discerned in the Waters wherein they are contained, because they either settle
or swim on the Surface, being not capable of mixture as the Salts. We have not
perceived any in the Waters which have been sent us. Those which were the
Hottest in their Springs have not seemed to us more Sulphurous and Bituminous
than the others. And if there is found any Sulphur or Bitumen in their Basins
upon the sides of their Receptacles, or in their Mud, it may be that these are
not those Inflammable Substances in the Earth which have rendered them Hot. It
is more probable that they contract this Heat by the mixture of some Hot
Vapors, which they meet with in Deep places through which they pass. Experience
does sufficiently show that no Combustible matter takes Fire, or keeps it long
without Air; and that to extinguish the Fire of Sulphurs and Bitumens inflamed,
it is enough to hinder them from the Communication of the Air, by covering well
the Vessels which contain these Substances. The Sulphurs which burn in Certain
Cavities of Mountains discovered do not take Fire, but in those places where
they take Air; and when that which lies open is spent, the Fire ceases in what
remains covered, although it be equally Combustible. And if some Substances take a
Fire strong enough not to be stifled under Ground, it causes what covers it
to crack, to give it self Vent and take Air, as does Powder in Mines.

If there are not perpetual Subterraneous Fires, the Heat of some Mineral
Waters, which continue to be Hot in their Springs, cannot be attributed to
them. It is more probable that there are in several places of the Earth Hot
Vapors and Exhalations, the Heat whereof is preserved in places Deep and
Close, where the Air does not penetrate to cool them, and where these
substances Rarifi'd have not room enough to distend themselves more, and suffer
some weakening of their Heat, or Dissipation by a more great Rarefaction. But
the Heat of these Vapors may be augmented by their pressing together in Close
Passages, whereinto they insinuate themselves; and if they meet with Waters
running through the same Passages, they may heat them by mixing with them.

There have been made some Observations which give occasion to judge that the
Waters of Hot Springs and Natural Baths are made warm by Hot Vapors which pass
with them.

I. That these Hot Mineral Waters burn not the Mouth and Tongue of those who
drink of them at their coming forth from their Springs, as Common Water heated
by Fire to a like Degree would do. Which seems to proceed from the Subtilty of
the Substance which produces this Heat in the Water. The Flame of Spirit of
Wine burns not the Hand so strongly, as that of a burning Coal.

II. That the Heat of Mineral Waters does not act on some tender substances, as
does that of Common Water raised by Fire to the same Degree; for it has been
seen that Dock-Leaves, which were softened and boiled easily enough in Common
Water, moderately heated on the Fire, did not soften in the Mineral Waters of
Neris in Bourbonnois, which are the Hottest in France, and which are rendered
difficult to drink by the excess of their Heat; but these Leaves only changed
Color, and became Yellowish, like dead dried Leaves. Which gives occasion to
judge that this Heat proceeds from some Vapor or Exhalation different from
Water, and more proper to dry than to soften, as does Common Water, which
humects.

III. That these Waters are more Hot in their Springs by Night than by Day.
Which may be caused by the Cool of the Air, which hinders the Dissipation of
the Hot Vapors and Exhalations which are mixed with them.

IV. That these Waters being exposed to the Air, from out their Springs, cooled
not so soon as does Common Water heated by Fire. Because the Cold Air, which
makes the Motion excited by the Fire in Common Water soon to cease, keeps in
the Hot Vapors which warm the Mineral Waters by their mixture, and hinders
them from dispersing so soon.

V. That Hot Mineral Waters have no more Disposition to Boil on the Fire than
Common Cold Waters, there being as much time required to cause the one to boil
as the other. Which clearly shows that the Heat which Mineral Waters contract
in the Earth, proceeds not from a Motion of their Particles excited by any
Subterraneous Fire; for this Motion being continued and augmentted by the Fire
of a Chimney or Furnace, would cause them to boil sooner than those which being
Cold have not that Disposition by a Motion Commenced. Wherefore the Heat of
Mineral Waters proceeds from certain Warm Vapors or Exhalations mingled with
them, which the Fire drives away before they can boil thereon.

If there is without Fire in the Earth, any Heat strong enough to warm the
Waters of some Springs, it must necessarily be that this Heat, which is
communicated to Waters which are Warm from some Thousands of Years, and perhaps
have ever been so, in order to perpetuate self, keeps in Deep places, and far
distant from the Surface of the Earth, where the Air which encompasseth that,
might weaken it by its Cold, which seems to be the most extreme. According to
this supposition, the Difference of Waters of Hot and Cold Springs, whereof
some are observed to make like Sediments, and to have Salts of the same
Species, should proceed from this, that these Waters pass in the Earth through
Places more or less Deep. We observe that Waters which run on the Surface of
the Earth are Cold, unless warmed by the Sun, and we find not any Heat very
manifest in the parts of the Earth which are not very Deep: Which gives
occasion to judge that what there is of Heat remarkable in the Earth, ought to
be placed far therein.

It is not easy to comprehend the Qualities of these Vapors or Exhalations
which mix with Mineral Waters and warm them. It seems not necessary that they
should be all Bituminous or Sulphurous, tho some are such. At Ain la Chapelle
are found Flowers of Sulphur raised upon the Walls of Hot Springs which are
there; and in the Burning Fountain of Dauphine is seen a Flame which Issues
forth with the Water, and which probably was not Flame under the Earth, where
it had not Air enough to burn, and scarcely the Water which issues forth with
it is heated. But in many other Springs of Hot Mineral Waters there is nothing
seen either Sulphurous or Inflammable. There are many other Substances which
are heated without taking Fire, the Vapors whereof mix with Hot Mineral
Waters, but their Qualities are not understood but by the effects which they
produce.

The Royal Academy of the Sciences has not had Opportunities to observe the
diverse Effects of Mineral Waters, as well Hot, as Tepid and Cold, by employing
them to different Uses. The Observations of the Effects of these Waters on
Persons who use them in Drinking, Bathing, Pumping, Washing, Embrocation, etc.
are reserved for the Physicians, whose Duty it is to know the Particular
Constitutions of those Persons, and the State of their Health Declining or
Improving. As for the Uses in Mechanical Arts, it may be easy to remark what
one or other sorts of these Waters can do, in the steeping of Hemp, whitening
of Linen, dying of Wool and Silk, dressing of Leather, tempering of Iron,
boiling of Pease and such like, watering of Plants, watering of Cattle, etc.

As for the Observations, concerning the different Weights and Consistences of
Mineral Waters, they may be better made on the Places of their Springs, where
they are not yet altered, either in Composition or Consistence; which they
certainly are, being carried and kept, having lost some part of those Vaporous
substances which being mixed with them, made their Consistence more Thin and
Subtle; or having contracted some Corruption which has rendered them more Thick
and almost Mucilaginous; or having made a Precipitation of some Mineral
Earthiness, which being imperceptibly mixed with them, renders them less Subtle,
and which is not ordinarily separated when they are drunk fresh, at which time
they are judged more efficacious than when they are kept.

The Instruments used by the Academy to observe the Weight and Consistence of
Liquors, were the Araiometre and the Compound Balance.

The Araiometre is a little hollow Globe of Glass, having in its bottom a small
Cavity to contain so much Quicksilver as is necessary to make this Globe sink
in the Liquor wherein it may be put. In its upper part is a little Pipe an Inch
long; and at the end of this Pipe there is a small Scale to receive the
adjusted Weights, which cause it to sink in different Liquors to a certain Mark
made in the middle of this Pipe. By this Instrument put in several Liquors is
found not only whether their Consistence be different, but also how much the
Difference is, by the Observation of the Weight of the Instrument, and of that
which is put in the Scale, to make it sink equally in diverse Liquors.

The Compound Balance is an ordinary Balance, moving easily, and very exact; to
one of the Scales whereof is hung by some Horse-hairs a Cylinder of Tin or
Leton well polished, having about four Inches Height and as much Diametre, to
be able to take up in the Water the space which a Pint of Liquor of Paris
Measure would take, and of such a weight that it may sink in all sorts of
Waters. This Cylinder being put in the Water the Weight and Consistence whereof
is to be observed, there is put in the other opposite Scale of the Balance so
much weight as is necessary to keep the two Scales Equipois'd; and according to
the difference of Weight, which is requisite to keep this equal Poise in diverse
Waters, judgment may be made of the difference of their Consistence and Weight
in like Quantity. And to know what is the Weight of this Quantity of Water
which the Cylinder takes up, the Weight put in the opposite Scale is to be
subtracted from that of the Cylinder. This may be practiced on Mineral Waters
taken at their Springs, and presently examined.

The like Observations may be made on Common Waters, in ordinary Use, as well
for drinking, as dressing of Victuals, to the end that by the knowledge of
their Properties judgment may be made what they contribute toward Health.
These Waters, ordinarily called Common, in distinction from Mineral, being not
altogether Pure and Simple, may have acquired diverse Proprieties by the
diversity of Mixtures which in them are made, either in the Air or Earth. And
although they contain none of those Species of Minerals which may be referred to
the middle Mineral or Metallic Gender, the participation whereof gives the Name
of Mineral to those Waters which are impregnated therewith; nevertheless they
have something Mineral: for the Salts and Earths, which are always mixed with
them, are Mineral Productions. And in the most part of the Waters sent for
Mineral, whereon the Observations made in the Royal Academy are here related,
there was found only Salt and Earth in different Proportions. The distinction
between the Waters of this sort which are used only medicinally, and those
which are commonly made Use of in order to Aliment, depending only upon More or
Less of these mixtures. The Common Waters, which are esteemed the best, are the
most Subtle, Light, and less Mixed.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
Martini Lister, e S. R. Land. de Fontibus Medicatis Angliae, Exercitationes
Duae. Londini. 1684. in 8o.
THe Design of this Ingenious Author being to show that in the several Mineral
Waters of England, whereon he had made Experiment, were found only two sorts of
Salts, viz. Common Salt, and a sort of Nitre, called by him Nitrum Calcarium;
and only two sorts of Sediments, viz. Ocre and Chalk-stone; it may not be
improper to mention this Book as confirming the Experiments of our French
Virtuosi.

A TABLE Of the WATERS, The Qualities whereof are examined in this Book.
A
THe Water of Andabre, at Pont de Camarets, in Languedoc, P. 96. Of Apougny,
near Seignelay, in Burgundy, 82. Of Availles, in Poictou, 70. Of Auteuil, near
Paris, 72.
B.
The Water of Bagnieres, in la Bigorre, 45. Of Balleruc, in Languedoc, 43. Of
Barbazan, in le Commingeois, 44. Of Bardon, near Moulins, 62. Of Bareges, in la
Bigorre, 44. Of Belesme, in Normandy, 77. Of Besse, near Mont d' Or, in
Auvergne, 86. Of Bievre, near Paris, 73. Of Bourberouge, near Mortain, in
Normandy, 79. Of Bourbon Lancy, in Bourbonnois, 36. Of Bourbon L' Archambault,
in Bourbonnois, 51. Of Bourbonne, in Champagne, 49. Of la Bourboule, in the
Parish of Murat de Quairs, 41.
C.
The Water of Capvert, in la Bigorre, 69. Of Chanonat, near Clermont, in
Auvergne, 87. Of Chartres, in Beausse, 99. Of Chasteau-Gontier, in Anjou, 73.
Of Chastelguyon, near Rion, in Auvergne, 85. Of Chaudesaigues, in the High
Country of Auvergne, 54.
D.
The Water of Digne, in Provence, 48.
E.
The Water of Encausse, in le Commingeois, 60. Of Evos, in Combrailles, from
the Great Spring of the Baths, 42. Of Evos, from the little Spring of the Town,
57.
F.
The Water of Fonsrouilleuse, in Saintonge, 76. Of Forges, in Normandy, 78.
H.
The Water of Hebecrevon, near S. Lo, in Normandy, 80.
I.
The Water of Jaude, in Auvergne, 67. Of Jonas, at Bourbon l'Archambault, 70.
Of Josse, lez Maringues, 94.
M.
The Water of Man's, 77. Of Martres de Veyre, in Auvergne, 66. Of Menitoue, in
Normandy, 79. Of Montbosq, in Normandy, 80. Of Mont d' Or, in Auvergne, 55. Of
Montendre, in Saintonge, 76.
N.
The Water of Neris, in Bourbonnois, 56.
P.
The Water of Passi, near Paris. 72. Of Pons, in Saintonge, 75. Of
Pont-Gibault, in Auvergne, 93. Of Pont-Normand, in Normandy, 79. Of Pougues, in
Nivernois, 90. Of Premeau, in Burgundy, near Nuits. 60. Of Provins, 81. Of
Prugniez, at Pont de Camerets, in Languedoc, 96
R.
The Water of la Rocheposay, in Touraine, 74.
S.
The Water of Sail lez Chasteau Morand, 58. Of S. Arban, in Forest, 95. Of S.
Floret, near S. Cirque, in Auvergne, 93. Of S. Mion, in Auvergne, 91. Of S.
Pardoux, in Bourbonnois, 88. Of S. Parise, in Nivernois, 89. Of S. Paul de
Rouen, 79. Of S. Pierre de Clermont, in Auvergne, 87. Of S. Reyne, in Burgundy,
71. Of Spa, in the Country of Liege, 102.
T.
The Water of la Trauliere, in Bourbonnois, 89.
V.
The Water of Vahls, in Dauphine, from the Spring called la Dominique, 83. Of
Vahls, from the Springs, la Marquise and la Marie, 97 Of Vaujour, in the Duchy
of la Valliere, 74. Of Verberie, near Compiegne, 77. Of Vernet, in Auvergne,
88. Of Vic, in Carladois, 65. Of Vic le Comte, in Auvergne, 63. Of Vichy, in
Bourbonnois, de la Grille, 57. Of Vichy, from the Great Basin, and the little
Basins, 62.
FINIS.

