THE TOMB OF SEMIRAMIS Hermetically Sealed, Which if a Wiseman open (not the
Ambitious Covetous Cyrus) he shall find the Treasures of Kings, inexhaustible
Riches to his content.

H. V. D.

He that exercises Love, will apprehend what I say: but if I speak to the
ungrateful, he shall not comprehend my sayings.

S. Aug. of Divine Love. London, Printed for William Cooper at the Pelican in
Little Britain. 1684.

Most Noble and most Famous, S.R.J. curious in the inspection of Nature, and my
most honored Patrons.
NOt only in former times, but also in this old Age of the World, nothing has
been deeper buried, nor hitherto more desired by all, especially the lovers of
Art, than the knowledge of that great Mystery of the Philosophers, which by a
known word is called the Philosophers-Stone; We therefore preserving the
Inscription of the Monument, do raise this knowledge, buried and obscured under
the pretext of the Tomb of the most wise Semiramis, formerly Queen of Babylon,
out of its Grave, and present it to the View of the Learned, which if (not an
ambitious covetous Cyrus, but) a wise man open, he will to his satisfaction
find Royal and inexhaustible Treasures: I may also add constant Health: which
two, you will say, are the principal supporters of an happy life.

But some happily of no small ingenuity will imagine that this Tomb may be opened
by Women's work, or Childrens sport: but let them know that this Knowledge is a
most deep River, wherein the Lamb wades, that is, the upright profits; and
the Elephant swims, that is, the most Learned do fluctuate, yea are drowned in
their opinions, errors and doubts; whilst one is yet doubtful concerning the
true subject of the great Work, yea generally a stranger to it; another very
solicitous in acquiring the sophical Mercury, wearyeth himself with
unsuccessful labors, not knowing what it is, or of what form; Another tortures
himself with vain perplexity to know what the Philosophers Fire is, what the
magical Elements, the Key, or dissolving Menstruum, whence it is to be drawn,
whether sweet, or corrosive? cold or fiery? it has troubled me often to see
such men so concerned, and in vain laborious in those things, wherein they at
length could find nothing but vanity and affliction of mind; wherefore
commiserating them by the impulse of Charity, I do freely impart (though many
will accuse me as guilty of violated silence) the Light mercifully communicated
to me, that they may use the same as a Key to the Sanctuary of that sacred
Knowledge.

But the curious Industry, and indefatigable Curiosity of you, being most
excellent in the exact Arcana's and Work of Polydaedalus nature, having invited
all the Learned men of the World by your most sweet incitements, to communicate
the most secret things, enjoyneth and obliges me to make you (the genuine Sons
of all sorts of Knowledge) Heirs of this, which in my judgment is the most exact
and curious Work of all Nature. But who I am, enquire not. I am a man that
makes it my study to profit others, your Friend, and an admirer of your
Virtues, known to many, at least by name.

Farewell therefore, ye Students of Nature, and Highpriests of Art, the lofty
Stars of Germany, God be with you, and with his Power strengthen your Works and
Thoughts, that they may be highly advantageous to the whole Commonwealth of
Learning, for the increase of the Publick-good, and the immortal Glory of your
own Names.

From my Study, Jan. 1. 1674.
THE Tomb of SEMIRAMIS Hermetically Sealed.
CHAP. I.
Of the Physical subject of the Philosophers Stone.
THE Fear of the Lord is the beginning of our Work, and the end Charity, and
love of our Neighbor. Entering therefore with the assistance of our good God
upon so divine a Work, it must be first enquired, what the subject thereof is.
For as a Plough-man in vain prepares his Ground for Harvest, unless he be
assured of the Seed; so also he prepares the Chemical Ground without any
recompense, if he knows not what he sows therein: and herein at this day many
do perplex themselves, and are hurried into different opinions.

But this is not a place to discuss all these things, whilst some do seek it in
the Animal Kingdom in Blood, Sperm, Sweat, Urine, Hair, Dung, Eggs, Serpents,
Toads, Spiders, etc. Others are with great diligence employed in the Vegetable
Kingdom, especially in Wine for the unprofitable Magistery. For though it be
manifest to us, that the supreme Medicine of our health may be obtained in
either Kingdom, and indeed in Man, (especially in his heart) as also in Wine:
for as Gold contains the virtues of all Minerals, so do these two comprehend
the powers of all Animals and Vegetables as contracted into one; yet that the
great work of Philosophers could be made from them, was never in the thought of
any Adept, it is therefore requisite to be sought in the Mineral Kingdom. But
there is also here a great company of Dissenters, so that we have need of an
Oedipus. For some there be that think to extract it out of the middle Minerals,
as they call them, namely, Salt, Nitre, Alom, and such other, but all in vain,
because they have in them no Argent vive, into which they may be resolved; in
which error even we in our primitive ignorance were also involved. It remains
therefore to be supposed, that Metals are the Physical subject of our blessed
Stone. But here also the matter is in suspense, because Metals are some perfect
and some imperfect.

But in fine we say, that all fused Metals, but especially the not fused,
though imperfect, may by the intimate depuration of their original pollution
(which yet is very difficult, and by outward appearance scarce possible) be the
subject of the Stone, whereof, says Flamel, some have operated in Jupiter,
others in Saturn, but I (says he) have operated and found it out in Sol: and
in Exercit. ad Turbam it is read, That all Metals clean and unclean are
internally Sol, and Luna, and Mercury, but there is one true Sol, which is
drawn from them. And the Author of the secret work of the Hermetick Philosophy,
Can. 16.says, He that seeks the Art of multiplying and perfecting imperfect
Metals but by the nature of Metals, deviates from the truth; for Metals must be
expected from Metals, as the species of Man from Man, of Beast from Beast. And
Can. 18. He proceeds thus: Perfect Bodies are endowed with a more perfect Seed;
under the hard shell therefore of the perfect Metals lies the perfect Seed,
which he that knows how to extract by Philosophical Resolution, is entered
into the Royal Path. So also that Anonymous Philalethes in his Introduction
into the King's Sacred Palace, Chap. 19. concerning the progress of the Work in
the first forty days; There is indeed in all (even in the common) Metals, Gold,
but nearer in Gold and Silver, though (as the same Adept speaks well) there is
yet one thing in the Metallic Kingdom of an admirable offspring, in which our
Gold is nearer than in common Gold and Silver, if you seek it in the hour of
its nativity, which melts in our Mercury, as Ice in warm Water, etc.

But leaving now these more imperfect Metals, at present we declare those two
great and more perfect Luminaries Sol and Luna, to wit, Gold and Silver, to be
the Physical subject of the Stone, which way a great part of the Philosophers
have followed, and came to their desired end. Which same thing Augurellus
shows, 2 Chrysop. when he says, Take a Metal pure, and purged of all its
dross, whose Spirit recedes in its secret part, and being pressed with a great
weight, lives privily, and desires to be released from bands, and to be sent
out of prison to Heaven, being spread into thin plates. The same in Chrysostom. lib.
1. Seek not the principles of Gold any-where else: for in Gold is the seed of
Gold; though being close shut up, it retires further, and is to be sought by us
with tedious labor. And concerning the dignity of both the Luminaries, Lully,
that Star of Spagyrick Philosophy, in his Book, P.M. 28. says, Two are more
pure than the rest, namely, Gold and Silver, without which the Work cannot be
begun or finished, because in them is the purest substance of Sulphur perfectly
purified by the ingenuity of Nature; and out of these two bodies prepared with
their Sulphur or Arsenick, our Medicine may be extracted, and cannot be had
without them. And Clangor Buccinae says, You must operate prudently and
expressly, because neither Sol nor Luna can be without ferment, and any other
seed or ferment is not proper and useful, but Gold to the red, and Silver to
the white; which bodies being first subtiliated under weight, must then be
sowed, that they may putrify and be corrupted; where one form being destroyed,
another more noble is put on; and this is done by the means of our Water alone.
From hence a certain Anonymous in his Answer excellently concludes; As Fire is
the principle of Fire, so Gold is the principle of Gold; such as the Cause is,
such is the Effect; such as the Father, such the Son; such as the Seed is, such
is the Fruit; Man generates Man, and a Lion a Lion.

But you will say, The Philosophers affirm, that the matter ought to be such,
that the Poor as well as the Rich may obtain it; from whence that saying is,
God has granted this treasure to be sought by all men; nor does he deny that
great Good to any man, except to him that makes himself unworthy by the
depraved affections of his heart. And Geber, You ought not to consume your
goods because of mean price: if you understand the principles of Art, which we
shall deliver to you, you will attain to the complete Magistery. For if it were
Gold, or any such costly thing, the Poor would be constrained to postpone this
glorious Work. And whereas an Artist may oftentimes happen to err, a poor man
could not repeat the Work after an error committed, which must absolutely be
done, if there be no other remedy. And Lilium; This Stone is openly sold at the
meanest rate, which if the Sellers knew, they would keep it in their hands, and
by no means sell it. And another Anonymous, Our expenses exceed not the price
of two Florins: which Arnoldus thus confirms; Hold fast, because the charge of
our most noble Art exceeds not the price of two pieces of Gold in its emption,
that is, in the operation. And Geber says, If in operations you lose your
money, reflect not injuriously on us, but impute it to your own imprudence; for
our Art requires no great expenses.

To which we answer; That we never denied, that besides Gold and Silver there
is not also granted another subject of meaner value, where we excluded not
imperfect Metals, as we mentioned before out of an Anonymous Philosopher in
these words; There is yet one thing in the Metallic Kingdom of an admirable
beginning, etc. though many Philosophers would have this vile price to be
understood of our dissolving Menstruum.

Moreover, you will say out of Sendivogius Tract. 11. in your Operations take
not common Gold and Silver, for these are dead things.

We answer, by granting that the Stone is not made of common Gold and Silver,
as such, and so long as they are dead, but when resuscitated, and reduced into
their first seminal nature, and made like unto the Philosophers Gold, then do
they not only express their seed, but also do serve instead of ferment: which a
certain Philosopher confirms in these words, saying; Neither the ancient nor
the modern Philosophers have ever made any thing but Gold of Gold, and Silver
of Silver, yet that was not common Gold or Silver.

By which it appears, that the Philosophers Gold is not common Gold, neither in
color nor in substance, but that which is extracted from them is the white and
red tincture.

CHAP. II.
What the Physical or Philosopher's Gold is.
THe Philosophers Gold or Silver, is a metallic body, resolved into the last
matter to wit, into Mercury, which is the first matter of the Stone, and is
thus proved: Every thing is from that into which it is resolved: But all Metals
are reduced into Argent vive; ergo, they were Argent vive.

For, according to the common opinions of Philosophers, that which the wise men
seek is in Mercury. Moreover, Mercury is the radix in Alchymy, because from it,
by it, and in it are all Metals. And Theophrastus (that most profound Sea of
the Spagyrick-Philosophy) thus speaks concerning the first matter of Metals: To
extract Mercury from metallic bodies, is nothing else but to resolve or reduce
them into their first matter, that is, running Mercury, even such as it was in
the center of the Earth, before the generation of Metals, to wit, a moist and
viscous vapor, which is the Philosophers Gold or Silver, containing in it
invisibly the Mercury and Sulphur of Nature, the principles of all Metals,
which Mercury is of ineffable virtue and efficacy, and contains divine secrets.

CHAP. III.
Of the preparation of Bodies for the Philosophers Mercury.
AVicen says, If you desire to operate, you must necessarily begin your Work
in the solution or sublimation of the two Luminaries; because the first degree
of the Work is, that Argent vive may be made from thence; but because these, as
the more perfect Bodies, are closer bound, and have an harder coagulation, that
they may be reduced into Mercury, they do in the first place require
preparation, and physical calcination, which indeed is not so necessary in
Silver; for by reason of the cleanness and softness thereof, our Water easily
acts upon it; which is not done in Gold and the other Metals, which do all
require Calcination, on which our Water then more easily acts, especially if
those which are impure be depurated for the similitude of substance.

Concerning the Calcination of Bodies out of the secret Work of the Doctor and
Bishop of Trent for the Philosophers Stone: Metals to be dissolved ought to be
first calcined or purged in Lac virginis, and Luna being most fine and subtly
filed, must be dissolved in Aquafortis, and distilled rainwater in which Sal
Armoniack or common Salt has been dissolved; then it must be precipitated into
a most white Calx, and washed in decanted water, and the Calx must be
edulcorated in other rainwater hot, that all the saltness and acrimony may be
taken away, then must it be dried, and it will be a most pure Calx.

But Gold must be calcined after this manner: Make an Amalgame with Gold (which
must be first depurated by the Body of the black Eagle, that it may be made
beautiful and glorious above measure) and Mercury very well purged with Salt
and Vinegar, and strained through Leather, put it in purified Aquafortis, that
all the Mercury may be dissolved, decant the Aquafortis from the Calx of Sol,
wash the Calx as aforesaid in warm water, and dry it with a gentle heat, that
Calx (if artificially and lightly reverberated, yet so that it flow not) will
be converted into a most beautiful Crocus.

Gold that it may be reduced into the first Matter, or Mercury of Philosophers,
is thus otherwise calcined, whereof Paracelsus, in his 7th Book of
Metamorphosis concerning resuscitation, declares, namely; that Metal must be
calcined with revivified Mercury, by putting Mercury with the Metal into a
Sublimatory, digesting them together, till an Amalgame be made, then sublime
the Mercury with a moderate Fire, and bruise it with the metallic Calx, and as
before, repeat the digestion and sublimation, and that so often till the Calx
being put to a burning Candle will melt like ice, or wax. This Metal so
prepared, put to digestion in Horse-dung or in Bal. Mariae, moderately hot,
digesting it for a month, and the Metal will be converted into living Mercury,
that is, into the first matter, which is called the Philosophers Mercury; and
the Mercury of Metals, which many have sought, but few have found.

Joachimus Poleman of the Mystery of the Philosophers Sulphur, by help of his
duplicated and satiated Corrosive, divides a Metal into the least Atoms, and
dilacerates it to be delivered to the fiery Menstruum, dissolving it to a
tinging Soul.

It is calcined by us another and better way, which Calcination we rather call
the first solution, and it is done by pouring the Wine of Life to the Calxes of
Sol or Luna aforesaid, put into a Phial, (which is our Menstruum, of which
hereafter in Chap. 6.) to the height of a fingers breadth, and putting to an
Head or Alembick, they must be digested in Ashes, or also in Sand, and
coagulated; being coagulated, you must pour on new Menstruum, as before, and
coagulate, and that three or four times, or till the metallic Calx melt at the
fire like Wax or Ice, which is sign of sufficient Philosophical calcinations;
and this is done with the preservation of the Metal in its primitive virtue;
and this is that which Aristotle says in the Rosary, join your Son Gabricius (
dearer to you then all your Children) with his Sister Beja, who is a tender
sweet and splendid Virgin.

CHAP. IV.
Of the second and true Philosophical Solution of Bodies, and their reduction
into Mercury.
HAving performed Calcination, or the first Solution, whereof we have spoken in
the preceding Chapter, and which (as the anonymous Philosopher in his Golden
Treatise of the Philosophers Stone in his Answer has it) ought to be sweet and
fully natural; that is, which should without noise dissolve the Subject with
the preservation of its radical moisture, then the Bodies so calcined must be
put into a Phial hermetically sealed, and in a gentle heat of Bal. Mar. or Dew,
be digested, or Putrified the space of a Philosophical Month: for a voluntary
Solution is better than a violent; a temperate, than a speedy; as the
Philosopher has it. And thus is made the second and true Solution of a Metal
into viscous water, or a certain Oleity with the preservation of the radical
moisture, in which is the true metallic Sulphur, together with the true and
most noble Mercury: for one of them is always the Magnet, and remains solving
with the solved, and desires to continue inseparably, and that because of the
similitude of substance. Wherefore the Ancients said, Nature rejoices in
Nature, Nature overcomes and alters Nature, whereby the essential or formal
Solution is distinguished from the corrosive Solution. But you must know that
from Luna is obtained a liquor, or green tincture, which is the true Elixir of
Luna, and the highest Arcanum to comfort the Brain. But from Sol by equal
putrefaction is produced a Liquor of the highest redness, which is the true
Elixir of Sol, and the quinessence of Metal. Whereof, says Geber, we make
sanguine Gold better than that produced by Nature, which Nature no wise makes.
Concerning this Viscosity, Geber further speaks briefly: We have most exactly
tried all things, and that by approved Reasons, but we could never find
anything permanent in Fire, except the viscous Moisture, the sole radix of all
Metals, when as all the other Moistures being not well united in homogeneity do
easily flee from Fire, and the Elements are easily separated from one another,
but the viscous Moisture, to wit, Mercury is never consumed with Fire, nor is
the Water separated from the Earth, but they either remain altogether, or go
altogether away.

But will you enquire in what weight the Menstruum is to be espoused to a
Metal? The Philosophers Rosary says, As in the working of Bread, a little
Leaven leaveneth and fermenteth a great quantity of Paste; so also a modicum of
Earth is sufficient for the nutrition of the whole Stone. Aristotle nominates
the weight, saying, do thus, and coct till the Earth (that is, the Gold) has
exhausted ten parts of the Water.

The Author of Novum Lumen at the end of his Book breaks forth into these
words; There ought to be ten parts of Water to one part of Body: and by this
way we make Mercury without common Mercury, by taking ten parts of our
Mercurial Water (that is, the Mercurial Oil of Salt putrefied and alembicated)
which is an unctious vapor, to one part of the body of Gold, and being
included in a Vessel by continual coction, the Gold is made Mercury, that is,
an unctuous vapor, and not common Mercury, as some falsely do imagine.

CHAP. V.
What a Quintessence properly is.
PARACELSVS in his third Book of long Life, chap. 2. discourses thus: A
Quintessence is nothing else but the goodness of Nature, so that all Nature
passes into a spagyrick mixture and temperament, in which no corruptible
thing, and nothing contrary is to be found.

He also in his fourth Book Archidox. of the Quintessence says, A Quintessence
is a matter which is corporally extracted out of all Crescitives, and out of
all things that have life, being separated from all impurity and mortality,
most purely subtiliated, and divided from all the Elements thereof.

And a little after in the same place; You ought to know concerning the
Quintessence, that it is a matter little and small, lodged and harbored in
some Tree, Herb, Stone, or the like; the rest is a pure body, from which we
learn the separation of the Elements.

Rupescissa concerning the Quintessence, in chap. 5. about the end, says, The
Quintessence which we seek is therefore a thing ingeniated by divine breath,
which by continual ascensions and descensions is separated from the corruptible
body of the four Elements; and the reason is, because that which is a second
time, and often sublimed, is more subtle, glorified and separated from the
corruption of the four Elements, then when it ascends only once; and so that
which is sublimed even to a thousand times, and by continual ascension and
desoension comes to so great a virtue of glorification, that it is a compound
almost incorruptible, as the Heavens, and of the matter of the Heavens, and
therefore called Quintessence; because it is in respect of the Body, as the
Heavens are in respect of the whole World, almost after the same way: by which
Art can imitate Nature, as by a certain like, very near and connatural way.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Philosophical Fire, or Dissolving Menstruum, or our Liquor Alkahest.
THe preparation of this Water, or most noble Juice, (which is the Kings true
Bath) the Philosophers always held occult, so that Bernard Count Tresne and
Neigen, Book 2. said, he had made a vow to God, to Philosophers, and to Equity,
not plainly to explain himself to any man, because it is the most secret
Arcanum of the whole Work, and is so indeed; for if this Liquor were manifested
to every man, Boys would then deride our Wisdom, and Fools would be equal to
the Wise, and the whole World would rush hither with a blind impulse, and run
themselves headlong without any regard to Equity or Piety, to the bottom of
Hell. Augurellus calls this Menstruum Mercury in these words: Tu quoque nec
coeptis Cylleni audacibus unquam
Defueris Argentum vulgo quod vivere dicunt
Sufficit, and tantis praestant primordia rebus.
Nor is Argent vive ever wanting to the bold undertaking of Cylenus, it yields
principles to great things. The same does George Ripley judge in his Preface of
the twelve Gates: I will teach you truly, that these are the Mercuries that are
the keys of Knowledge, which Raymund calls his Menstrua's, without which is
nothing done. Geber names it otherwise, saying, by the most high God, this is
that Water, which lights Candles, gives light to houses, and yields abundance
of Riches, Oh the Water of our Sea! Oh our Sal Nitre appertaining to the Sea of
the World! Oh our Vegetable! Oh our fixed and volatile Sulphur! O the Caput
mortuum, or faeces of our Sea!

Tridensine in his secret work of the Philosophers Stone, says: The Water
which Philosophers used for the complement of the Work, they called Lac
Virginis, Coagulum, the Morning-dew, the Quintessence, Aquavitae, the
Philosophers Daughter, etc.

Paracelsus variously also, Azoth, Spirit of Wine tempered and circulated,
Mercurial-Water, Sendivogius, Chalibs; Rupeseissa, Vinegar most nobly distilled.

Van-Helmont (that most profound Philosopher by Fire) called it, the Liquor
Alkahest, and thus described it: The Liquor Alkahest resolves every visible and
tangible body into its first matter, preserving the power of the Seed,
concerning which the Chemists say, the Vulgar burn by Fire, but we by Water.

We, by the Philosophers leave, are those that can at will give names to their
products, do call it the Mercurial Oil of Salt putrefied and alembicated: for
Oil is exalted to an higher degree of a fiery quality, as it is the foundation
of the whole metallic solution, (which is to be well observed) without which
nothing can be advantageous in the Art, and it acts the part of a Woman in our
Work, and is deservedly called the Wife of Sol, and the Matrix; and it is the
hidden Key to open the close Gates of Metals; for it dissolves calcined Metals,
it calcines and putrefies the volatile and spiritual, it tingeth into all
colors, and is the beginning, middle and end of Tinctures; and is of one
nature with Gold, as Arn. de Villa Nova affirms, unless that the nature of Gold
is complete, digested and fixed: but the nature of the Water is incomplete,
indigested and volatile. In a word, it is the Philosophers Fire, by which the
Tree of Hermes is burnt to ashes.

Concerning this Fire Johannes Pontanus in his Epistle says, The Philosophers
Fire is not the Fire of Balneo, nor of Dung, nor of any thing of that kind,
which the Philosophers have published in their Writings; it is mineral, it is
equal, it is continual, it evapourates not, unless it be too much incensed; it
participates of Sulphur; it is taken elsewhere than from the matter; it divide,
dissolves calcines and congeals all things; and it is a Fire with moderate
burning; it is a compendium without any great charge, because the whole work is
perfected therewith. Study therefore therein: for if I had found this at first,
I had not erred two hundred times before I attained to practice: wherefore men
do err, have erred, and will err, because the Philosophers have not constituted
a proper Agent in their Books, except one, namely Artephius. But he speaks
according to his judgment; and unless I had read Artephius, and perceived his
scope, I had never attained to the Complement of the Work, etc. Do you consult
him, and ye shall know what our Menstruum is. I have said enough.

CHAP. VII.
Whether the dissolving Menstruum be corrosive.
GEBER de Sum. perfect. Cap. 52 seems to be of this opinion, whilst he says,
Every thing that is solved must necessarily have the nature of Salt, Alums, and
the like. And Paracelsus in his fourth Book Archidox. of the Quintessence, a
little after the beginning, says thus: It is difficult, and scarce credible,
to extract a Quintessence without a Corrosive out of Metals, but especially out
of Gold, which cannot be overcome but by a Corrosive, by which the Quincessence
and Body are one separated from the other; which Corrosive may again be taken
from it. And Chap. 3. of Long Life, Tom. 6. Book 3. he thus speaks: Resolve
Gold together with all the substance of Gold by a Corrosive, etc. and that so
long till it be made the same with the Corrosive: nor be you dismayed because
of this way of operation; for a Corrosive is commodious for Gold, if it be
Gold, and without a Corrosive it is dead.

Yet you must know, that our Menstruum being poured upon Gold, ought not
properly be said to be corrosive, but rather fiery; the strength and virtue of
which Arcanum overcomes all Poisons. For every Realgar, that is, Mercury vive
and sublimate, as also precipitate, ought to dye in the Elixirium of Sol, and
come to a singular and excellent tincture; because also violent solution is not
made by our Menstruum, such as by the Resuscitatives, Aquafortis and Regia, and
others of this form; but (as was said before in the fourth Chapter) it is done
gently, sweetly, without any noise, and with the preservation of its radical
moisture, with the spirits of which (as Lully has it in his Vade mecum) a
vivified virtue is infused in the matters.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the practice of the Stone.
WHen you have acquired the tinging Soul of the Planet, or the true
Quintessence thereof by previous putrefaction, in which the true Mercury, and
the Philosophers true Sulphur are contained: then is your matter prepared, fit
to make thereby our blessed Stone. Take therefore (in the name of Him that
said, and all things were done) of this most pure matter a sufficient quantity,
put it into a fixing Vessel, or Phial, or Philosophical Egg, hermetically
sealed; place it in an Athanor, as you know, and proceed with a convenient,
viz. a digesting heat, continual, (for that failing it must needs dye, or
become abortive) sweet, subtle, altering, and not burning (that I may use the
Counts own words) from the first conjunction, even to perfect ablution,
government of the Fire, concerning which the anonymous Philalethes may be
further consulted, who by the government of every Planet clearly describes the
diversities of colors, coagulating and fixing it into the white or red Stone:
for (as Raymund Lully advertiseth) he that has not power and patience in the
work, will corrupt it with too much haste.

The sign of the Work perfected will be this: If the Stone being projected upon
an hot plate of Venus, does melt like Wax, and not smoke, but penetrate and
tinge, then is the Oriental King born, sitting in his Kingdom with greater
power than all the Princes of the World. Hence a Philosopher cries out, Come
forth out of Hell, arise from the Grave, awake out of Darkness; for thou have
put on Brightness and Spirituality, because the voice of Resurrection is heard,
and the Soul of Life is entered into thee, praised be the Most High; and let his
Gifts redound to the Glory of his most boly Name, and to the good and benefit
of our neighbor.

CHAP. IX.
Of the augmentation of the blessed Stone.
WHen by the help of God you have now obtained the aforesaid incombustible
Sulphur, red with Purple, that you may by the repeated inversion of the Wheel
(as the Philosophers term it) know how to augment it; in which no small mystery
of Art is contained, we may the same way and method augment it, whereby we made
it; yet you must know that the oftener our Sulphur, which is our Stone, is
moistened or nourished by its proper Milk, dissolved in a moist Balneo, and
again coagulated and fixed, as in the first work, the tinging virtue of it will
be always greater; so that indeed after the first absolute work, one part will
tinge an hundred of purged Mercury, or any other imperfect Metal, in the second
solution by Lac Virginis, and the coagulation and fixation thereof, one part
will tinge a thousand. And thus time after time is our Medicine augmented and
multiplied in quantity and quality, in virtue and weight.

Take therefore one part of our Stone, and pour it upon two parts of Lac
Virginis, or the Mercurial Oil of Salt putrefied and alembicated; solve and
coagulate as you did in the first work, and our Water which before was only a
Mineral potentially, is actually made a Metal more precious than Gold. And thus
is the Stone mortified by sublimations, and revivified by imbibitions, which is
the chief universal way. These things being brought to a desired end,
Projections may at pleasure be made upon this or that Metal prepared, and
decently mundified and fused, as you have obtained the tincture either for
white or red; the true use of this Art, and all the Philosophers Books,
(especially out Philalethes) will abundantly show.

CHAP. X.
Of the physical use of the Stone both internal and external.
YOU must know concerning this blessed Stone, that it is an universal Medicine
containing in it the perfect Cure of all Diseases, as well hot as cold, so far
as they are known to be curable by Nature, and are permitted by God to be
cured. If you enquire, how this most perfect Medicine, and Celestial Tincture,
and such other Universal Curatives do act, and operate, by curing contrary
things in Man's Body. We answer; They perform all this by heating,
illuminating, and irradiating the Archaeus, as our Philosopher Van Helmont has
it in a Treatise, entitled, There is in Herbs, Words and Stones a great
Virtue, that they do certainly act without their dissolution or destruction,
without their penetration, intro-admission, commixture, and commutation, also
afar off upon the drowsy or inflamed Archaeus, as it were by the sight alone,
by the irradiation or ejaculation of their virtues produced and exposed, their
former weight and properties being yet retained, and not changed. After which
manner, as Joachimus Poleman excellently says, They transmute the spirits of
darkness, to wit, diseases, (which are all nothing else but the properties of
the seat of death, or the forerunners of dark and obscure death) into good
spirits, such as they were when the man was sound in perfect health, and by
this renovation of the defective powers, strength is withal universally
restored.

The dose of it is from one grain to two, according to the age and strength of
the Patient in a draught of warm Wine, or in a spoonful of the same
Quintessence dissolved, and taken every third day. In external Diseases,
Wounds, Cacoetheck and Phagedenick Ulcers, Fistulaes, Gangreen, Cancer, etc.
one grain is taken in Wine every day, or once in two days; but the part
externally affected is washed in Wine, wherein a portion of our Stone has been
dissolved; or if necessity require, it is injected by a Syringe, putting a
plate of Lead, and a convenient Ligature thereupon.

And this is the internal and external use of this great Mystery consummated,
for the acquisition of which invoke the Light of Light, and with a pure heart
pray for the illumination of your understanding, and you shall receive it: then
operate prudently, give relief to the Poor, abuse not the blessings of God,
believe the Gospel, and exercise your self in Piety, Amen.

FINIS.

