

De Art Graphica.

THE Art of Painting, BY C. A. DU FRESNOY. WITH REMARKS.

Translated into English, Together with an Original Preface containing A
PARALLEL betwixt PAINTING and POETRY.

By Mr. DRYDEN.

As also a Short Account of the most Eminent PAINTERS, both Ancient and Modern,
continued down to the Present Times, according to the Order of their Succession.

By another Hand.

Vt Pictura Poesis erit --
Hor. de Art Poetica. LONDON, Printed by I. Heptinstall for W. Rogers, at the
Sun against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. MDCXCV.

PREFACE OF THE TRANSLATOR, With a Parallel, Of Poetry and Painting.
IT may be reasonably expected, that I should say something on my own behalf,
in respect to my present Undertaking. First, then, the Reader may be pleased to
know, that it was not of my own choice that I undertook this Work. Many of our
most Skillfull Painters, and other Artists, were pleased to recommend this
Author to me, as one who perfectly understood the Rules of Painting; who gave
the best and most concise Instructions for Performance, and the surest to
inform the Judgment of all who loved this noble Art. That they who before were
rather fond of it, than knowingly admired it, might defend their Inclination by
their Reason: that they might understand those Excellencies which they blindly
valued, so as not to be farther imposed on by bad Pieces, and to know when
Nature was well imitated by the most able Masters. It Is true indeed, and they
acknowledge it, that beside the Rules which are given in this Treatise, or
which can be given in any other, that to make a perfect Judgment of good
Pictures, and to value them more or less when compared with one another, there
is farther required a long conversation with the best Pieces, which are not
very frequent either in France or England; yet some we have, not only from the
hands of Holbein, Rubens, and Vandyck, (one of them admirable for
History-painting, and the other two for Portraits,) but of many
Flemish-Masters, and those not inconsiderable, though for Design, not equal to
the Italians. And of these latter also, we are not unfurnished with some Pieces
of Raphael, Titian, Correggio, Michael Angelo and others. But to return to my
own undertaking of this Translation, I freely own, that I thought my self
incapable of performing it, either to their Satisfaction, or my own Credit. Not
but that I understood the Original Latin, and the French Author perhaps as
well as most Englishmen; But I was not sufficiently versed in the Terms of Art:
And therefore thought that many of those persons who put this honorable task
on me, were more able to perform it themselves, as undoubtedly they were. But
they assuring me of their assistance, in correcting my faults where I spoke
improperly, I was encouraged to attempt it; that I might not be wanting in what
I could, to satisfy the desires of so many Gentlemen who were willing to give
the world this useful Work. They have effectually performed their promise to
me; and I have been as careful on my side, to take their advice in all things;
so that the Reader may assure himself of a tolerable Translation. Not Elegant,
for I proposed not that to my self: but familiar, clear and instructive. In any
of which parts, if I have failed, the fault lies wholly at my door. In this one
particular only I must beg the Readers pardon. The Prose Translation of the
Poem is not free from Poetical Expressions, and I dare not promise that some of
them are not fustian, or at least highly metaphorical; but this being a fault
in the first digestion (that is, the Original Latin) was not to be remedied in
the second ( viz.) the Translation. And I may confidently say, that whoever had
attempted it, must have fallen into the same inconvenience; or a much greater,
that of a false Version. When I undertook this Work, I was already engaged in
the Translation of Virgil, from whom I have borrowed only two months, and am
now returning to that which I ought to understand better. In the mean time I
beg the Readers pardon, for entertaining him so long with my self: It Is an
usual part of ill manners in all Authors, and almost in all Mankind, to
trouble others with their business; and I was so sensible of it beforehand,
that I had not now committed it, unless some concernments of the Readers had
been interwoven with my own. But I know not, while I am attoning for one Error,
if I am not falling into another: for I have been importuned to say something
farther of this Art; and to make some Observations on it in relation to the
likeness and agreement which it has with Poetry its Sister. But before I
proceed, it will not be amiss, if I copy from Bellori (a most ingenious
Author, yet living) some part of his Idea of a Painter, which cannot be
unpleasing, at least to such who are conversant in the Philosophy of Plato. And
to avoid tediousness, I will not translate the whole Discourse, but take and
leave as I find occasion.

God Almighty, in the Fabrique of the Universe, first contemplated himself, and
reflected on his own Excellencies; from which he drew, and constituted those
first Forms, which are called Idea's. So that every Species which was
afterward expressed was produced from that first Idea, forming that wonderful
contexture of all created Beings. But the Celestial Bodies above the Moon
being incorruptible, and not subject to change, remained for ever fair, and in
perpetual order: On the contrary, all things which are sublunary are subject to
change, to deformity, and to decay. And though Nature always intends a
consummate beauty in her productions, yet through the inequality of the Matter,
the Forms are altered; and in particular, Humane Beauty suffers alteration for
the worse, as we see to our mortification, in the deformities, and
disproportions which are in us. For which reason the Artfull Painter and the
Sculptour, imitating the Divine Maker, form to themselves as well as they are
able, a Model of the Superior Beauties; and reflecting on them endeavor to
correct and amend the common Nature; and to represent it as it was first
created without fault, either in Color or in Lineament.

This Idea, which we may call the Goddess of Painting and of Sculpture,
descends upon the Marble and the Cloth, and becomes the Original of those Arts;
and being measured by the Compass of the Intellect, is it self the Measure of
the performing Hand; and being an^^mated by the Imagination, infuses Life into
the Image. The Idea of the Painter and the Sculptour, is undoubtedly that
perfect and excellent Example of the Mind; by imitation of which imagined form,
all things are represented which fall under humane sight: Such is the
Definition which is made by Cicero in his Book of the Orator to Brutus. "As
therefore in Forms and Figures there is somewhat which is Excellent and
Perfect, to which imagined Species all things are referred by Imitation which
are the Objects of Sight, in like manner we behold the Species of Eloquence in
our Minds, the Effigies, or actual Image of which we seek in the Organs of our
Hearing. This is likewise confirmed by Proclus in the Dialogue of Plato called
Timaeus: If, says he, you take a Man, as he is made by Nature, and compare him
with another who is the effect of Art; the work of Nature will always appear
the less beautiful, because Art is more accurate than Nature." But Zeuxis, who
from the choice which he made of Five Virgins drew that wonderful Picture of
Helena, which Cicero in his Orator beforementioned, sets before us as the most
perfect Example of Beauty, at the same time admonishes a Painter, to
contemplate the Idea's of the most Natural Forms; and to make a judicious
choice of several Bodies, all of them the most Elegant which he can find. By
which we may plainly understand that he thought it impossible to find in any
one Body all those Perfections which he sought for the accomplishment of a
Helena, because Nature in any individual person makes nothing that is perfect
in all its parts. For this reason Maximus Tyrius also says, that the Image
which is taken by a Painter from several Bodies produces a Beauty, which it is
impossible to find in any single Natural Body, approaching to the perfection of
the fairest Statues. Thus Nature on this account is so much inferior to Art,
that those Artists who propose to themselves only the imitation and likeness
of such or such a particular person, without election of those Idea's
beforementioned, have often been reproached for that omission: Demetrius was
taxed for being too Natural; Dionysius was also blamed for drawing Men like us,
and was commonly call'd' (...), that is, a Painter of Men. In our times Michael
Angelo da Caravaggio, was esteemed too Natural. He drew persons as they were;
and Bambovio, and most of the Dutch Painters have drawn the worst likeness.
Lysippus of old, upbraided the common sort of Sculptours, for making Men such
as they were found in Nature; and boasted of himself that he made them as they
ought to be: which is a Precept of Aristotle, given as well to Poets as to
Painters. Phidias raised an admiration even to astonishment, in those who
beheld his Statues, with the Forms, which he gave to his Gods and Heroes; by
imitating the Idea rather than Nature. And Cicero speaking of him affirms, that
figuring Jupiter and Pallas, he did not contemplate any Object from whence he
took the likeness, but considered in his own mind a great and admirable form of
Beauty, and according to that Image in his Soul, he directed the operation of
his Hand. Seneca also seems to wonder, that Phidias having never beheld either
Jove or Pallas, yet could conceive their divine Images in his Mind. Apollonius
Tyanaeus says the same in other words, that the fancy more instructs the
Painter than the imitation; for the last makes only the things which it sees,
but the first makes also the things which it never sees.

Leon Battista Alberti tells us, that we ought not so much to love the likeness
as the beauty, and to choose from the fairest Bodies severally the fairest
Parts. Leonardo da Vinci instructs the Painter to form this Idea to himself:
And Raphael, the greatest of all modern Masters, writes thus to Castiglione,
concerning his Galatea: "To paint a Fair one, it is necessary for me to see many
Fair ones; but because there is so great a scarcity of lovely Women, I am
constrained to make use of one certain Idea, which I have formed to my self in
my own fancy." Guido Reni sending to Rome his St. Michael which he had painted
for the Church of the Capuchins, at the same time wrote to Monsignor Massano,
who was Maestro di Casa (or Steward of the House) to Pope Urban the Eighth, in
this manner. I wish I had the wings of an Angel, to have ascended into
Paradise, and there to have beheld the Forms of those beatify'd Spirits, from
which I might have copied my Archangel: But not being able to mount so high, it
was in vain for me to search his resemblance here below: so that I was forced
to make an Introspection, into my own mind, and into that Idea of Beauty, which
I have formed in my own imagination. I have likewise created there the contrary
Idea of deformity and ugliness; but I leave the consideration of it, till I
paint the Devil: and in the mean time shun the very thought of it as much as
possibly I can, and am even endeavoring to blot it wholly out of my
remembrance. There was not any Lady in all Antiquity, who was Mistress of so
much Beauty as was to be found in the Venus of Gnidus, made by Praxiteles, or
the Minerva of Athens by Phydias; which was therefore called the Beautiful
Form. Neither is there any Man of the present Age, equal in the strength,
proportion, and knitting of his Limbs, to the Hercules of Farnese, made by
Glicon: Or any Woman who can justly be compared with the Medicean Venus of
Cleomenes. And upon this account, the noblest Poets and the best Orators, when
they desired to celebrate any extraordinary Beauty, are forced to have recourse
to Statues and Pictures, and to draw their Persons and Faces into Comparison.
Ovid endeavoring to express the Beauty of Cillarus, the fairest of the
Centaures, celebrates him as next in perfection, to the most admirable Statues.
Gratus in ore vigor, cervix, humerique manusque
Pectoraque Artificum laudatis Proxima Signis.
A pleasing Vigor his fair Face expressed;
His Neck, his Hands, his Shoulders, and his Breast,
Did next in Gracefulness and Beauty stand,
To breathing Figures of the Sculptour's Hand.


In another place he sets Apelles above Venus. Si Venerem Cois nunquam
pinxisset Apelles,
Mersa sub aequoreis illa lateret Aquis.
Thus varied. One Birth to Seas the Cyprian Goddess owed,
A Second Birth the Painter's Art bestowed:
Less by the Seas than by his power was given;
They made her live, but he advanced to Heaven.


The Idea of this Beauty, is indeed various, according to the several forms
which the Painter or Sculptour would describe: As one in Strength, another in
Magnanimity; and sometimes it consists in Cheerfulness, and sometimes in
Delicacy; and is always diversified by the Sex and Age.

The Beauty of Jove is one, and that of Juno another: Hercules, and Cupid are
perfect Beauties, though of different kinds; for Beauty is only that which
makes all things as they are in their proper and perfect Nature; which the best
Painters always choose by contemplating the Forms of each. We ought farther to
consider, that a Picture being the representation of a humane action, the
Painter ought to retain in his mind, the Examples of all Affections, and
Passions, as a Poet preserves the Idea of an Angry man, of one who is fearful,
sad or merry, and so of all the rest. For it is impossible to express that with
the Hand, which never entered into the Imagination. In this manner as I have
rudely and briefly shown you, Painters and Sculptours, choosing the most
elegant natural Beauties, perfectionate the Idea, and advance their Art, even
above Nature it self, in her individual productions, which is the utmost
mastery of humane performance.

From hence arises that astonishment, and almost adoration which is paid by the
Knowing to those divine remainders of Antiquity. From hence Phydias, Lysippus,
and other noble Sculptours, are still held in veneration; and Apelles, Zeuxis,
Protogenes, and other admirable Painters, though their Works are perished, are
and will be eternally admired; who all of them drew after the Idea's of
Perfection; which are the Miracles of Nature, the Providence of the
Understanding, the Exemplars of the Mind, the Light of the Fancy; the Sun which
from its rising, inspired the Statue of Memnon, and the fire which warmed into
life the Image of Prometheus: It Is this which causes the Graces, and the Loves
to take up their habitations in the hardest Marble, and to subsist in the
emptiness of Light, and Shadows. But since the Idea of Eloquence is as far
inferior to that of Painting, as the force of Words is to the Sight; I must
here break off abruptly, and having conducted the Reader as it were to a secret
Walk, there leave him in the midst of Silence to contemplate those Idea's;
which I have only sketch'd, and which every man must finish for himself.

In these pompous Expressions, or such as these the Italian has given you his
Idea of a Painter; and though I cannot much commend the Style, I must needs say
there is somewhat in the Matter: Plato himself is accustomed to write loftily,
imitating, as the Critiques tell us, the manner of Homer; but surely that
inimitable Poet, had not so much of Smoke in his writing, though not less of
Fire. But in short, this is the present Genius of Italy. What Philostratus
tells us in the Proem of his Figures is somewhat plainer; and therefore I will
translate it almost word for word. " He who will rightly govern the Art of
Painting, ought of necessity first to understand Humane Nature. He ought
likewise to be endued with a Genius to express the signs of their Passions whom
he represents; and to make the dumb as it were to speak: He must yet further
understand what is contained in the constitution of the Cheeks, in the
temperament of the Eyes, in the naturalness (if I may so call it) of the
Eyebrows: and in short whatsoever belongs to the Mind and Thought. He who
thoroughly possesses all these things will obtain the whole. And the Hand will
exquisitely represent the action of every particular person. If it happen that
he be either mad, or angry, melancholique, or cheerful, a sprightly Youth, or
a languishing Lover; in one word, he will be able to paint whatsoever is
proportionable to any one. And even in all this there is a sweet error without
causing any shame. For the Eyes and Minds of the beholders being fastened on
Objects which have no real Being, as if they were truly Existent, and being
induced by them to believe them so, what pleasure is it not capable of giving?
The Ancients, and other Wise Men, have written many things concerning the
Symmetry which is in the Art of Painting; constituting as it were some certain
Laws for the proportion of every Member, not thinking it possible for a Painter
to undertake the expression of those motions which are in the Mind, without a
concurrent Harmony in the natural measure. For that which is out of its own
kind and measure, is not received from Nature, whose motion is always right. On
a serious consideration of this matter it will be found, That the Art of
Painting has a wonderful affinity with that of Poetry; and that there is
betwixt them a certain common Imagination. For as the Poets introduc^^ the Gods
and Heroes, and all those things which are either Majestical, Honest or
Delightful, in like manner the Painters, by the virtue of their Out-lines,
Colors, Lights and Shadows, represent the same Things and Persons in their
Pictures."

Thus, as Convoy Ships either accompany, or should accompany their Merchants
till they may prosecute the rest of their Voyage without danger, so
Philostratus has brought me thus far on my way, and I can now sail on without
him. He has begun to speak of the great relation betwixt Painting and Poetry,
and thither the greatest part of this Discourse by my promise was directed. I
have not engaged my self to any perfect Method, neither am I loaded with a full
Cargo. It Is sufficient if I bring a Sample of some Goods in this Voyage. It
will be easy for others to add more when the Commerce is settled. For a
Treatise twice as large as this of Painting could not contain all that might be
said on the Parallel of these two Sister Arts. I will take my rise from Bellori
before I proceed to the Author of this Book.

The business of his Preface is to prove, that a learned Painter should form to
himself an Idea of perfect Nature. This Image he is to set before his Mind in
all his Undertakings, and to draw from thence as from a Storehouse, the
Beauties which are to enter into his Work; thereby correcting Nature from what
actually she is in individuals, to what she ought to be, and what she was
created. Now as this Idea of Perfection is of little use in Portraits (or the
resemblances of particular persons) so neither is it in the Characters of
Comedy, and Tragedy; which are never to be made perfect, but always to be drawn
with some specks of frailty and deficience; such as they have been described to
us in History, if they were real Characters; or such as the Poet began to show
them at their first appearance, if they were only fictitious, (or imaginary.)
The perfection of such Stage-characters consists chiefly in their likeness to
the deficient faulty Nature, which is their Original. Only, as it is observed
more at large hereafter, in such cases^^ there will always be found a better
likeness, and a worse; and the better is constantly to be chosen: I mean in
Tragedy, which represents the Figures of the highest form amongst Mankind. Thus
in Portraits, the Painter will not take that side of the Face which has some
notorious blemish in it; but either draw it in profile (as Apelles did
Antigonus, who had lost one of his Eyes) or else shadow the more imperfect
side. For an ingenious flattery is to be allowed to the Professors of both
Arts; so long as the likeness is not destroyed. It Is true that all manner of
Imperfections must not be taken away from the Characters, and the reason is,
that there may be left some grounds of pity for their misfortunes. We can never
be grieved for their miseries who are thoroughly wicked, and have thereby
justly called their calamities on themselves. Such Men are the natural Objects
of our hatred, not of our commiseration. If on the other side their Characters
were wholly perfect, (such as for Example, the Character of a Saint or Martyr
in a Play,) his, or her misfortunes, would produce impious thoughts in the
Beholders: they would accuse the Heavens of injustice, and think of leaving a
Religion, where Piety was so ill requited. I say the greater part would be
tempted so to do, I say not that they ought: and the consequence is too
dangerous for the practice. In this I have accused my self for my own St.
Catharine, but let truth prevail. Sophocles has taken the just medium in his
Oedipus. He is somewhat arrogant at his first entrance; and is too inquisitive
through the whole Tragedy: Yet these Imperfections being balanced by great
Virtues, they hinder not our compassion for his miseries; neither yet can they
destroy that horror which the nature of his Crimes have excited in us. Such in
Painting are the Warts and Moles, which adding a likeness to the Face, are not
therefore to be omitted. But these produce no loathing in us. But how far to
proceed, and where to stop, is left to the judgment of the Poet and the
Painter. In Comedy there is somewhat more of the worse likeness to be taken.
Because that is often to produce laughter; which is occasioned by the sight of
some deformity: but for this I referr the Reader to Aristotle. It Is a sharp
manner of Instruction for the Vulgar who are never well amended, till they are
more than sufficiently exposed. That I may return to the beginning of this
Remark, concerning perfect Idea's, I have only this to say, that the Parallel
is often true in Epique-Poetry.

The Heroes of the Poets are to be drawn according to this Rule. There is
scarce a frailty to be left in the best of them; any more than is to be found
in a Divine Nature. And if Aeneas sometimes weeps, it is not in bemoaning his
own miseries, but those which his people undergo. If this be an Imperfection,
the Son of God when he was incarnate shed tears of Compassion over Jerusalem.
And Lentulus describes him often weeping, but never laughing; so that Virgil is
justified even from the Holy Scriptures. I have but one word more, which for
once I will anticipate from the Author of this Book. Though it must be an Idea
of Perfection, from which both the Epique Poet, and the History Painter draws;
yet all Perfections are not suitable to all Subjects: But every one must be
designed according to that perfect Beauty which is proper to him. An Apollo
must be distinguished from a Jupiter, a Pallas from a Venus: and so in Poetry
an Aeneas from any other Hero: for Piety is his chief Perfection. Homer's
Achilles is a kind of Exception to this Rule: but then he is not a perfect
Hero, nor so intended by the Poet. All his Gods had somewhat of humane
imperfection; for which he has been taxed by Plato, as an Imitatour of what was
bad. But Virgil observed his fault, and mended it. Yet Achilles was perfect in
the strength of his Body, and the vigor of his Mind. Had he been less
passionate, or less revengefull, the Poet well foresaw that Hector had been
killed, and Troy taken at the first assault; which had destroyed the beautiful
contrivance of his Iliads, and the moral of preventing Discord amongst
Confederate Princes, which was his principal intention. For the Moral (as Bossu
observes) is the first business of the Poet, as being the groundwork of his
Instruction. This being formed, he contrives such a Design, or Fable, as may be
most suitable to the Moral. After this he begins to think of the Persons, whom
he is to employ in carrying on his Design: and gives them the Manners, which
are most proper to their several Characters. The thoughts and words are the
last parts, which give Beauty and Coloring to the Piece. When I say, that the
Manners of the Hero ought to be good in perfection, I contradict not the
Marquess of Normanby's opinion, in that admirable Verse, where speaking of a
perfect Character, he calls it A Faultless Monster, which the World never knew.
For that Excellent Critique, intended only to speak of Dramatique Characters,
and not of Epique. Thus at lea^^t I have shown, that in the most perfect Poem,
which is that of Virgil, a perfect Idea was required, and followed. And
consequently that all succeeding Poets ought rather to imitate him, than even
Homer. I will now proceed as I promised, to the Author of this Book. He tells
you almost in the first lines of it, that the chief end of Painting is to
please the Eyes: and it is one great End of Poetry to please the Mind. Thus far
the Parallel of the Arts holds true: with this difference, That the Principal
end of Painting is to please; and the chief design of Poetry is to instruct. In
this the latter seems to have the advantage of the former. But if we consider
the Artists themselves on both sides, certainly their aims are the very same:
they would both make sure of pleasing, and that in preference to instruction.
Next, the means of this pleasure is by Deceit. One imposes on the Sight, and
the other on the Understanding. Fiction is of the Essence of Poetry as well as
of Painting; there is a resemblance in one, of Humane Bodies, Things and
Actions which are not real, and in the other, of a true Story by a Fiction. And
as all Stories are not proper Subjects for an Epique Poem, or a Tragedy, so
neither are they for a noble Picture. The Subjects both of the one, and of the
other, ought to have nothing of immoral, low, or filthy in them; but this being
treated at large in the Book itself, I wave it to avoid repetition. Only I
must add, that though^^ Catullus, Ovid and others were of another opinion, that
the Subject of Poets, and even their thoughts and expressions might be loose,
provided their lives were chaste and holy, yet there are no such licenses
permitted in that Art any more than in Painting, to design and color obscene
Nudities. Vita proba est, is no excuse, for it will scarcely be admitted, that
either a Poet or a Painter can be chaste, who give us the contrary examples in
their Writings and their Pictures. We see nothing of this kind in Virgil: that
which comes the nearest to it, is the adventure of the Cave, where Dido and
Aeneas were driven by the Storm: Yet even there the Poet pretends a Marriage
before the Consummation; and Juno her self was present at it. Neither is there
any expression in that Story, which a Roman Matron might not read without a
blush. Besides the Poet passes it over as hastily as he can, as if he were
afraid of staying in the Cave with the two Lovers, and of being a witness to
their Actions. Now I suppose that a Painter would not be much commended, who
should pick out this Cavern from the whole Eneids, when there is not another in
the Work. He had better leave them in their obscurity, than let in a flash of
Lightning to clear the natural darkness of the place, by which he must discover
himself as much as them. The Altar-Pieces, and holy Decorations of Painting,
show that Art may be applied to better uses, as well as Poetry.

And amongst many other instances, the Farnesian Gallery, painted by Hannibal
Carracci, is a sufficient witness yet remaining: the whole Work being morally
instructive, and particularly the Herculis Bivium, which is a perfect Triumph
of Virtue over Vice, as it is wonderfully well described by the ingenious
Bellori.

Hitherto I have only told the Reader what ought not to be the subject of a
Picture or of a Poem: what it ought to be on either side; our Author tells us:
it must in general be great and noble: and in this, the Parallel is exactly
true. The subject of a Poet either in Tragedy or in an Epique Poem is a great
action of some illustrious Hero. It Is the same in Painting; not every action,
nor every person is considerable enough to enter into the Cloth. It must be the
Anger of an Achilles, the Piety of an Aeneas, the Sacrifice of an Iphigenia
(for Heroins as well as Heroes are comprehended in the Rule;) but the Parallel
is more complete in Tragedy, than in an Epique Poem. For as a Tragedy may be
made out of many particular Episodes of Homer or of Virgil, so may a noble
Picture be designed out of this or that particular Story in either Author.
History is also fruitful of designs both for the Painter and the Tragique
Poet: Curtius throwing himself into a Gulf, and the two Decii sacrificing
themselves for the safety of their Country, are subjects for Tragedy and
Picture. Such is Scipio restoring the Spanish Bride, whom he either loved or
may be supsos'd to love, by which he gained the Hearts of a great Nation, to
interess themselves for Rome against Carthage: These are all but particular
Pieces in Livy's History; and yet are full complete Subjects for the Pen and
Pencil. Now the reason of this is evident. Tragedy and Picture are more
narrowly circumscribed by the Mechanic Rules of Time and Place than the Epique
Poem. The time of this last is left indefinite. It Is true, Homer took up only
the space of eight and forty days for his Iliads; but whether Virgil's action
was comprehended in a year or somewhat more, is not determined by Bossu. Homer
made the place of his action Troy, and the Grecian Camp besieging it. Virgil
introduces his Aeneas, sometimes in Sicily, sometimes in Carthage, and other
times at Cumae, before he brings him to Laurentum; and even after that, he
wanders again to the Kingdom of Evander and some parts of Tuscany, before he
returns to finish the War by the death of Turnus. But Tragedy according to the
Practice of the Ancients, was always confined within the compass of 24 hours,
and seldom takes up so much time. As for the place of it, it was always one,
and that not in a larger Sense; as for example, A whole City or two or three
several Houses in it; but the Market or some other public place, common to the
Chorus and all the Actours. Which established Law of theirs, I have not an
opportunity to examine in this place, because I cannot do it without digression
from my subject, though it seems too strict at the first appearance because it
excludes all secret Intrigues, which are the Beauties of the modern Stage: for
nothing can be carried on with Privacy, when the Chorus is supposed to be
always present. But to proceed, I must say this to the advantage of Painting,
even above Tragedy, that what this last represents in the space of many Hours,
the former shows us in one Moment. The Action, the Passion, and the manners of
so many Persons as are contained in a Picture, are to be discerned at once, in
the twinkling of an Eye; at least they would be so, if the Sight could travel
over so many different Objects all at once, or the Mind could digest them all
at the same instant or point of time. Thus in the famous Picture of Poussin,
which represents the Institution of the Blessed Sacrament, you see our Savior
and his twelve Disciples, all concurring in the same action, after different
manners, and in different postures, only the manners of Judas are
distinguished from the rest. Here is but one indivisible point of time
observed: but one action performed by so many Persons, in one Room and at the
same Table: yet the Eye cannot comprehend at once the whole Object, nor the
Mind follow it so fast; it is considered at leisure, and seen by intervals. Such
are the Subjects of Noble Pictures: and such are only to be undertaken by
Noble Hands. There are other parts of Nature, which are meaner, and yet are the
Subjects both of Painters, and of Poets.

For to proceed in the Parallel, as Comedy is a representation of Humane Life,
in inferior persons, and low Subjects, and by that means creeps into the
nature of Poetry, and is a kind of Juniper, a Shrub belonging to the species of
Cedar, so is the painting of Clowns, the representation of a Dutch Kermis, the
brutal sport of Snick or Snee, and a thousand other things of this mean
invention, a kind of Picture, which belongs to Nature, but of the lowest form.
Such is a Lazar in comparison to a Venus; both are drawn in Humane Figures:
they have Faces alike, though not like Faces. There is yet a lower sort of
Poetry and Painting, which is out of Nature. For a Farce is that in Poetry,
which Grotesque is in a Picture. The Persons, and Action of a Farce are all
unnatural, and the Manners false, that is, inconsisting with the characters of
Mankind. Grotesque-painting is the just resemblance of this; and Horace begins
his Art of Poetry by describing such a Figure; with a Man's Head, a Horse's
Neck, the Wings of a Bird, and a Fishes Tail; parts of different species
jumbled together, according to the mad imagination of the Dawber; and the end
of all this, as he tells you afterward, to cause Laughter. A very Monster in a
Bartholomew-Fair for the Mob to gape at for their twopence. Laughter is indeed
the propriety of a Man, but just enough to distinguish him from his elder
Brother, with four Legs. It Is a kind of Bastard-pleasure too, taken in at the
Eyes of the vulgar gazers, and at the Ears of the beastly Audience.
Church-Painters use it to divert the honest Countryman at Public Prayers, and
keep his Eyes open at a heavy Sermon. And Farce-Scriblers make use of the same
noble invention to entertain Citizens, Country-Gentlemen, and Covent Garden
Fops. If they are merry, all goes well on the Poet's side. The better sort go
thither too, but in despair of Sense, and the just Images of Nature, which are
the adequate pleasures of the Mind. But the Author can give the Stage no
better than what was given him by Nature: and the Actors must represent such
things, as they are capable to perform, and by which both they and the
Scribbler may get their living. After all, it is a good thing to laugh at any
rate, and if a straw can tickle a man, it is an instrument of happiness. Beasts
can weep when they suffer, but they cannot laugh. And as Sir William Davenant
observes in his Preface to Gondibert, It Is the wisdom of a Government to permit
Plays (he might have added Farces) as it is the prudence of a Carter to put
Bells upon his Horses, to make them carry their Burdens cheerfully.

I have already shown, that one main end of Poetry and Painting is to please,
and have said something of the kinds of both, and of their Subjects, in which
they bear a great resemblance to each other. I must now consider them, as they
are great and noble Arts; and as they are Arts, they must have Rules which may
direct them to their common end.

To all Arts and Sciences, but more particularly to these may be applied what
Hippocrates says of Physic, as I find him cited by an eminent French Critique.
"Medicine has long subsisted in the World. The Principles of it are certain,
and it has a certain way; by both which there has been found in the course of
many Ages, an infinite number of things, the experience of which has confirmed
its usefulness and goodness. All that is wanting to the perfection of this Art,
will undoubtedly be found, if able Men, and such as are instructed in the
Ancient Rules will make a farther enquiry into it, and endeavor to arrive at
that, which is hitherto unknown, by that which is already known. But all, who
having rejected the Ancient Rules, and taken the opposite ways, yet boast
themselves to be Masters of this Art, do but deceive others, and are themselves
deceived; for that is absolutely impossible."

This is notoriously true in these two Arts: for the way to please being to
imitate Nature; both the Poets and the Painters, in Ancient times, and in the
best Ages, have studied her: and from the practice of both these Arts, the
Rules have been drawn, by which we are instructed how to please, and to compass
that end which they obtained, by following their Example. For Nature is still
the same in all Ages, and can never be contrary to her self. Thus from the
practice of Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides, Aristotle drew his Rules for
Tragedy; and Philostratus for Painting. Thus amongst the Moderns, the Italian
and French Critiques by studying the Precepts of Aristotle, and Horace, and
having the Example of the Grecian Poets before their Eyes, have given us the
Rules of Modern Tragedy: and thus the Critiques of the same Countries, in the
Art of Painting have given the Precepts of perfecting that Art. It Is true that
Poetry has one advantage over Painting in these last Ages, that we have still
the remaining Examples both of the Greek and Latin Poets: whereas the Painters
have nothing left them from Apelles, Protogenes, Parrhasius, Xeuxis and the
rest, but only the testimonies which are given of their incomparable Works.
But instead of this, they have some of their best Statues, Bass-Relievo's,
Columns, Obilisques, etc. which were saved out of the common ruin, and are
still preserved in Italy: and by well distinguishing what is proper to
Sculpture, and what to Painting, and what is common to them both, they have
judiciously repaired that loss. And the great Genius of Raphael, and others,
having succeeded to the times of Barbarism and Ignorance, the knowledge of
Painting is now arrived to a supreme perfection, though the performance of it
is much declined in the present Age. The greatest Age for Poetry amongst the
Romans was certainly that of Augustus Caesar; and yet we are told that Painting
was then at its lowest Ebb, and perhaps Sculpture was also declining at the
same time. In the Reign of Domitian, and some who succeeded him, Poetry was but
meanly cultivated, but Painting eminently flourished. I am not here to give the
History of the two Arts; how they were both in a manner extinguished, by the
Irruption of the barbarous Nations, and both restored about the times of Leo
the Tenth, Charles the Fifth, and Francis the First; though I might observe,
that neither Ariosto, nor any of his Contemporary Poets ever arrived at the
Excellency of Raphael, Titian, and the rest in Painting. But in revenge at this
time, or lately in many Countries, Poetry is better practiced than her
Sister-Art. To what height the Magnificence and Encouragement of the present
King of France may carry Painting and Sculpture is uncertain, but by what he
has done, before the War in which he is engaged, we may expect what he will do
after the happy Conclusion of a Peace, which is the Prayer and Wish of all
those who have not an interest to prolong the miseries of Europe. For'tis most
certain, as our Author amongst others has observed, That Reward is the Spur of
Virtue, as well in all good Arts, as in all laudable Attempts: and Emulation
which is the other Spur, will never be wanting either amongst Poets or
Painters, when particular Rewards and Prizes are proposed to the best
deservers. But to return from this digression, though it was almost necessary;
all the Rules of Painting are methodically, concisely, and yet clearly
delivered in this present Treatise which I have translated. Bossu has not given
more exact Rules for the Epique Poem, nor Dacier for Tragedy in his late
excellent Translation of Aristotle and his notes upon him, than our Fresnoy has
made for Painting; with the Parallel of which I must resume my Discourse,
following my Author's Text, though with more brevity than I intended, because
Virgil calls me. The principal and most important parts of Painting, is to know
what is most beautiful in Nature, and most proper for that Art: that which is
the most beautiful is the most noble Subject: so in Poetry, Tragedy is more
beautiful than Comedy; because, as I said, the Persons are greater whom the
Poet instructs, and consequently the instructions of more benefit to Mankind:
the action is likewise greater and more noble, and thence is derived the
greater and more noble Pleasure.

To imitate Nature well in whatsoever Subject, is the perfection of both Arts;
and that Picture and that Poem which comes nearest to the resemblance of Nature
is the best. But it follows not, that what pleases most in either kind is
therefore good; but what ought to please. Our depraved Appetites, and ignorance
of the Arts, mislead our Judgments, and cause us often to take that for true
imitation of Nature, which has no resemblance of Nature in it. To inform our
Judgments, and to reform our Tastes, Rules were invented, that by them we might
discern when Nature was imitated, and how nearly. I have been forced to
recapitulate these things, because Mankind is not more liable to deceit, than
it is willing to continue in a pleasing error strengthened by a long habitude.
The imitation of nature is therefore justly constituted as the general, and
indeed the only Rule of pleasing both in Poetry and Painting. Aristotle tells
us, that imitation pleases, because it affords matter for a Reasoner to enquire
into the truth or falsehood of Imitation, by comparing its likeness or
unlikeness with the Original. But by this Rule, every Speculation in Nature,
whose truth falls under the enquiry of a Philosopher, must produce the same
delight which is not true; I should rather assign another reason. Truth is the
Object of our Understanding as Good is of our Will: And the Understanding can
no more be delighted with a Lie, than the Will can choose an apparent Evil. As
Truth is the end of all our Speculations, so the discovery of it is the
pleasure of them. And since a true knowledge of Nature gives us pleasure, a
lively imitation of it, either in Poetry or Painting, must of necessity produce
a much greater. For both these Arts as I said before, are not only true
imitations of Nature, but of the best Nature, of that which is wrought up to a
nobler pitch. They present us with Images more perfect than the Life in any
individual: and we have the pleasure to see all the scattered Beauties of
Nature united by a happy Chemistry, without its deformities or faults. They are
imitations of the passions which always move, and therefore consequently
please: for without motion there can be no delight; which cannot be considered,
but as an active passion. When we view these Elevated Idea's of Nature, the
result of that view is Admiration, which is always the cause of Pleasure.

This foregoing Remark, which gives the reason why imitation pleases; was sent
me by Mr. Walter Moyle, a most ingenious young Gentleman, conversant in all the
Studies of Humanity, much above his years. He had also furnished me (according
to my request) with all the particular passages in Aristotle and Horace, which
are used by them to explain the Art of Poetry by that of Painting: which if
ever I have time to retouch this Essay, shall be inserted in their places.
Having thus shown that Imitation pleases, and why it pleases in both these
Arts, it follows that some Rules of Imitation are necessary to obtain the end:
for without Rules there can be no Art; any more than there can be a House
without a Door to conduct you into it. The principal parts of Painting and
Poetry next follow.

Invention is the first part, and absolutely necessary to them both: yet no
Rule ever was or ever can be given how to compass it. A happy Genius is the
gift of Nature: it depends on the influence of the Stars say the Astrologers,
on the Organs of the Body say the Naturalists; it is the particular gift of
Heaven say the Divines, both Christians and Heathens. How to improve it many
Books can teach us; how to obtain in none; that nothing can be done without it
all agree. Tu nibil invita dices faciesve Minerva. Without Invention a Painter
is but a Copier, and a Poet but a Plagiary of others. Both are allowed
sometimes to copy and translate; but as our Author tells you that is not the
best part of their Reputation. Imitatours are but a Servile kind of Cattle,
says the Poet; or at best, the Keepers of Cattle for other men; they have
nothing which is properly their own; that is a sufficient mortification for me
while I am translating Virgil. But to copy the best Author is a kind of
praise, if I perform it as I ought. As a Copy after Raphael is more to be
commended, than an Original of any indifferent Painter.

Under this head of Invention is placed the Disposition of the Work, to put all
things in a beautiful order and harmony; that the whole may be of a piece. The
Compositions of the Painter should be conformable to the Text of Ancient
Authors, to the Customs, and the Times. And this is exactly the same in
Poetry; Homer, and Virgil, are to be our guides in the Epique; Sophocles, and
Euripides, in Tragedy: in all things we are to imitate the Customs, and the
Times of those Persons and Things which we represent. Not to make new Rules of
the Drama, as Lopez de Vega has attempted unsuccessfully to do; but to be
content to follow our Masters, who understood Nature better than we. But if the
Story which we treat be modern, we are to vary the Customs, according to the
Time and the Country where the Scene of Action lies: for this is still to
imitate Nature, which is always the same, though in a different dress.

As in the Composition of a Picture, the Painter is to take care that nothing
enter into it, which is not proper, or convenient to the Subject; so likewise
is the Poet to reject all incidents which are foreign to his Poem, and are
naturally no parts of it: they are Wenns, and other Excrescences, which belong
not to the Body, but deform it. no person, no incident in the Piece, or in the
Play, but must be of use to carry on the main Design. All things else are like
six fingers to the hand; when Nature which is superfluous in nothing, can do
her work with five. A Painter must reject all trifling Ornaments, so must a
Poet refuse all tedious, and unnecessary Descriptions. A Robe which is too
heavy, is less an Ornament than a Burden.

In Poetry Horace calls these things, Versus inopes rerum, nugaeque canorae;
these are also the lucus and ara Dianae, which he mentions in the same Art of
Poetry. But since there must be Ornaments both in Painting and Poetry, if they
are not necessary, they must at least be decent: that is, in their due place,
and but moderately used. The Painter is not to take so much pains about the
Drapery as about the Face, where the principal resemblance lies: neither is the
Poet who is working up a passion, to make similes which will certainly make it
languish. My Montezuma dies with a fine one in his mouth: but it is ambitious
and out of season. When there are more Figures in a Picture than are necessary,
or at least ornamental, our Author calls them Figures to be let: because the
Picture has no use of them. So I have seen in some modern Plays above twenty
Actours; when the Action has not required half the number. In the principal
Figures of a Picture, the Painter is to employ the sinews of his Art, for in
them consists the principal beauty of his Work. Our Author saves me the
comparison with Tragedy, for he says that herein he is to imitate the Tragique
Poet, who employs his utmost force in those places wherein consists the height
and beauty of the Action. Du Fresnoy, whom I follow, makes Design or Drawing
the second part of Painting: But the Rules which he gives concerning the
Posture of the Figures, are almost wholly proper to that Art; and admit not any
comparison that I know with Poetry. The Posture of a Poetique Figure is as I
conceive, the Description of his Heroes in the performance of such or such an
Action: as of Achilles just in the act of killing Hector: or of Aeneas who has
Turnus under him. Both the Poet and the Painter vary the Postures according to
the Action, or Passion which they represent of the same person. But all must be
great and graceful in them. The same Aeneas must be drawn a Suppliant to Dido
with respect in his Gestures, and humility in his Eyes: But when he is forced
in his own defense to kill Lausus, the Poet shows him compassionate, and
tempering the severity of his looks with a reluctance to the Action, which he
is going to perform. He has pity on his Beauty, and his Youth; and is loath to
destroy such a Masterpiece of Nature. He considers Lausus rescuing his Father
at the hazard of his own life; as an Image of himself when he took Anchises on
his Shoulders, and bore him safe through the rage of the Fire, and the
opposition of his Enemies. And therefore in the posture of a retiring Man, who
avoids the Combat, he stretches out his Arm in sign of peace, with his right
Foot drawn a little back, and his Breast bending inward, more like an Orator
than a Soldier; and seems to dissuade the Young man from pulling on his
destiny, by attempting more than he was able to perform: take the passage as I
have thus translated it. Shouts of Applause ran ringing through the Field,
To see the Son, the vanquished Father shield:
All, fired with noble Emulation, strive;
And with a storm of Darts to distance drive
The Trojan Chief; who held at Bay, from far
On his Vulcanian Orb, sustained the War.
Aeneas thus'o erwhelm'd on every side,
Their first Assault undaunted did abide;
And thus to Lausus, loud with friendly threatening cried,
Why will thou rush to certain death, and rage
In rash attempts beyond thy tender Age,
Betrayed by pious love?
And afterward. He grieved, he wept, the Sight an Image brought
Of his own Filial Love; a sadly pleasing thought.
But beside the Outlines of the Posture, the Design of the Picture comprehends
in the next place the forms of Faces which are to be different: and so in a
Poem, or a Play, must the several Characters of the Persons be distinguished
from each other. I knew a Poet, whom out of respect I will not name, who being
too witty himself, could draw nothing but Wits in a Comedy of his: even his
Fools were infected with the Disease of their Author. They overflowed with
smart Reperties, and were only distinguished from the intended Wits by being
called Coxcombs; though they deserved not so scandalous a Name. Another, who
had a great Genius for Tragedy, following the fury of his natural temper, made
every Man and Woman too in his Plays stark raging mad: there was not a sober
person to be had for love or money. All was tempestuous and blustering; Heaven
and Earth were coming together at every word; a mere Hurrican from the
beginning to the end, and every Actour seemed to be hastening on the Day of
Judgment.

Let every Member be made for its own Head, says our Author, not a withered
Hand to a young Face. So in the Persons of a Play, whatsoever is said or done
by any of them, must be consistent with the manners which the Poet has given
them distinctly: and even the Habits must be proper to the degrees, and humors
of the Persons as well as in a Picture. He who entered in the first Act, a
Young man like Pericles Prince of Tire, must not be in danger in the fifth Act,
of committing Incest with his Daughter: nor an Usurer, without great
probability and causes of Repentance, be turned into a Cutting Moorcraft.

I am not satisfied that the comparison betwixt the two Arts in the last
Paragraph is altogether so just as it might have been; but I am sure of this
which follows.

The principal Figure of the Subject must appear in the midst of the Picture,
under the principal Light to distinguish it from the rest which are only its
attendants. Thus in a Tragedy or an Epique Poem, the Hero of the Piece must be
advanced foremost to the view of the Reader or Spectator; He must outshine the
rest of all the Characters; He must appear the Prince of them, like the Sun in
the Copernican System, encompassed with the less noble Planets. Because the
Hero is the Center of the main Action; all the Lines from the Circumference
tend to him alone: He is the chief object of Pity in the Drama, and of
Admiration in the Epique Poem.

As in a Picture, besides the principal Figures which compose it, and are
placed in the midst of it, there are less Grouppes or Knots of Figures disposed
at proper distances, which are parts of the Piece, and seem to carry on the
same Design in a more inferior manner. So in Epique Poetry, there are
Episodes, and a Chorus in Tragedy, which are Members of the Action, as growing
out of it, not inserted into it. Such in the ninth Book of the Eneids is the
Episode of Nisus and Euryalus: the adventure belongs to them alone; they alone
are the Objects of Compassion and Admiration; but their business which they
carry on, is the general Concernment of the Trojan Camp, then beleaguered by
Turnus and the Latins, as the Christians were lately by the Turks. They were
to advertise the chief Hero of the Distresses of his Subjects occasioned by his
Absence, to crave his Succor, and solicit him to hasten his Return.

The Grecian Tragedy was at first nothing but a Chorus of Singers, afterward
one Actor was introduced, which was the Poet himself, who entertained the
people with a discourse in Verse, betwixt the Pauses of the Singing. This
succeeding with the People, more Actors were added to make the variety the
greater; and in process of time, the Chorus only sung betwixt the Acts; and
the Coriphaeus, or Chief of them spoke for the rest, as an Actor concerned in
the business of the Play.

Thus Tragedy was perfected by degrees, and being arrived at that Perfection,
the Painters might probably take the hint from thence, of adding Grouppes to
their Pictures. But as a good Picture may be without a Grouppe; so a good
Tragedy may subsist without a Chorus: notwithstanding any reasons which have
been given by Dacier to the contrary.

Monsieur Racine has indeed used it in his Esther, but not that he found any
necessity of it, as the French Critique would insinuate. The Chorus at St. Cyr,
was only to give the young Ladies an occasion of entertaining the King with
vocal Music, and of commending their own Voices. The Play it self was never
intended for the public Stage, nor without disparagement to the learned
Author, could possibly have succeeded there, and much less the Translation of
it here. Mr. Wicherly, when we read it together was of my opinion in this, or
rather I of his; for it becomes me so to speak of so excellent a Poet, and so
great a Judge. But since I am in this place, as Virgil says, Spatiis exclusus
iniquis; that is, shortened in my time, I will give no other reason, than that
it is impracticable on our Stage. A new Theater much more ample and much deeper
must be made for that purpose, besides the cost of sometimes forty or fifty
Habits, which is an expense too large, to be supplied by a Company of Actors.
It Is true, I should not be sorry to see a Chorus on a Theater, more than as
large and as deep again as ours, built and adorned at a King's Charges, and on
that condition, and another, which is, That my Hands were not bound behind me,
as now they are; I should not despair of making such a Tragedy, as might be
both instructive and delightful, according to the manner of the Grecians.

To make a Sketch, or a more perfect Model of a Picture, is in the Language of
Poets, to draw up the Scenary of a Play, and the reason is the same for both;
to guide the Undertaking, and to preserve the Remembrance of such things, whose
Natures are difficult to retain.

To avoid Absurdities and Incongruities, is the same Law established for both
Arts. The Painter is not to paint a Cloud at the Bottom of a Picture, but in
the uppermost parts: nor the Poet to place what is proper to the end or middle
in the beginning of a Poem. I might enlarge on this, but there are few Poets or
Painters, who can be supposed to sin so grossly against the Laws of Nature, and
of Art. I remember only one Play, and for once I will call it by its name, The
Slighted Maid: where there is nothing in the First Act, but what might have
been said or done in the Fifth; nor any thing in the Midst, which might not
have been placed as well in the Beginning or the End. To express the Passions
which are seated in the Heart by outward Signs, is one great Precept of the
Painters, and very difficult to perform. In Poetry, the same Passions and
Motions of the Mind are to be expressed; and in this consists the principal
Difficulty, as well as the Excellency of that Art. This, says my Author, is the
Gift of Jupiter: and to speak in the same Heathen Language, we call it the Gift
of our Apollo: not to be obtained by Pains or Study, if we are not born to it.
For the Motions which are studied are never so natural, as those which break
out in the height of a real Passion. Mr. Otway possessed this part as
thoroughly as any of the Ancients or Moderns. I will not defend every thing in
his Venice preserved; but I must bear this testimony to his Memory, That the
Passions are truly touched in it, though perhaps there is somewhat to be
desired both in the Grounds of them, and in the Height and Elegance of
Expression; but Nature is there which is the greatest Beauty.

In the Passions, says our Author, we must have a very great regard to the
quality of the Persons who are actually possessed with them. The Joy of a
Monarch for the news of a Victory, must not be expressed like the Ecstasy of a
Harlequin on the Receipt of a Letter from his Mistress; this is so much the
same in both the Arts, that it is no longer a Comparison. What he says of
Face-painting, or the Protrait of any one particular Person; concerning the
likeness is also as applicable to Poetry. In the character of an Hero, as well
as in an inferior Figure, there is a better or worse likeness to be taken; the
better is a Panegyric if it be not false, and the worse is a Libel: Sophocles.
says Aristotle always drew men as they ought to be, that is better than they
were; another, whose name I have forgotten, drew them worse than naturally they
were. Euripides altered nothing in the Character, but made them such as they
were represented by History, Epique Poetry or Tradition. Of the three, the
draught of Sophocles is most commended by Aristotle. I have followed it in that
part of Oedipus, which I writ, though perhaps I have made him too good a man.
But my Characters of Anthony and Cleopatra, though they are favorable to them,
have nothing of outrageous Panegyric, their Passions were their own, and such
as were given them by History, only the deformities of them were cast into
Shadows, that they might be Objects of Compassion; whereas if I had chosen a
Noonday Light for them, somewhat must have been discovered, which would rather
have moved our Hatred than our Pity.

The Gothique manner, and the barbarous Ornaments, which are to be avoided in a
Picture, are just the same with those in an ill ordered Play. For example, our
English Tragicomedy must be confessed to be wholly Gothique, notwithstanding
the Success which it has found upon our Theater, and in the Pastor Fido of
Guarini; even though Corisca and the Satyr contribute somewhat to the main
Action. Neither can I defend my Spanish Friar, as fond as otherwise I am of it
from this Imputation: for though the comical parts are diverting, and the
serious moving, yet they are of an unnatural mingle. For Mirch and Gravity
destroy each other, and are no more to be allowed for decent, than a gay Widow
laughing in a mourning Habit.

I had almost forgotten one considerable resemblance. Du Fresnoy tells us, That
the Figures of the Grouppes, must not be all on a side, that is, with their
Face and Bodies all turned the same way; but must contrast each other by their
several positions. Thus in a Play, some characters must be raised to oppose
other; and to set them off the better, according to the old Maxim, Contraria
juxta se posita, magis elucescunt. Thus in the Scornful Lady, the Usurer is
set to confront the Prodigal. Thus in my Tyrannicque Love, the Atheist Maximin
is opposed to the character of St. Catharine.

I am now come, though with the omission of many Likenesses, to the third Part
of Painting, which is called the Cromatique or Coloring. Expression, and all
that belongs to words, is that in a Poem, which Coloring is in a Picture. The
Colors well chosen in their proper places, together with the Lights and
Shadows which belong to them, lighten the Design, and make it pleasing to the
Eye. The Words, the Expressions, the Tropes and Figures, the Versification, and
all the other Elegancies of Sound, as Cadences, Turns of Words upon the
Thought, and many other things which are all parts of expression, perform
exactly the same Office both in Dramatique and Epique Poetry. Our Author calls
Coloring, Lena Sororis, in plain English, The Bawd of her Sister the Design or
Drawing: she clothes, she dresses her up, she paints her, she makes her appear
more lovely than naturally she is, she procures for the Design, and makes
Lovers for her. For the Design of it self, is only so many naked lines. Thus
in Poetry, the Expression is that which charms the Reader, and beautifies the
Design which is only the Out-lines of the Fables. It Is true, the Design must
of it self be good; if it be vicious or (in one word) unpleasing, the cost of
Coloring is thrown away upon it. It Is an ugly woman in a rich Habit set out
with Jewels, nothing can become her: but granting the Design to be moderately
good, it is like an excellent Complexion with indifferent Features; the white
and red well mingled on the Face, make what was before but passable, appear
beautiful. Operum Colores is the very word which Horace uses, to signify Words
and elegant Expressions, of which he himself was so great a Master in his Odes.
Amongst the Ancients, Zeuxis was most famous for his Coloring. Amongst the
Moderns, Titian and Correggio. Of the two Ancient Epique Poets, who have so far
excelled all the Moderns, the Invention and Design were the particular Talents
of Homer. Virgil must yield to him in both, for the Design of the Latin was
borrowed from the Grecian: But the dictio Virgiliana, the expression of Virgil;
his Coloring was incomparably the better, and in that I have always
endeavored to copy him. Most of the Pedants I know maintain the contrary, and
will have Homer excel even in this part. But of all people, as they are the
most ill manner'd, so they are the worst Judges; even of words which are their
Province, they seldom know more than the Grammatical construction, unless they
are born with a Poetical Genius; which is a rare Portion amongst them. Yet some
I know may stand excepted; and such I honor. Virgil is so exact in every word,
that none can be changed but for a worse: nor any one removed from its place,
but the harmony will be altered. He pretends sometimes to trip; but it is only
to make you think him in danger of a fall, when he is most secure. Like a
skillful dancer on the Ropes (if you will pardon the meanness of the
similitude) who slips willingly and makes a seeming stumble, that you may think
him in great hazard of breaking his neck; while at the same time he is only
giving you a proof of his dexterity. My late Lord Roscomon was often pleased
with this reflection, and with the examples of it in this admirable Author.

I have not leisure to run through the whole Comparison of Lights and Shadows
with Tropes and Figures; yet I cannot but take notice of Metaphors, which like
them have power to lessen or greaten any thing. Strong and glowing Colors are
the just resemblances of bold Metaphors, but both must be judiciously applied;
for there is a difference betwixt daring and fool-hardiness. Lucan and Statius
often ventured them too far, our Virgil never. But the great defect of the
Pharsalia and the Thebais was in the Design; if that had been more perfect, we
might have forgiven many of their bold strokes in the Coloring; or at least
excused them: yet some of them are such as Demosthenes or Cicero could not have
defended. Virgil, if he could have seen the first Verses of the Sylvae, would
have thought Statius mad in his sustian Description of the Statue on the brazen
Horse. But that Poet was always in a Foam at his setting out, even before the
Motion of the Race had warmed him. The soberness of Virgil, whom he read it
seems to little purpose, might have shown him the difference betwixt, Arma
virumque cano, and Magnanimum AEacidem, formidatamque tonanti Progeniem. But
Virgil knew how to rise by degrees in his expressions: Statius was in his
towering heights at the first stretch of his Pinions. The description of his
running Horse just starting in the Funeral Games for Archemorus, though the
Verses are wonderfully fine, are the true Image of their Author. Stare adeo
nescit, pereunt vestigia mill
Ante fugam; absentemque ferit gravis ungula campum.
Which would cost me an hour, if I had the leisure to translate them, there is
so much of Beauty in the Original. Virgil, as he better knew his Colors, so he
knew better how and where to place them. In as much have as I am, I cannot
forbear giving one example. It Is said of him, That he read the Second, Fourth
and Sixth Books of his Aeneids to Augustus Caesar. In the Sixth, (which we are
sure he read, because we know Octavia was present, who rewarded him so
bountifully for the twenty Verses which were made in honor of her deceased Son
Marcellus) in this sixth Book I say, the Poet speaking of Misenus the
Trumpeter, says, -- Quo non praestantior alter,
Aere ciere viros, --
And broke off in the Hemystick or midst of the Verse: but in the very reading
siez'd as it were with a divine Fury, he made up the latter part of the
Hemystick, with these following words; -- Martemque accendere cantu. How warm,
nay how glowing a Coloring is this! In the beginning of the Verse, the word
Aes, or Brass, was taken for a Trumpet, because the Instument was made of that
Metal, which of it self was fine; but in the latter end, which was made ex
tempore, you see three Metaphors, Martemque, -- accendere, -- cantu. Good
Heavens! how the plain sense is raised by the Beauty of the words. But this was
Happiness, the former might be only Judgment: this was the curiosa felicitas,
which Petronius attributes to Horace; it is the Pencil thrown luckily full upon
the Horses mouth to express the Foam which the Painter with all his skill could
not perform without it. These hits of words a true Poet often finds, as I may
say, without seeking: but he knows their value when he finds them, and is
infinitely pleased. A bad Poet may sometimes light on them, but he discerns not
a Diamond from a Bristol ^^stone; and would have been of the Cocks mind in
Aesop, a Grain of Barley would have pleased him better than the Jewel. The
Lights and Shadows which belongs to Coloring, put me in mind of that Verse in
Horace, Hoc amat obscurum, vult hoc sub luce videri: some parts of a Poem
require to be amply written, and with all the force and elegance of Words:
others must be cast into Shadows; that is, passed over in silence, or but
faintly touched. This belongs wholly to the Judgment of the Poet and the
Painter. The most beautiful parts of the Picture and the Poem must be the most
finished, the Colors and Words most chosen; many things in both which are not
deserving of this care, must be shifted off; content with vulgar expressions
and those very short, and left as in a shadow to the imagination of the Reader.

We have the Proverb, manum de tabula, from the Painters; which signifies, to
know when to give over, and to lay by the Pencil. Both Homer and Virgil
practiced this Precept wonderfully well, but Virgil the better of the two.
Homer knew that when Hector was slain, Troy was as good as already taken;
therefore he concludes his Action there. For what follows in the Funerals of
Patroclus, and the redemption of Hector's Body, is not (properly speaking) a
part of the main Action. But Virgil concludes with the death of Turnus: sor
after that difficulty was removed, Aeneas might marry and establish the Trojans
when he pleased. This Rule I had before my Eyes in the conclusion of the
Spanish Friar, when the discovery was made, that the King was living, which was
the knot of the Play untied, the rest is shut up in the compass of some few
lines, because nothing then hindered the Happiness of Torismond and Leonora.
The faults of that Drama are in the kind of it, which is Tragi comedy. But it
was given to the people; and I never writ any thing for my self but Anthony and
Cleopatra.

This Remark I must acknowledge is not so proper for the Coloring as the
Design; but it will hold for both. As the words, etc. are evidently shown to be
the clothing of the Thought, in the same sense as Colors are the clothing of
the Design, so the Painter and the Poet ought to judge exactly, when the
Coloring and Expressions are perfect, and then to think their work is truly
finished. Apelles said of Protogenes, That he knew not when to give over. A
work may be overwrought as well as under-wrought: too much Labor often takes
away the Spirit by adding to the polishing; so that there remains nothing but a
dull correctness, a piece without any considerable Faults, but with few
Beauties; for when the Spirits are drawn off, there is nothing but a caput
mortuum. Statius never thought an expression could be bold enough; and if a
bolder could be found he rejected the first. Virgil had Judgment enough to know
daring was necessary; but he knew the difference betwixt a glowing Color and a
glaring: as when he compared the shocking of the Fleets at Actium to the
justling of Islands rent from their Foundations, and meeting in the Ocean. He
knew the comparison was forced beyond Nature and raised too high: he therefore
softens the Metaphor with a Credas. You would almost believe, that Mountains or
Islands rushed against each other. -- Credas innare revulsas
Cycladas: aut montes concurrere montibus aequos.


But here I must break off without finishing the Discourse.

Cynthius aurem vellit and admonuit, etc. the things which are behind are of
too nice a consideration for an Essay, begun and ended in twelve Mornings, and
perhaps the Judges of Painting and Poetry, when I tell them, how short a time
it cost me, may make me the same answer, which my late Lord Rochester made to
one, who to commend a Tragedy, said it was written in three weeks; How the
Devil could he be so long about it? For that Poem was infamously bad; and I
doubt this Parallel is little better; and then the shortness of the time is so
far from being a Commendation, that it is scarcely an Excuse. But if I have
really drawn a Portrait to the Knees, or an half length with a tolerable
Likeness, then I may plead with some Justice for my self, that the rest is left
to the Imagination. Let some better Artist provide himself of a deeper Canvas,
and taking these hints which I have given, set the Figure on its Legs, and
finish it in the Invention, Design and Coloring.

THE PREFACE OF THE French Author.
AMong all the beautiful and delightful Arts, that of Painting has always found
the most Lovers; the number of them almost including all Mankind. Of whom great
multitudes are daily found, who value themselves on the knowledge of it; either
because they keep company with Painters, or that they have seen good Pieces; or
lastly, because their Gusto is naturally good. Which notwithstanding, that
Knowledge of theirs (if we may so call it) is so very superficial, and so ill
grounded, that it is impossible for them to describe in what consists the
beauty of those Works which they admire, or the faults which are in the
greatest part of those which they condemn: and truly it is not hard to find,
that this proceeds from no other cause, than that they are not furnished with
Rules by which to judge, nor have any solid Foundations, which are as so many
Lights set up to clear their understanding and lead them to an entire and
certain knowledge. I think it superfluous to prove that this is necessary to
the knowledge of Painting. It Is sufficient, that Painting be acknowledged for
an Art; for that being granted it follows without dispute, that no Arts are
without their Precepts. I shall satisfy my self with telling you, that this
little Treatise will furnish you with infallible Rules of judging truly: since
they are not only founded upon right Reason but upon the best Pieces of the
best Masters, which our Author has carefully examined during the space of more
than thirty years; and on which he has made all the reflections which are
necessary to render this Treatise worthy of Posterity: which though little in
bulk, yet contains most judicious Remarks, and suffers nothing to escape that
is essential to the Subject which it handles. If you will please to read it
with attention, you will find it capable of giving the most nice and delicate
sort of Knowledge, not only to the Lovers, but even to the Professors of that
Art.

It would be too long to tell you the particular advantages which it has above
all the Books which has appeared before it in this kind: you need only to
read it, and that will convince you of this truth. All that I will allow my
self to say, is only this, That there is not a word in it, which carries not
its weight; whereas in all others, there are two considerable faults which lie
open to the sight, ( viz) That saying too much, they always say too little. I
assure my self, that the Reader will own it is a work of general profit, to the
Lovers of Painting, for their instruction how to judge exactly; and with
Knowledge of the Cause, which they are to judge. And to the Painters
themselves, by removing their difficulties, that they may work with pleasure;
because they may be in some manner certain that their Productions are good.
It Is to be used like Spirits and precious Liquours, the less you drink of it at
a time it is with the greater pleasure: read it often, and but little at once,
that you may digest it better; and dwell particularly on those passages which
you find marked with an Asterism* For the observations which follow such a
Note, will give you a clearer Light, on the matter which is there treated. You
will find them by the Numbers which are on the side of the Translation, from
five to five Veres; by searching for the like Number in the Remarks which are
at the end of it, and which are distinguished from each other by this note. You
will find in the latter Pages of this Book, the Judgment of the Author on those
Painters, who have acquired the greatest Reputation in the World. Amongst whom,
he was not willing to comprehend those who are now living: They are undoubtedly
his, as being found among his Papers written in his own hand.

As for the Prose Translation which you will find on the other side of the
Latin Poem, I must inform you on what occasion, and in what manner it was
performed. The Love which I had for Painting, and the pleasure which I found in
the Exercise of that noble Art, at my leisure hours, gave me the desire of
being acquainted with the late Mr. du FRESNOY; who was generally reputed to
have a through knowledge of it. Our Acquaintance at length proceeded to that
degree of Intimacy; that he entrusted me with his Poem, which he believed me
capable both of understanding, and translating; and accordingly desired me to
undertake it. The truth is, that we had conversed so often on that Subject, and
he had communicated his Thoughts of it so fully to me; that I had not the least
remaining difficulty concerning it. I undertook therefore to translate it, and
employed my self in it with Pleasure, Care, and Assiduity; after which, I put
it into his hands, and he altered in it what he pleased, till at last it was
wholly to his Mind. And then he gave his Consent that it should be published:
but his Death preventing that Design, I thought it a wrong to his Memory, to
deprive Mankind any longer of this Translation, which I may safely affirm to be
done according to the true sense of the Author, and to his liking: Since he
himself has given great Testimonies of his Approbation to many of his Friends,
and they who were acquainted with him, know his humor to be such, that he
would never constrain himself so far, as to commend what he did not really
approve. I thought my self obliged to say thus much, in vindication of the
faithfulness of my Work, to those who understand not the Latin: for as to
those who are conversant in both the tongues, I leave them to make their own
judgment of it.

The Remarks which I have added to his work, are also wholly conformable to his
opinions; and I am certain that he would not have disapproved them. I have
endeavored in them to explain some of the most obscure passages, and those
which are most necessary to be understood; and I have done this according to
the manner wherein he used to express himself, in many Conversations which we
had together. I have con^^in'd them also to the narrowest compass I was able,
that I might not tire the patience of the Reader, and that they might be read
by all persons. But if it happens, that they are not to the taste of some
Readers (as doubtless it will so fall out) I leave them entirely to their own
discretion, and shall not be displeased that another hand should succeed
better. I shall only beg this favor from them, that in reading what I have
written, they will bring no particular gusto along with them, or any prevention
of mind, and that whatsoever judgment they make, it may be purely their own,
whether it be in my favor, or in my condemnation.

A TABLE of the Precepts Contained in this TREATISE.
OF what is Beautiful. p. 7 Of Theory and Practice. 8 Concerning the Subject.
11 Invention the first part of Painting. 12 The Disposition of the whole Work.
ib. The Faithfulness of the Subject. ib. Whatsoever palls the Subject to be
rejected. 15 Design, or Drawing the second part of Painting. 16 Variety in the
Figures. 19 The Members and Drapery of every Figure to be suitable to it. ib.
The Actions of Mutes to be imitated. ib. Of the principal Figure of the
Subject. ib. Grouppes of Figures. 20 The Diversity of Postures in the Grouppes.
ib. Equality of the Piece. ib. Of the number of Figures. 23 Of the Ioints and
Feet. ib. The Motions of the Hands and Head must agree. ib. What must be
avoided in the distribution of the Figures. ib. That we must not tie our selves
to Nature, but accommodate her to our Genius. 24 Ancient Figures the Rules of
imitating Nature. 27 A single Figure how to be treated. ib. Of the Draperies.
ib. What things contribute to adorn the Picture. 31 Of precious Stones and
Pearls for Ornament. ib. The Model. ib. The Scene of the Picture. ib. The
Graces and the Nobleness. ib. Let every thing be set in its proper place. ib.
Of the Passions. 32 Gothique Ornamens to be avoided. ib. Coloring the third
part of Painting. 35 The Conduct of the Tones of Lights and Shadows. 39 Of dark
Bodies on light grounds. 40 That there must not be two equal Lights in a
Picture. 43 Of White and Black. 44 The Reflection of Colors. 47 The Union of
Colors. ib. Of the Interposition of Air. ib. The relation of Distances. 48 Of
Bodies which are distanc'd. ib. Of Bodies which are contiguous, and of those
which are separated. ib. Contrary extremities to be avoided. ib. Diversity of
Tones and Colors. ib. The Choice of Light. 51 Of certain things relating to
the practical part. ib. The Field, or Ground of the Picture. ib. Of the
Vivacity of Colors. 52 Of Shadows. ib. The Picture to be of one Piece. ib. The
Looking-glass the Painters best Master. ib. An half Figure, or a whole one
before others. ib. A Portrait. 55 The place of the Picture. ib. Large Lights.
56 What Lights are requisite. ib. Things which are vicious in Painting to be
avoided. ib. The prudential part of a Painter. ib. The Idea of a beautiful
Piece. 59 Advice to a young Painter. ib. Art must be subservient to the
Painter. 60 Diversity and Facility are pleasing. ib. The Original must be in
the Head, and the Copy on the Cloth. ib. The Compass to be in the Eyes. ib.
Pride an Enemy to good Painting. 63 Know your self. ib. Practice perpetually.
64 The Morning most proper for Work. ib. Every day do something. ib. The
Passions which are true and na^^ural ib. Of Table-Books. 67 The method of
Studies for a young ^^ainter. 71 Nature and Experience perfect Art. 76
THE ART OF PAINTING.
DE ART GRAPHICA LIBER.
UT PICTURA POESIS ERIT; similisque Poesi
Sit Pictura, refert par aemula quaeque sororem,
Alternantque vices and nomina; muta Poesis
Dicitur haec, Pictura loquens solet illa vocari.

Quod pulchrum aspectu Pictores pingere curant:
Quaeque Poetarum numeris indigna fuere,
Non eadem Pictorum operam studiumque merentur:
Ambae quippe sacros ad Relligionis honores

Ingressae, Divum aspectu, alloquioque fruuntur;
Oraque magna Deum and dicta observata reportant,
Coelestemque suorum operum mortalibus ignem.
Inde pe^^ hunc orbem studiis coeuntibus errant,
Carpentes quae digna sui, revolutaque lustrant
Tempora. Quaerendis consortibus Argumentis.
Denique quaecumque in coelo, terraque, marique
Longius in tempus durare, ut pulchra, merentur,
Nobilitate sua claroque insignia casu,
Dives and ampla manet Pictores atque Poetas
Materies, inde alta sonant per saecula mundo
Nomina, magnanimis Heroibus inde superstes
Gloria, perpetuoque operum miracula restant:
Tantus inest divis honor Artibus atque potestas.
Non mihi Pieridum chorus hic, nec Apollo vocandus,
Majus ut eloquium numeris aut gratia fandi
Dogmaticis illustret opus rationibus horrens:
Cum nitida tantum and facili digesta loquela,
Ornari praecepta negent; contenta doceri.
Nec mihi men's animusve fuit constringere nodos
Artificum manibus, quos tantum dirigit usus;
Indolis ut vigor inde potens obstrictus hebescat,
Normarum numero immani Geniumque moretur:
Sed rerum ut pollens Ars cognitione gradatim

Transeat in Genium, Geniusque usu induat Artem.
Praecipua imprimis Artisque potissima pars est, Primum Praeceptum. De Pulchro.

Nosse quid in rebus Natura crearit ad Artem
Pulchrius, idque Modum juxta, Mentemque Vetustam,

Negligit, insultans ignotae audacior Arti,
Ut curare nequit, quae non modo noverit esse,
Illud apud Veteres fuit, unde notabile dictum,
Nil Pictore malo securius atque Poeta.
Cognita amas, and amata cupis, sequerisque cupita;
Passibus assequeris tandem quae fervidus urges:
Illa tamen quae pulchra decent; non omnia casus
Qualiacumque dabunt, etiamve simillima veris:
Nam quamcumque modo servili haud sufficit ipsam
Naturam exprimere ad vivum, sed ut Arbiter Artis
Seliget ex illa tantum pulcherrima Pictor.
Quodque minus pulchrum, aut mendosum corriget ipse
Mart suo, formae Veneres captando fugaces.
Utque manus grandi nil nomine practica dignum
Assequitur, Praeceptum. De Speculatione and Praxi.
purum arcanae quam deficit Artis
Lumen, and in praeceps abitura ut caeca vagatur;
Sic nihil Ars opera manuum privata supremum
Exequitur, sed languet iners uti vincta lacertos;
Dispositumque typum non lingua pinxit Apelles.

Ponere, (cum nequeant quae sunt pulcherrima dici)
Nitimur haec paucis, scrutati summa magistrae
Dogmata Naturae, Artisque Exemplaria prima
Altius intuiti; sic men's habilisque facultas

Luxuriansque in monstra furor compescitur Art:
Est modus in rebus, ^^unt certi denique fines,
Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere rectum.
Praeceptum. De Argumento.
pulchrum,

Sponte capax amplam emeritae mox praebeat Arti
Materiam, retegens aliquid salis and documenti.
Tandem opus aggredior, primoque occurrit in Albo
Disponenda typi concepta potente Minerva
Machina, quae nostris Inventio dicitur oris.
Illa quidem prius ingenuis instructa Sororum
Artibus Aonidum, INVENTIO prima Picturae pars.
and Phoebi sublimior aestu.
Quaerendasque inter Posituras, luminis, Dispositio, sive operis totius
Oeconomia.
umbrae,
Atque futurorum jam praesentire colorum
Par erit harmoniam, captando ab utrisque venustum.
Sit Thematis genuina ac viva expressio juxta
Textum Antiquorum, Fidelitas Argumenti.
propriis cum tempore formis.
Inane rejici^^ndum.
sive videtur
Improprium, minim^^que urgens, potiora tenebit

Summa ubi res agitur, vis summa requiritur Artis.
Ista labor gravi, studio, monitisque Magistri
Ardua pars nequit addisci rarissima: namque
Ni prius aethereo rapuit quod ab axe Prometheus

Mortali haud cuivis divina haec munera dantur,
Non uti Daedaleam licet omnibus ire Corinthum.
Aegypto informis quondam Pictura reperta,
Graecorum studiis and mentis acumine crevit:

Naturam visa est miro superare labor.
Quos inter Graphidos gymnasia prima fuere,
Portus Athenarum, Sicyon, Rhodos, atque Corinthus,
Disparia inter se, modicum ratione Laboris;
Ut patet ex Veterum statuis, formae atque decoris
Archetypis, GRAPHIS seu Positura, Secunda Picturae pars.
queis posterior nil protulit aetas
Condignum, and non inferius long Art, Modoque:
Horum igitur vera ad normam Positura legetur,
Grandia, inaequalis, formosaque Partibus amplis
Anteriora dabit membra, in contraria motu
Diverso variata, suo liberataque centro:
Membrorumque Sinus ignis flammantis ad instar
Serpenti undantes flexu, sed laevia plana
Magnaque signa, quasi sine tubere subdita tactu
Ex longo deducta fluant, non secta minutim,
Insertisque Toris sint not a ligamina juxta
Compagem Anathomes, and membrificatio Graeco
Deformata Modo, paucisque expressa lacertis,
Qualis apud Veteres; totoque Eurithmia parts

Sit minus, and puncto videantur cuncta sub uno;
Regula certa licet nequeant Prospectica dici,
Aut complementum Graphidos; sed in art juvamen
Et Modus accelerans operandi: ut corpor a falso

Nam Geometralem nunquam sunt corpora juxta
Mensuram depicta oculis, sed qualia visa.
Varietas in Figuris.
non omnibus aetas
Aequalis, similisque color, crinesque Figuris:


Unum idemque simul corpus cum vestibus ipsis: Figura situna cum Membris and
Vestibus

Mutorum actiones imitandae.

Figura Princ^^ps.
seu Princeps Dramatis ultro

Pulchrior ante alias, reliquis nec operta Figuris.
Agglomerata simul sint membra, Figurarum Globiseu Cumuli.
ipsaeque Figurae
Stipentur, circumque globos locus usque vacabit;
Ne, mal^^ dispersis dum visus ubique Figuris
Dividitur, cunctisque operis fervente tumultu
Partibus implicitis crepitans confusio surgat.
Inque figurarum cumulis non omnibus idem
Corporis inflexus, Positurorum di^^ersitas in cumulis.
motusque, vel artibus omnes
Conversis pariter non connitantur eodem,
Sed quaedam in diversa trahant contraria membra
Transvers^^que aliis pungent, and caetera frangant.
Pluribus adversis aversam oppone figuram,
Pectoribusque humeros, and dextera membra sinistris,
Seu multis constabit Opus, paucisve figuris.
Altera pars tabulae vacuo ne frigida Campo
Aut deserta siet, Tabulaelibramentum.
dum pluribus alter a formis
Fervida mole sua supremam exurgit ad or am:
Sed tibi sic positis respondeat utraque rebus,
Ut si aliquid sursum se part attollat in una,
Sic aliquid part ex alia consurgat, and ambas
Aequiparet, geminas cumulando aequaliter oras.

In genere ut rarum est; Numerus Figurarum.
multis ita densa Figuris
Rarior est Tabula excellens; vel adhuc fere nulla

Quippe solet rerum nimio dispersa tumultu
Majestate carere gravi requieque decora;
Nec speciosa nitet vacuo nisi liber a Campo.
Sed si Opere in magno plures Thema grande requirat

Machina tota rei, non singula quaeque seorsim.
Praecipua extremis raro Internodia membris
Internodia and Pedes exhibendi.
summa Pedum vestigia nunquam. Motusmanuum motui capitis jungendus.

Gratia nulla manet, Quaefugienda in Distributione and Compositione.
motusque, vigorque Figuras


Difficiles fugitoa spectus, contractaque visu
Membra sub ingrato, motusque, actusque coactos,
Quodque refert signis, rectos quodammodo tractus,
Siva Parallelos plures simul, and vel acutas,
Vel Geometrales (ut Quadra, Triangula,) formas:
Ingratamque pari Signorum ex ordine quandam
Symmetriam: sed praecipu^^ in contraria semper
Signa volunt duci transversa, ut diximus ante.
Summa igitur ratio Signorum habeatur in omni
Composito; dat enim reliquis pretium, atque vigorem.
Non ita naturae astanti sis cuique revinctus,
Hanc praeter nihil ut Genio studioque relinquas; NaturaGenlo accommodanda.

Nec sine test rei natura, Artisque Magistra
Quidlibet ingenio memor ut tantummodo rerum
Pingere posse putes; errorum est plurima sylva,
Multiplicesque viae, been agendi terminus unus,
Linea recta velut sola est, and mill recurvae:
Sed juxta Antiquos naturam imitabere pulchram,
Qualem forma rei propria, objectumque requirit.
Signa Antiqua Naturae modum constituunt.


Quodque refert specie Veterum post saecula Mentem;
Splendidior quippe ex illis assurgit imago,
Magnaque se rerum facies aperit meditanti;

Cum spes nulla siet rediturae aequalis in aevum.

Pingitur, Sola Figura quomodotractanda.
and multis variata Coloribus esto.
Lati amplique sinus Pannorum, Quid in Pannis observandum.
and nobilis ordo


Et circumfulos Pannorum porrigat extra
Membra sinus, non contiguous, ipsisque Figurae
Partibus impressos, quasi Pannus adhaereat illis;

Quaeque intermissis passim sunt dissita vanis
Copulet, inductis subterve, lacernis.
Et membra ut magnis paucisque expressa lacertis.
Majestate allis preastant forma atque decore;
Haud seus in Pannis quos supra optavimus amplos
Perpaucos sinuum flexus, rugasque, striasque,
Membra super versu faciles inducere praestat.
Naturaeque rei proprius sit Pannus, abundans
Patriciis, succinctus erit crassusque Bubulcis
Mancipiisque; levis, teneris, gracilisque Puellis.
Inque cavis maculisque umbrarum aliquando tumescet
Lumen ut excipiens operis qua Massa requirit
Latius extendat, sublatisque aggreget umbris.
Quid multu^^ conferat ad^^ abulae ornamentum.
ornantque Figura^^,

Nec sit opus nimium Gemmis Auroque refertum;
Ornamentum Auri and Gemmarum.

sed plurima vili.
Prototypus.


Convenientia rerum cum Scena.

ritusque decusque
Servetur; sit Nobilitas, Charitumque Venustas,
Charites and Nobilitas.

Coelo, non Art petendum.)
Res quaeque locum suum teneat.

Non vicina pedum tabulata excelsa tonantis
Astra domus depicta gerent nubesque notosque;
Nec mare depressum Laquearia summa vel orcum;
Marmoreamque feret cannis vaga pergula molem:
Congrua sed propria semper statione locentur.
Haec praeter motus animorum and cord repostos
Exprimere Affectus, Affectus.

paucisque coloribus ipsam
Pingere posse animam, atque oculis praebere videndam,
Hoc opus, his labor est: pauci quos aequus amavit
Juppiter, aut ardens evexit ad aethera virtus:
Dis similes potuere manu miracula tanta.
Hos ego Rhetoribus tractandos desero tantum
Egregii antiquum memorabo sophisma Magistri,
Verius affectus animi vigor exprimit ardens,
Solliciti nimium quam sedula cura laboris.
Denique nil sapiat Gotthorum barbara trito
Ornamenta modo, Gotthorum ornamenta fugienda.

saeclorum and monstra malorum;
Queis ubi bella, famen and pestem, Discordia, Luxus,
Et Romanorum res grandior intulit Orbi,
Ingenuae periere Arts, periere superbae

Ignibus absumi Pictura, latere coacta
Fornicibus, sortem and reliquam confidere Cryptis,
Marmoribusque diu Sculptura jacere sepultis.
Imperium interea scelerum gravitate fatiscens

Luminis indignum, errorum caligine mersit,
Impiaque ignaris damnavit saecla tenebris:
Unde Coloratum Graiis huc usque Magistris
Nil superest tantorum Hominum quod Mente Modoque
CHROMATICE Tertia pars Picturae.
doceatque Laborem;
Nec qui Chromatices nobis hoc tempor parts
Restituat, quales Zeuxis tractaverat olim.
Hujus quando maga velut Art aequavit Apellem
Pictorum Archigraphum meruitque Coloribus altam
Nominis aeterni famam toto orb sonantem.
Haec quidem ut in Tabulis fallax sed grata Venustas,
Et complementum Graphidos (mirabile visu)
Pulchra vocabatur, sed subdola Lena Sororis:
Non tamen hoc lenocinium; fucusque, dolusque
Dedecori fuit unquam; illi sed semper honori,
Laudibus and meritis; hanc ergo nosse juvabit.
Lux varium vivumque dabit, nullum Umbra Colorem.
Quo magis adversum est corpus lucisque propinquum,
Clarius est Lumen; nam debilitatur eundo.
Quo magis est ^^orpus directum oculisque propinquum,
Conspicitur melius; nam visus hebescit eundo.

Integra sint, Tonorum, Luminum and Umbrarum ratio.
extrema abscedant perdita signis
Confusis, non praecipiti labentur in Umbram

Prorumpant; sederit sensim hinc atque inde meatus
Lucis and Umbrarum; capitisque unius ad instar
Totum opus, ex multis quamquam sit partibus unus
Luminis Umbrarumque globus tantummodo fiet,

Divisum Pegma in parts statione remotas.
Sintque ita discreti inter se ratione colorum,
Luminis umbrarumque anteorsum ut corpora clara
Obscura umbrarum requies speetanda relinquat;

Ac veluti in speculis convexis eminet ante
Asperior reipsa vigor and vis aucta colorum
Partibus adversis; magis and fuga rupta retrorsum
Illorum est (ut visa minus vergentibus oris)
Corporibus dabimus formas hoc more rotundas,
Mente Modoque igitur Plastes and Pictor eodem
Dispositum tractabit opus; quae Sculptor in orbem
Atterit, haec rupto pro^^ul abscedente color
Assequitur Pictor, fugientiaque illa retrorsum
Iam signata minus confusa coloribus aufert:
Anteriora quidem direct adversa, color
Integra, vivaci, summo cum Lumine and Umbra
Antrorsum distincta refert velut aspera visu.
Sicque super planum inducit Leucoma Colores.
Hos velut ex ipsa natura immotus eodem
Intuitu circum Statuas daret inde rotundas.
Densa Figurarum solidis quae corpora formis
Subdita sunt tactu non transluent, Corpora densa and opaca cum translucentibus.
sed opaca
In translucendi spatio ut super Era, Nubes

Asperiora illis prope circumstantibu^^ esse,
Ut distincta magis firmo cum L^^mine and Umbra,
Et gravioribus ut suste^^ a coloribus, inter
Aereas species subsistent semper opaca:

Corporibus leviora; uti Nubes, Aer and Undae.

In Tabula paria admitti, Non duo ex Coelo Lumina in Tabulam aequalia.
aut aequalia pingi:
Majus at in mediam Lumen ^^adet usqe Tabellam

Res agitur, circumque oras minuetur eundo:
Utque in progressu Iubar attenuatur ab ortu
Solis ad occasum paulatim, and cessat eundo;
Sic Tabulis Lumen, tota in compage Colorum,

Majus ut in Statuis per compita stantibus Urbis
Lumen habent Parts superae, minus inferiores,
Idem erit in tabulis, majorque nec umbra vel ater
Membra Figurarum intrabit Color atque secabit:
Corpora sed circum Umbra cavis latitabit oberrans:
Atque ita quaeretur Lux opportuna Figuris,
Ut late infusum Lumen lata Umbra sequatur:
Unde nec immerito fertur Titianus ubique
Lucis and Umbrarum Normam appellasse Racemum.
Purum Album esse potest propiusque magisque remotum:
Cum Nigro antevenit propius, Album and N^^grum.
fugit absque remotum;
Purum autem Nigrum antrorsum venit usque Propinquum.
Lux fucata suo tingit miscetque Color
Corpora, sicque suo, per quem Lux funditur, aer
Colorum reflectio.
circumfusosque Colores


Participes, Unio Colorum.
mixtosque simul decet esse Colores.

(Quae fuit Antiquis Corruption dicta Colorum)
Cum plures opere in magno posuere Figuras,
Ne conjuncta simul variorum inimica Colorum
Congeries Formam implicitam and concisa minutis
Membra daret Pannis, totam unamquamque Figuram
Affini aut uno tantum vestire Color

Carbaseosque Sinus, vel amicum in Lumine and Umbra
Contiguis circum rebus sociando Colorem.
Aer interpositus.
aut qua purior Aer,

Qu^^que magis densus nebulis, aut plurimus Aer
Amplum inter fuerit spatium porrectus, Distantiarum Relatio.
in auras
Confundet rerum species, and perdet inanes.
Anteriora magis semper finita remotis
Incertis dominentur and abscedentibus, idque
More relativo, ut majora minoribus extant.
Cuncta minuta procul Massam densantur in unam, Corpora procul distantia.

Ut folia arboribus sylvarum, and in Aequore fluctus.
Contigua inter se coeant, Contigua and Dissita.

Distabuntque tamen grato and discrimine parvo.
Extrema extremis contraria jungere noli; Contraria extrema fugienda.

Sed medio sint usque gradu sociata Coloris.
Corporum erit Tonus atque Color variatus ubique
Quaerat amicitiam retro, Tonus and Color varii.
ferus emicet ante.

Luminis delectus.
cum attingere tantum
Non Pigmenta queant; auream sed vespere Lucem,
Seu modicam mane albentem, sive aetheris actam
Post Hymem nimbis transfuso Sole caducam,

Quaedam circa Praxim.
veluti Chrystalla, Metalla,
Ligna, Ossa and Lapides; Villosa, ut Vellera, Pelles,
Barbae, aqueique Oculi, Crines, Holoserica, Plumae;
Et Liquida, ut stagnans Aqua, reflexaeque sub Undis

Subter ad extremum liquide sint picta, superque*
Luminibus pereussa suis, signisque repostis.
Campus Tabulae.
levisque
Abscedat latus, liquideque been unctis amicis

Quaeque cadunt retro in Campum confinia Campo.
vividus esto Color nimio non pallidus Albo, Color vividus, non tamen pallidus.

Adversisque locis ingestus plurimus ardens;
Sed leviter parceque datus vergentibus oris.
Cuncta Labor simul coeant, Umbra.
velut Umbra in eadem.
Tota siet Tabula ex una depicta Patella. Ex una Patella sit Tabula.

Multa ex Natura Speculum praeclara docebit; Speculum Pictorum Magister.

Quaeque procul sero spatiis spectantur in amplis.
Dimidia Effigies, quae sola, Dimidia Figura vel integra ante alias.
vel integra plures
Ante alias posita ad Lucem, stet proxima visu,
Et latis spectanda locis, oculisque remota,
Luminis Umbrarumque gradu sit picta supremo.

E^^igies.
alternas referendo tempore eodem
Consimiles Parts, cum Luminis atque Coloris
Compositis justisque Tonis, tunc parta Labor
Si facili and vegeto micat ardens, viva videtur.
Locus Tabulae.
amico
Iuncta Color graduque, procul quae picta feroci

Grandia signa volunt spatia ampla ferosque Colores.
Lumina lata unctas simul undique copulet Umbras
Extremus Labor. Lumina lata.
In Tabulas demissa fenestris
Si fuerit Lux parva, Quantitas Luminis loci in quo Tabula est exponenda.
Color clarissimus esto:
Vividus at contra obscurusque in Lumine aperto.
Quae vacuis divisa cavis vitare memento: Errores and vitia Picturae.

Trita, minuta, simul quae non stipata dehiscunt;
Barbara, Cruda oculis, rugis fucata Colorum,
Luminis Umbrarumque Tonis aequalia cuncta;
Foeda, cruenta, cruces, obscoena, ingrata, chimeras,
Sordidaque and misera, and vel acuta, vel aspera tactu,
Quaeque dabunt formae temere congesta ruinam,
Implicitasque aliis confundent miscua Parts.
Dumque fugis vitiosa, Prudentia in Pictore.
cave in contraria labi
Damna mali, Vitium extremis nam semper inhaeret.

Nobilibus Signis sunt Grandia, Elegantium Idaea Tabularum.
Dissita, Pura,
Tersa, velut minime confusa, Labor Ligata,
Partibus ex magnis paucisque efficta, Colorum

Qui been coepit, uti facti jam fertur habere
Pictor Tyro.
Picturam ita nil sub limine primo
Ingrediens Puer offendit damnosius Arti,
Quam varia errorum genera ignorante Magistro

Inficere, in toto quod non abstergitur aevo.
Nec Graphidos rudis Artis adhuc cito qualiacumque
Corpora viva super studium meditabitur ante
Illorum quam Symmetriam, Internodia, Formam

Archetypis, dulcesque Dolos praesenserit Artis.
Ars debet servire Pictori, non Pictor Arti.

Quaere Artem quaecumque juvant, Oculosrecreant diversitas and Operis
facilitas, quae speciatim Ars dicitur.
fuge quaeque repugnant.
Corpora diversae naturae juncta placebunt;
Sic ea quae facili contempta labor videntur:
Aethereus quippe ignis inest and spiritus illis.
Mente diu versata, manu celeranda repenti.
Arsque Laborque Operis grata sic fraud latebit.
Maxima deinde erit ars, nihil artis inesse videri.
Nec prius inducas Tabulae Pigmenta Colorum,
Expensi quam signa Typi stabilita nitescant, Archetypus in mente, Apographum
in tela.

Et menti praesens Operis sit Pegma futuri.
Praevaleat sensus rationi quae officit Arti
Conspicuae, Circinusin oculis.
inque oculis tantummodo Circinus esto.

Superbia pictori nocet plurimum.

Est coecus nam quisque suis in rebus, and expers
Iudicii, Prolemque suam miratur amatque.
Ast ubi Consilium deerit Sapientis Amici,

Non facilis tamen ad nutus and inania Vulgi
Dicta levis mutabis Opus, Geniumque relinques:
Nam qui part sua sperat been posse mereri
Multivaga de Plebe, nocet sibi, nec placet ulli.

(...).

Proderit imprimis Pictori (...);
Ut data quae genio colat, abstineatque negat is.
Fructibus utque suus nunquam est sapor at que venustas
Floribus insueto in fundo praecoce sub anni
Tempore, quos cultus violentus and ignis adegit;
Sic nunquam nimio quae sunt extorta labor,
Et picta invito Genio, nunquam illa placebunt.
Vera super meditando, Quod ment^^ conceperis manu comproba.
Manus, Labor improbus adsit:
Nec tamen obtundat Genium, mentisque vigorem.
Optima nostrorum pars matutina dierum, Matutinum tempus Labori aptum.

Difficili hanc igitur potiorem impende Labori.
Nulla dies abeat quin linea ducta supersit. Singulis diebus aliquid faciendum.

Perque vias vultus hominum, motusque notabis
Liberate sua proprios, Affectus inobservati and naturales.
positasque Figuras
Ex sese faciles, ut inobservatus habebis.
Non desint ^^ugillares.
Terris and in Aere pulchrum
Contigerit, Chartis propera mandare paratis,
Dum praesens animo species tibi fervet hianti.

Parcit, Amicorum quantum ut sermon benigno
Exhaustum reparet mentem recreata, sed inde
Litibus and curis in Coelibe libera vita
Secessus procul a turba strepituque remotos

Namque recollecto tota incumbente Minerva
Ingenio rerum species praesentior extat,
Commodiusque Operis compagem amplectitur omnem.
Infami tibi non potior sit avara peculi

Nominis aeterni and laudis pruritus habendae,
Condignae pulchrorum Operum mercedis in aevum.
Iudicium, docile Ingenium, Cor nobile, Sensus
Sublimes, firmum Corpus, florensque Iuventa,
Commoda Res, Labor, Artis amor, doctusque Magister;
Et quamcumque voles occasio porrigat ansam,
Ni Genius quidam adfuerit Sydusque benignum,
Dotibus his tantis, nec adhuc Ars tantaparatur:
Distat ab Ingenio long Manus. Optima Doctis
Censentur quae prava minus; latet omnibus error,
Vitaque tam longae brevior non sufficit Arti;
Desinimus nam posse senes cum scire periti
Incipimus, doctamque Manum gravat aegra senectus,
Nec gelidis fervet juvenilis in Artubus ardor.

Paciferae studia allectant tranquilla Minervae,
Quosque suo fovet igne, sibique optavit Alumnos!
Eja agite, atque animis ingentem ingentibus Artem
Exercete alacres, dum strenua corda Iuventus

Dum vacua errorum nulloque imbuta sapore
Pura nitet men's, and rerum sitibunda novarum
Praesentes haurit species, atque humida servat.
Ordo Studiorum.
In Geometrali prius Art parumper adulti
Signa Antiqua super Graiorum addiscite formam;
Nec mora nec requies, noctuque diuque labori
Illorum Menti atque Modo, vos donec agendi
Praxis ab assiduo faciles assueverit usu.
Mox ubi Iudicium emensis adoleverit annis
Singula quae celebrant primae Exemplaria classis
Romani, Veneti, Parmenses, atque Bononi
Partibus in cunctis pedetentim atque ordine recto,
Ut monitum supra est vos expendisse juvabit.
Hos apud invenit Raphael miracula summo
Ducta modo, Veneresque habuit quas nemo deinceps.
Quidquid erat formae scivit Bonarota potenter.
Julius a puero Musarum eductus in Antris
Aonias reseravit opes, Graphicaque Poesi
Quae non visa prius, sed tantum audita Poetis
Ante oculos spectanda dedit Sacraria Phoebi:
Quaeque coronatis complevit bella triumphis
Heroum fortuna potens, casusque decoros
Nobilius reipsa antiqua pinxisse videtur.
Clarior ante alios Corregius extitit, ampla

Pingendique Modo grandi, and tractando Color
Corpora. Amicitiamque, gradusque, dolosque Colorum,
Compagemque ita disposuit Titianus, ut inde
Divus appellatus, magnis sit honoribus auctus
Annibal omnes
In propriam mentem atque Modum mira art coegit.
Plurimus inde labor Tabulas imitando juvabit
Egregias, Natura and Experientia Artem perficiunt.
Operumque Typos; sed plura docebit
Natura ante oculos praesens; nam firmat and auget
Vim Genii, ex illaque Artem Experientia complet.
Multa supersileo quae commentaria dicent.
Haec ego, dum memoror subitura volubilis aevi
Cuncta vices, variisque olim peritura ruinis,
Pauca Sophismata sum Graphica immortalibus ausus
Credere Pieriis. Romae meditatus: ad Alps
Dum super insanas moles inimicaque castra
Borbonidum decus and vindex Lodoicus Avorum
Fulminat ardenti dextra, Patriaeque resurgens
Gallicus Alcides, premit Hispani ora Leonis.
THE Art of Painting
*PAinting and Poesy are two Sisters, which are so like in all things, The
Passages which you see marked with an Asterism * are more amply explained in
the Remarks.
that they mutually lend to each other both their Name and Office. One is
called a dumb Poesy, and the other a speaking Picture. The Poets have never
said any thing but what take their passage through the world; and are neither
sparing of their pains nor of their study to

heap of Rules: nor extinguish the fire of a vein which is lively and abundant.
But rather to make this my business, that Art being strengthened by the
knowledge of things, may at length pass into Nature by slow degrees; and so in
process

* The principal and most important part of Painting, Precept I. Of what is
Beautiful.
is to find out and thoroughly to understand what Nature has made most
beautiful, and most proper to this Art; * and that a choice of it may be made
according to the gust and manner of the Ancients, * without which all is That
no man is so bold, so rash, and so overweening of his own works, as an ill
Painter, and a bad Poet, who are not conscious to themselves of their own
Ignorance.



Of Theory, and Practice.
destitute of the Lights of Art, is always subject to fall into a precipice
like a blind Traveller, without Apelles performed his Noble Works. Therefore
For there is a mean in all things; and a certain measure, wherein the good and
the beautiful consist; and out of which they never can depart.

This being premised, the next thing is to make Concerning the Subject.
which being of it self capable of all the charms its power, and to produce
somewhat to the sight which is excellent, judicious, * and well seasoned; and
at the same time proper to instruct, and to enlighten the Understanding.

Thus at length I enter into the Subject Matter of my Discourse; and at first
find only a bare strained Canvass: * on which the whole Machine (as it may be
called) of the Picture is to be disposed; and the imagination of a powerful,
and Invention.

* INVENTION is a kind of Muse, Invention the first part of Painting.
which being possessed of the other advantages common to her Sisters; and being
warmed by the fire of Apollo, is raised higher than the rest, and shines with a
more glorious, and brighter flame.

The Disposition or Economy of the whole Work.
in his choice of Postures, to foresee the effect, and harmony of the Lights
and Shadows, with the Colors which are to enter into the whole; taking from
each of

The faithfulness of the Subject.
to Customs, and to Times.

* Take care that whatsoever makes nothing Whatsoever palls the Subject to be
rejected.
and is improper to it, be not admitted into your Work, or not possess the
chief place in it. But on this occasion, imitate

* This part of Painting, so rarely met with, and so difficult to be found, is
neither to be acquired by pains or study, nor by the Precepts or Counsels of
any Master. For they alone who have been inspired at their birth with some
portion of that Heavenly fire * which was stolen Prometheus, are capable of
receiving so divine a present. As the Proverb tells us, * that it happens not
to every one to see Corinth.

Painting first appeared in Egypt: but wholly different from the truth, till
having traveled into Greece, and being cultivated by the Study, and sublime
Genius of that Nation, *it arrived at

Amongst the Academies, which were composed by the rare Genius of those Great
men, these four are reckoned as the principal: namely, the Athenian School,
that of Sicyon, that of Rhodes, and that of Corinth. These were little
different from each other, only in the manner of their Ancient Statues, which
are the Rule of Beauty, and to which succeeding Ages have nothing that is
equal: * Though they are not very much inferior either in Science, or in the
manner of their Execution.

Design, the second part of Painting.
* The Parts of it must be great * and large, * unequal in their position, so
that those which are before must contrast (or

* The Parts must have their out-lines in waves resembling flames, or the
gliding of a Snake upon the ground: They must be smooth, they must be great,
they must be almost imperceptible to the touch, and even, without either
Eminences Anatomy. Let them be * designed after the manner of the Grecians: and
let them appear but little, according to what we see in the Ancient Figures. In
fine, * let there be a perfect relation betwixt the parts and the whole, that
they may be entirely of a piece.

Let the part which produces another part, be

Neither the Shape of Faces, nor the Age, Variety in the Figures.
any more than the Hair: because Men are as different

* Let every Member be made for its own The Member^^s and Drapery of every
Figure to be suitable to it.
and agree with it. And let all together compose but one Body, with the
Draperies which are proper and suitable to it. And above all, let the Figures
to which Art cannot give a voice, The Actions of Mutes to be imitated.


* Let the principal Figure of the Subject appear Of the principal Figure of
the Subject.
that it may have somewhat to make it more remarkable than the rest, and that
the Figures which accompany it, may not steal it from our Sight.

Grouppes of Figures.
that is to say, coupled and knit together, And let the Grouppes be separated
by a void space, to avoid a confused heap; which proceeding from parts that are
dispersed

The diversity of postures in the Grouppes.
ought not to be like each other in their Motions, any more than in their
Parts: nor to be all on the same side,

Amongst many Figures which show their foreparts let there be some one whose
hinder parts may be seen; opposing the Shoulders to the Stomach, and the right
side to the left.

Equality of the piece.


* As a Play is very seldom good, Of the number of Figures.
in which there are too many Actors, so it is very seldom seen and almost
impossible to perform, that a Picture should be perfect in which there are too
great a number of Figures. And we cannot wonder that so few Painters have
succeeded who have introduced into

* The extremities of the Ioints must be seldom Of the Joints and Feet.
and the extremities or end of the Feet never. The motions of the hands and
head must agree.


* The Figures which are behind others, have neither Grace nor Vigor, unless
the Motions of

Avoid the views which are difficult to be found, What must be avoided in the
distribution of the Figures.
and are not natural, as also forced Actions and Motions. Show no parts which
are ungracious to the Sight, as all fore shortnings, usually are.

* Avoid also those Lines and Out-lines which are equal; which make Parallels,
or other sharp

Nature, That we must not tie our selves to Nature, but accommodate her to our
Genius.
that you allow nothing to study, and the bent of your own Genius. But on the
other side, believe not that your Genius alone, and the Remembrance of those
things which you have seen, can afford you wherewithal to furnish out a
beautiful Piece, without the Succor of that incomparable Schoolmistress,
Nature; * whom you must have always as also there are many several sorts of
crooked lines; but there is one only which is straight.

Our business is to imitate the Beauties of Nature, Ancient Figures the rules
of imitating Nature.
as the Ancients have done before us, and as Ancient Medals, Statues, Vases and
Basso Relievo's: * And of all other things which discover to us the Thoughts
and Inventions of the Graecians; because they furnish us with great Ideas, and
make our Productions wholly beautiful.

* If you have but one single Figure to work A single Figure how to be treated.
you ought to make it perfectly finished and diversified and with many Colors.

* Let the Draperies be nobly spread upon the Of the Draperies.
* and let them follow the order of the parts, that they may be seen parts
which are under them, so as in some manner to distinguish them, by the
judicious ordering of the Lights and Shadows. * And if the parts be too much
distant from each other, so that there be void spaces, which are deeply
shadowed, we are then to take occasion to place in those voids some Fold to
make a joining of the parts. * And as the Beauty of the Limbs consists not in
the quantity and rising of the Muscles, but on the contrary, those which are
less eminent have more

* The Marks or Ensigns of Virtues contribute What things contribute to adorn
the Picture.
for example as are the Decorations belonging to the Liberal Arts, to War or
Sacrifices. * But let not the work be too much Of precious Stones and Pearls
for ornament.
because the rarest are ever the dearest and most precious; and those which
serve only to increase the number, are of the common sort, and of little value.

* It Is very expedient to make a Model of The Model.
which we have not in our Sight, and whose Nature is difficult to be retained
in the Memory.

* We are to consider the places, where we The Scene of the Picture.
their Laws and Customs, and all that is properly belonging to them.

* Let a nobleness and grace be remarkable The Graces and the Nobleness.
this is a most difficult undertaking; and a very rare Present which the Artist
receives rather from the hand of Heaven, than from his own Industry and Studies.

In all things you are to follow the order of Let every thing be set in its
proper place.
for which reason you must beware of drawing or painting Clouds, Winds and
Thunder

Of the Passions.
and the affections or Passions whose Center is the Heart: In a word, to make
the Soul visible, by the means of some few Colors; * this is that in which the
greatest difficulty consists. Few there are whom Jupiter regards with a
favorable eye in this Undertaking. So that it appertains only to those few,
who participate Rhetoricians, to treat the characters of the Passions: and I
shall content my self with repeating what an excellent Master has formerly said
on this Subject, That the studied motions of the Soul, are never so natural as
those, which are as it were struck out of it on the sudden by the heat and
violence of a real Passion.

Gothique Gothique Ornaments are to be avoided.
as being in effect so many Monsters, which barbarous Ages have produced:
during which, when Discord and Ambition caused by the too large extent of the
Roman Empire, had produced Wars, Plagues and Famine through the World, then I
say, the stately Buildings fell to Ruin, and the nobleness of all beautiful
Arts was totally extinguished; then it was that the admirable Painting were
made fuel for the Fire: But that this wonderful Art might not wholly perish, *
some Relics of it took Sanctuary under ground, and thereby escaped the common
Destiny. And in the same profane age, the noble Sculpture was for a long time
buried under the same Ruins, with all its beautiful Productions and admirable
Statues. The Empire in the mean time under the weight of its proper Crimes and
undeserving to enjoy the day, was invelop'd with a hideous night, Graecians are
wanting to us; nothing of their Painting and Coloring now remains to assist
our modern Artists, either in the Invention, CHROMATIQUE part or COLORING,
Coloring the third part of Painting.
or to renew it to that point of excellency to which it had been carried by
Zeuxis: who by this part which is so charming, so magical, and which so
admirably deceives the sight, made himself equal Apelles, that Prince of
Painters; and deserved that height of reputation which he still possesses in
the World.

And as this part which we may call the Soul of Painting and its utmost
perfection, is a deceiving Beauty, but withal soothing and pleasing: So she has
been accused of procuring Lovers for * her Sister, and artfully engaging us to
admire her. But so little have this Prostitution, these false Colors, and this
Deceit, dishonored Painting,

*The light produces all kinds of Colors, and the Shadow gives us none. The
more a Body is nearer to the Eyes, and the more directly it is opposed to them,
the more it is enlightn'd. Because the Light languishes and lessens the farther
it removes from its proper Source.



It Is therefore necessary that round Bodies, (...)
which

The raising and roundness of a Body, ought to be given it * in the same manner
as we behold it in a Unequal Mirror, in which we view the Figures and all other
things, which bear out with

Thus the Painter and the Sculptor, are to work with one and the same
intention, and with one and the same conduct. For what the Sculptor strikes
off, and makes round with his instrument of Steel, the Painter performs with
his Pencil; casting behind, that which he makes less visible

Of dark Bodies on light grounds.
sensible to the feeling, and dark, are placed on Light, and transparent
grounds, as for example, The Heavens, the Clouds and Waters, and every other
thing which

We are never to admit two equal Lights in the (...)
but the greater Light must strike forcibly on the middle; and there extend its
greatest clearness on those places of the Picture, where the principal Figures
of it are, and where the strength

The experience of this is evident in those Statues which we see set up in the
midst of Public Places, whose upper parts are more enlightened than the
lower; and therefore you are to imitate them in the distribution of your Lights.

Avoid strong Shadows on the middle of the Limbs; least the great quantity of
black which composes those Shadows, should seem to enter Titian said, with
reason that he knew no better rule for the distribution of the Lights and
shadows, than his Observations drawn from a * Bunch of Grapes.

Of White and Black.
or carries it off to farther distance: It draws it nearer with black, and
throws it backward without it. *But as for pure black, there is nothing which
brings the object nearer to the Sight.

The light being altered by some Color, never fails to communicate somewhat of
that Color to the Bodies on which it strikes, and the same effect is performed
by the Medium of Air, through which it passes.

The Bodies which are close together, The reflection of Colors.
receive

It Is also consonant to reason, (...)
(...)

The less aereal space which there is betwixt us Of the Interposition of Air.
and the more pure the Air is, by so and on the contrary the more space of Air
there is, and the less it is pure, so much the more the Object is confused and
embroiled.

The relation of Distances.
ought always to be more finished, than those which are cast behind; and ought
to have dominion over those things which are confused and transient. *But let
this be done relatively, viz.) one thing greater and stronger, casting the less
behind and rendering it less sensible by its opposition.

Of Bodies which are distanced.
though they are many, yet ought to make but one Mass; as for example the
Leaves on the Trees, and the Billows in the Sea.

Of Bodies which are contiguous, and of those which are separated.
and let those which ought to be separated be apparently so to us; but let this
be done by a small and pleasing difference.

Contrary extremities to be avoided.
either in Color or in Light, but let there always be a Medium partaking both
of the one and of the other.

Diversity of Tones and Colors.
and that those which are foremost may be strong and lively.

* It Is labor in vain to paint a High-noon, or The choice of Light.
because we have Of certain things relating to the practical part.
and make the light appear of a fiery color.

Smooth bodies, such as Chrystals, polished

*Let the Field, or Ground of the Picture, The field or ground of the Picture.
be be something in it of every color that composes your work, as it were the
contents of your Palette. And let the bodies mutually partake of the color of
their ground.

Of the vi^^city of Colors.
let them not be pale.

*Let the parts which are nearest to us, and most raised, be strongly colored,
and as it were sparkling; and let those parts which are more remote from sight,
and toward the borders, be more faintly touched.

Of Shadows.
or consent,

The Picture to be of one piece.
and avoid as much as possibly you can, to paint drily.

The Looking-glass the Painter's best Master.
which you may observe from Nature: so will also those objects which are seen
in an Evening in a large prospect.

An half figure, or a whole one, before others.
which is to be set before the other figures, it must be placed nearer to the
view, and next the and at a distance from the Eyes; be sure on that occasion
not to be sparing of great lights, the most lively colors, nor the strongest
shadows.

*As for a Portraict, or Pictures by the Life, A Portraict.
you are to work precisely after Natu^^e, and to express what she shows you,
working at the same time on those parts which are resembling to each other: As
for example, the Eyes, the

The works which are painted to be seen in The place of the Picture.
must be very tender and well united with tones, and colors; the degrees of
which ought to be more different, more unequal, and more strong and vigorous,
as the work

Large Lights.
and endeavor to lose insensibly the * large lights in the shadows which
succeed them, and incompass them about.

What Lights are requisite.
but with a little light, the colors must

Things which are vicious in painting to be avoided.
broken in pieces, little, and which are separated, or in parcels: shun also
those things which are barbarous, shocking to the Eye and party-colored, and
all which is of an equal force of light and shadow: as also all things which
are For the Eyes have a horror for those things which the Hands will not
condescend to touch.

The prudential part of a Painter.
be cautious lest you fall into another: for Virtue is placed betwixt two
extremes, which are on both sides equally blameable.

Those things which are beautiful in the utmost The Idea of a beautiful piece.
according to the Axiom of ancient Painters, * ought to have somewhat of
greatness in them; and their out-lines to be noble: they must be disintangled,
pure and without alteration, clean and knit together; composed of great parts,
yet those but few in number. In fine, distinguished by bold Colors; but He who
has Advice to a young Painter.
has already performed half his work; so * there is nothing more pernicious to
a Youth, who is yet in the Elements of Painting, than to engage himself under
the discipline of an ignorant Master; who depraves his taste, by an infinite
number of mistakes; of which his wretched works are full, and thereby makes him
drink the

Let him who is yet but a Beginner, not make so much haste to study after
Nature, every thing which he intends to imitate; as not in the mean time to
learn Proportions, the connection of the parts, and their out-lines: And let him
first have Master, than by practice; and by seeing him perform, without being
contented only to hear him speak.

Art must be subservient to the Painter.
and convenient, and avoid those things which are repugnant to it.

Diversity and facility are pleasing.
are agreeable and pleasant

Never give the least touch with your Pencil The Original must be in the Head,
and the Copy on the Cloth.
* nor till you have present in your mind a perfect Idea of your work.

The Compass to be in the Eyes.
* Let the Eye be satisfied in the first place, even against and above all
other reasons, which beget difficulties in your Art, which of it self suffers
none; and let the compass be rather in your Eyes than in your Hands.

* Profit your self by the Counsels of the knowing: Pride an Enemy to good
Painting.
And do not arrogantly disdain to learn the

Since every Painter paints himself in his own works (so much is Nature
accustomed to produce her own likeness) it is advantageous to him to Know your
self.
know himself, * to the end that he may cultivate those Talents which make his
Genius, and not unprofitably lose his time in endeavoring to gain that which
she has refused him. As neither

Perpetually practice, and do easily what you have conceived.
and observe them diligently, by making necessary reflections on them; let the
labor of the Hand accompany the study of the Brain; let the former second and
support the latter; yet without

The Morning most proper for work.
and most proper part of the day for your business; employ it therefore in the
study and exercise of those things Every day do something.


The Passions which are true and natural.


Observe as you walk the Streets, the Airs of Heads; the natural Posturs and
Expressions;

* Be ready to put into your Table Book Of Table-books.


* Wine and good Cheer are no great Friends

* Let not the covetous design of growing rich, your Thoughts be wholly taken
up with acquiring to your self a glorious Name, which can never perish, but
with the World, and make that the recompense of your worthy Labors.

* The qualities requisite to form an excellent Painter, are, a true discerning
Judgment; a Mind which is docible, a noble Heart, a sublime Sense

And remember, that whatsoever your Subject be, whether of your own Choice, or
what chance or good fortune shall put into your hand, if you have not that
Genius or natural Inclination, which your Art requires, you shall never arrive
to perfection in it, even with all those great advantages which I have
mentioned; for the Wit, and the manual operation are things vastly distant from
each other. It Is the Influence of your Stars, and the happiness of your Genius,
to which you must be obliged for the greatest Beauties of your Art.

short, that it is not sufficient for so long an Art. Our strength fails us in
our old Age, when we begin to know somewhat: Age oppresses us by the same
degrees that it instructs us, and permits not that our mortal Members which are
frozen with our years, should retain the Vigor and Spirits of our Youth.

* Take courage therefore, O ye Noble Youths! Minerva, who are born under the
influence of a happy Planet, and warmed with a Celestial Fire, which attracts
you to the Love of Science; exercise while you are young, your whole forces,
and employ them with delight in an Art which requires a whole Painter. Exercise
them I say, while your boiling Youth supplies you with Strength, and furnishes
The method of Studies for a young Painter.
* you will do well Geometry, and after having made some progress it it, * set
your self on designing Ancient Greeks, * and cease not day or night from
labor, till by your continual practice you have gained an easy habitude of
imitating them in their invention, and in their manner. * And when afterward
your judgment shall grow stronger, and come to its maturity with years, it will
be very necessary to see and examine one after the other, and part by part,
those works Romans, the Venetians, the Parmesans, and the Bologneses. Amongst
those excellent Persons, Raphael had the Talent of Invention Michael Angelo
possessed powerfully the part of Design, above all others. * Iulio Romano
(educated from his childhood among the Muses) has opened to us the Treasures of
Parnassus and in the Poetry of Painting has discovered to our Eyes the Apollo,
and all the rarest Ornaments which that God is capable of commucating to those
works that he inspires, which we knew not before, but only by the Recital that
the Poets made of them; he seems to have painted those famous Wars which Heroes
have waged, and ended with Victory over crowned Heads, whom they have led in
triumph; and those other glorious Events which Fortune has caused in all ages,
even with more Magnificence and Nobleness, than when they were acted in the
World. Correggio has made his Memory immortal by the Strength and Vigor Titian
understood so well the Union of the Masses, and the Bodies of Colors, the
Harmony of the Tones, and the Disposition of the whole together, that he has
deserved those Honors, and that wealth which were heaped upon him, together
with that attribute of being surnamed the Divine Painter. The laborious and
diligent Annibal Carracci, has and, as it were, converted their Nourishment
into his own Substance.

Nature and Experience perfect Art.
and those beautiful designs; But Nature which is present before your Eyes, is
yet a better Mistress: For she augments the Force and Vigor of the Genius, and
she it is from whom Art derives her ultimate Experience; * I pass in silence
many things which will be more amply treated in the ensuing Commentary.

And now considering that all things are subject to the vicissitude of Time,
and that they are liable to Destruction by several ways, I thought I might
reasonably take the boldness * to entrust to the Muses (those lovely and
immortal Sisters of painting) these few Precepts which I have here made and
collected of that Art.

Rome, while the honor of the Bourbon Family, and the just Avenger of his
injured Ancestors, the Victorious Lovis* was darting his Thunder on the Alps,
and causing his Enemies to feel the force of his unconquerable Arms, while he
like another Gallique Hercules, born for the benefit and Honor of his Country,
was griping the Spanish by the Throat, and at the point of strangling him.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE Art of Painting OF Charles Alphonse du Fresnoy.
PAinting and Poesy are two Sisters, 1. The Number at the head of every
Observation serves to find in the Text the particular Passage on which the
Observation was made.
etc. It Is a received truth, that the Arts have a certain relation to each
other. " There is no Art (said Tertullian in his Treatise of Idolatry) which is
not either the Father or the near Relation of another. And Cicero in his
Oration for Archias the Poet, says, That the Arts which have respect to human
life, have a kind of Alliance amongst themselves, and hold each other (as we
may say) by the hand." But those Arts which are the nearest related, and claim
the most ancient Kindred with each other, are Painting and Poetry; and
whosoever shall thoroughly examine them, will find them so much resembling one
another, that he cannot take them for less than Sisters.

They both follow the same bent, and suffer themselves rather to be carried
away, than led by their secret Inclinations, which are so many seeds of the
Divinity. "There is a God within us (says Ovid in the beginning of his Sixth
Book de Fastis, there speaking of the Poets) who by his Agitation warms us. And
Suidas says, That the famous Sculptor Phidias, and Zeuxis that incomparable
Painter, were both of them transported by the same Enthusiasm, which gave life
to all their works." They both of them aim at the same end, which is Imitation.
Both of them excite our Passions; and we suffer our selves willingly to be
deceived, both by the one, and by the other; our Eyes and Souls are so fixed to
them, that we are ready to persuade our selves that the painted Bodies breath,
and that the Fictions are Truths. Both of them are set on fire by the great
Actions of Heroes; and both endeavor to eternize them: Both of them in short,
are supported by the strength of their Imagination, and avail themselves of
those licenses, which Apollo has equally bestowed on them, and with which their
Genius has inspired them. -- Pictoribus atque Poetis
Quidlibet audendi, semper fuit aequa potestas.
Painters and Poets free from servile awe,
May treat their Subjects, and their Objects draw.
As Horace tells us in his Art of Poetry.

The advantage which Painting possesses above Poesy is this; That amongst so
great a Diversity of Languages, she makes her self understood by all the
Nations of the World; and that she is necessary to all other Arts, because of
the need which they have of demonstrative Figures, which often give more Light
to the Understanding than the clearest discourses we can make. Segnius irritant
animos demissa per aurem,
Quam quae sunt oculis commissa fidelibus.
Hearing excites the Mind by slow degrees,
The Man is warmed at once by what he sees.
Horace in the same Art of Poetry.

For both of them that they might contribute, etc. 9.
Poetry by its Hymns and Anthems, and Painting by its Statues, Altar-pieces,
and by all those Decorations which inspire Respect and Reverence for our Sacred
Mysteries, have been serviceable to Religion. Gregory of Nice, after having
made a long and beautiful Description of Abraham sacrificing his Son Isaac,
says these words, " I have often cast my eyes upon a Picture, which represents
this moving object, and could never withdraw them without Tears. So well did
the Picture represent the thing it self, even as if the Action were then 24.
passing before my Sight." So much these Divine Arts have been always honored,
etc. The greatest Lords, whole Cities and their Magistrates of Old (says Pliny
lib. 35.) took it for an honor to obtain a Picture from the hands of those
great Ancient Painters. But this Honor is much fallen of late amongst the
French Nobility: and if you will understand the cause of it, Vitruvius will
tell you that it comes from their Ignorance of the charming Arts. Propter
ignorantiam Artis, virtutes obscurantur: (in the Preface to his Fifth Book.)
Nay more, we should see this admirable Art fall into the last degree of
Contempt, if our Mighty Monarch, who yields in nothing to the Magnanimity of
Alexander the Great, had not shown as much Love for Painting as Valor in the
Wars: we daily see him encouraging this noble Art, by the considerable Presents
which he makes to his Mr. Le Brun.
chief Painter. And he has also founded an Academy for the Progress and
Perfectionating of Painting, which his Mr. Colbert.
first Minister honors with his Protection, his care, and frequent Visits:
insomuch that we might shortly see the age of Apelles reviving in our Country,
together with all the beauteous Arts, if our generous Nobility, who follow our
incomparable King with so much Ardour and Courage in those dangers to which he
exposes his Sacred Person for the Greatness and Glory of his Kingdom, would
imitate him in that wonderful Affection which he bears to all who are
excellent in this kind. Those Persons who were the most considerable in Ancient
Greece, either for Birth or Merit, took a most particular care, for many ages,
to be instructed in the Art of Painting: following that laudable and profitable
custom which was begun and established by the Great Alexander, which was to
learn how to Design. And Pliny who gives testimony to this in the tenth Chapter
of his 35th. Book tells us farther (speaking of Pamphilus the Master of
Apelles) That it was by the authority of Alexander, that first at Sicyon, and
afterward through all Greece, the young Gentlemen learned before all other
things to design upon Tablets of Boxen-wood; and that the first place among all
the Liberal Arts was given to Painting. And that which makes it evident, that
they were very knowing in this Art, is the love and esteem which they had for
Painters. Demetrius gave high testimonies of this when he besieged the City of
Rhodes: For he was pleased to employ some part of that time, which he owed to
the care of his Arms, in visiting Protogenes, who was then drawing the Picture
of Ialisus. This Ialisus,, (says Pliny) hindered King Demetrius from taking
Rhodes, out of fear, lest he should burn the Pictures; and not being able to
fire the Town on any other side, he was pleased rather to spare the Painting,
than to take the Victory which was already in his hands. Protogenes at that
time had his Workhouse in a Garden out of the Town, and very near the Camp of
the Enemies, where he was daily finishing those Pieces which he had already
begun; the noise of Soldiers not being capable of interrupting his studies. But
Demetrius causing him to be brought into his Presence, and asking him what made
him so bold as to work in the midst of Enemies: He answered the King, That he
understood the War which he made, was against the Rhodians and not against the
Arts. This obliged Demetrius to appoint him Guards for his Security, being
infinitely pleased that he could preserve that hand, which by this means he
saved from the barbarity and insolence of Soldiers. Alexander had no greater
pleasure, than when he was in the painting room of Apelles, where he commonly
was found. And that Painter once received from him a sensible Testimony of Love
and Esteem which that Monarch had for him: for having caused him to paint naked
(by reason of her admirable beauty) one of his Concubines called Campaspe, who
had the greatest share in his affections, and perceiving that Apelles was
wounded with the same fatal dart of Beauty, he made a present of her to him. In
that age so great a deference was paid to Painting, that they who had any
Mastery in that Art, never painted on any thing but what was portable from one
place to another, and what could be secured from burning. They took a
particular care, says Pliny, in the place above cited, not to paint any thing
against a Wall, which could only belong to one Master, and must always remain
in the same place; and for that reason could not be removed in case of an
accidental Fire. Men were not suffered to keep a Picture, as it were in Prison,
on the Walls: It dwelt in common in all Cities, and the Painter himself was
respected, as a Common Good to all the World. See this Excellent Author, and
you shall find that the 10th. Chapter of his 35th. Book is filled with the
praises of this Art, and with the Honors which were ascribed to it. You will
there find that it was not permitted to any but those of noble Blood to profess
it. Francis the First, as Vasari tells us, was in love with Painting to that
degree, that he allured out of Italy all the best Masters, that this Art might
flourish in his own Kingdom. Amongst others Leonardo da Vinci, who after having
continued for some time in France, died at Fontainbleau, in the Arms of that
great King, who could not behold his death, without shedding Tears over him.
Charles the Fifth has adorned Spain with the noblest Pictures which are now
remaining in the World. Ridolphi in his life of Titian, says, that Emperor one
day took up a Pencil, which fell from the hand of that Artist, who was then
drawing his Picture, and upon the Compliment which Titian made him on that
occasion, he said these words, Titian has deserved to be served by Caesar. And
in the same life it is remarkable, That the Emperor valued himself not so much
in subjecting Kingdoms and Provinces, as that he had been thrice made immortal
by the hand of Titian. If you will but take the pains to read this famous life
in Ridolphi, you will there see the relation of all those honors which he
received from Charles the Fifth. It would take up too much time here to recount
all the particulars: I will only observe that the greatest Lords who composed
the Court of that Emperor, not being able to refrain from some marks of
Jealousy, upon the preference which he made of the Person, and Conversation of
Titian, to that of all his other Courtiers; he freely told them, That he could
never want a Court or Courtiers, but he could not have Titian always with him.
Accordingly he heaped Riches on him, and whenever he sent him Money, which,
ordinarily speaking, was a great Sum, he always did it with this obliging
Testimony, That his design was not to pay him the value of his Pictures,
because they were above any price. After the example of the Worthies of
Antiquity, who bought the rarest Pictures with Bushels of Gold, without
counting the weight or the number of the pieces, In nummo aureo, mensura
accepit, non numero, says Pliny, speaking of Apelles. Quinctilian inferrs from
hence, that there is nothing more noble than the Art of Painting; because other
things for the most part are Merchandice, and bought at certain Rates; most
things for this very reason, (says he) are vile because they have a price,
Pleraque hoc ipso possunt videri vilia, quod pretium habent: see the 34th.
35th. and 36th. Books of Pliny. Many great persons have loved it with an
extreme Passion, and have exercised themselves in it with delight. Amongst
others, Lelius Fabius, one of those famous Romans, who, as Cicero relates,
after he had tasted painting and had practiced it, would be called Fabius
Pictor: as also Turpilius a Roman Knight; Labco Praetor and Consul, Quintus
Pedius, the Poets Ennius and Pacuvius; Socrates, Plato, Metrodorus, Pirrho,
Commodus, Nero, Vespasian, Alexander Severus, Antoninus, and many other Kings
and Emperors, who thought it not below their Majesty to employ some part of
their time in this honorable Art.

37.
The principal and most important part of Painting, is to find out and
thoroughly to understand what Nature has made most beautiful and most proper
to this Art, etc. Observe here the rock on which the greatest part of the
Flemish Painters have split: most of that Nation know how to imitate Nature, at
least as well as the Painters of other Countries, but they make a bad choice in
Nature it self; whether it be, that they have not seen the Ancient pieces to
find those beauties; or that a happy Genius, and the beautiful Nature is not
of the growth of their Country. And to confess the truth, that which is
naturally beautiful is so very rare, that it is discovered by few persons;
it is difficult to make a choice of it, and to form to our selves such an Idea
of it, as may serve us for a Model.

39.
And that a choice of it may be made according to the gust and manner of the
Ancients, etc. That is to say, according to the Statues, the Basso Relievo's,
and the other Ancient Pieces, as well of the Graecians as of the Romans;
Ancient (or Antique) is that which has been made from the time of Alexander the
Great, till that of Phocas; during whose Empire the Arts were ruined by War.
These Ancient works from their beginning have been the rule of Beauty; and in
effect, the Authors of them have been so careful to give them that perfection,
which is still to be observed in them, that they made use not only of one
single Body, whereby they formed them, but of many, from which they took the
most regular parts to compose from them a beautiful whole. " The Sculptors,
says Maximus Tyrius in his 7th. Dissertation, with admirable Artifice chose out
of many Bodies those parts which appeared to them the most beautiful, and out
of that diversity made but one Statue: But this mixture is made with so much
prudence and propriety, that they seem to have taken but one only perfect
Beauty. And let us not imagine that we can ever find one natural Beauty which
can dispute with Statues, that Art which has always somewhat more perfect than
Nature." It Is also to be presumed, that in the choice which they made of those
parts, they followed the opinion of the Physicians, who at that time were very
capable of instructing them in the rules of Beauty: Since Beauty and Health
ordinarily follow each other. " For Beauty, says Galen, is nothing else but a
just Accord and mutual Harmony of the Members, animated by a healthful
constitution. And men, said the same Author, commend a certain Statue of
Polycletus, which they call the rule, and which deserves that name for having
so perfect an agreement in all its parts, and a proportion so exact, that it is
not possible to find a fault in it." From what I have quoted, we may conclude,
that the Ancient Pieces are truly beautiful, because they resemble the
Beauties of Nature; and that Nature will ever be beautiful which resembles
those Beauties of Antiquity. It Is now evident upon what account none have
presumed to contest the proportion of those Ancient Pieces, and that on the
contrary, they have always been quoted as Models of the most perfect Beauty.
Ovid in the 12th. Book of his Metamorphosis, where he describes Cyllarus, the
most beautiful of all the Centaures, says, That he had so great a Vivacity in
his Countenance, his Neck, his Shoulders, his Hands and Stomach were so fair,
that it is certain the manly part of him was as beautiful as the most
celebrated Statues. And Philostratus in his Heroiqnes, speaking of Protesilaus
and praising the beauty of his face, says, "That the form of his Nose was
square, as if it had been of a Statue;" and in another place speaking of
Euphorbus, he says, " That his beauty had gained the affections of all the
Greeks, and that it resembled so nearly the beauty of a Statue, that one might
have taken him for Apollo." Afterward also speaking of the Beauty of
Neoptolemus, and of his likeness to his Father Achilles, he says, "That in
beauty, his Father had the same advantage over him, as Statues have over the
beauty of living Men."

This ought to be understood of the fairest Statues, for amongst the multitude
of Sculptors which were in Greece and Italy, it is impossible but some of them
must have been bad workmen, or rather less good: for though their works were
much inferior to the Artists of the first form, yet somewhat of greatness is
to be seen in them, and somewhat of harmonious in the distribution of their
parts, which makes it evident; that at this time they wrought on Common
Principles, and that every one of them availed himself of those Principles
according to his Capacity and Genius. Those Statues were the greatest Ornaments
of Greece; we need only open the Book of Pausanias to find the prodigious
quantity of them, whether within or without their Temples, or in the crossing
of Streets, or in the Squares and public Places, or even the Fields, or on
the Tombs, Statues were erected to the Muses, to the Nymphs, to Heroes, to
great Captains, to Magistrates, Philosophers and Poets: In short, they were set
up to all those who had made themselves eminent either in defense of their
Country, or for any noble action which deserved a recompense; for it was the
most ordinary and most authentic way, both amongst the Greeks and Romans,
thus to testify their gratitude. The Romans when they had conquered Graecia,
transported from thence, not only their most admirable Statues, but also
brought along with them the most excellent of their Sculptors, who instructed
others in their Art, and have left to posterity the immortal Examples of their
knowledge, which we see confirmed by those curious Statues, those Vases, those
Basso-Relievo's, and those beautiful Columns called by the names of Trajan and
Antonine: They are those Beauties which out Author proposes to us for our
Models. And as the true Fountains of Science, out of which both Painters and
Statuaries are bound to draw for their own use, without amusing themselves with
dipping in streams which are often muddy, at least troubled; I mean the manner
of their Masters, after whom they creep, and from whom they are unwilling to
depart, either through negligence, or through the meanness of their Genius. "
It belongs only to heavy minds, says Cicero, to spend their time on streams,
without searching for the Springs from whence their materials flow in all
manner of abundance."

40.
Without which all is nothing, but a blind and rash barbarity, etc. All that
has nothing of the Ancient gust, is called a barbarous or Gothique manner,
which is not conducted by any rule, but only follows a wretched fancy, which
has nothing in it that is noble: we are here to observe, that Painters are not
obliged to follow the Antique as exactly as the Sculptors, for then their
Picture would favor too strongly of the Statue, and would seem to be without
Motion. Many Painters, and some of the ablest amongst them, believing they do
well, and taking that Precept in too literal a Sense, have fallen thereby into
great inconveniences; it therefore becomes the Painters to make use of those
Ancient Patterns with discretion, and to accommodate the Nature to them in such
a manner, that their Figures which must seem to live, may rather appear to be
Models for the Antique, than the Antique a Model for their figures.

It appears that Raphael made a perfect use of this conduct, and that the
Lombard School have not precisely searched into this Precept, any further than
to learn from thence how to make a good choice of the Nature, and to give a
certain grace and nobleness to all their works, by the general and confused
Idea, which they had of what is beautiful; as for the rest, they are
sufficiently licentious, excepting only Titian, who, of all the Lombards has
preserved the greatest purity in his works. This barbarous manner of which I
spoke, has been in great vogue from the year 611 to 1450. They who have
restored Painting in Germany, (not having seen any of those fair Relics of
Antiquity) have retained much of that barbarous manner. Amongst others Lucas
van Leyden, a very laborious man, who with his Scholars has infected almost all
Europe with his designs for Tapestry, which by the ignorant are called Ancient
Hangings, (a greater honor than they deserve:) these I say are esteemed
beautiful by the greatest part of the World. I must acknowledge that I am
amazed at so gross a stupidity, and that we of the French Nation should have so
barbarous a Taste, as to take for beautiful those flat, childish and insipid
Tapestries. Albert Durer, that famous German, who was contemporary to that
Lucas, has had the like misfortune to fall into that absurd manner, because he
had never seen any thing that was beautiful. Observe what Vasari tells us in
the life of Marc Antonio (Raphael's Graver) having first commended Albert for
his skill in graving, and his other Talents: " And in truth, says he, if this,
so excellent, so exact, and so universal a Man, had been born in Tuscany, as he
was in Germany, and had formed his studies according to those beautiful pieces
which are seen at Rome, as the rest of us have done, he had proved the best
Painter of all Italy, as he was the greatest Genius, and the most accomplished
which Germany ever bore."

45.
We love what we understand, etc. This period informs us, that though our
inventions are never so good, though we are furnished by Nature with a noble
Genius, and though we follow the impulse of it, yet this is not enough, if we
learn not to understand what is perfect and beautiful in Nature, to the end
that having found it, we may be able to imitate it, and by this instruction we
may be capacitated to observe those errors which she her self has made, and to
avoid them, so as not to copy her in all sorts of subjects; such as she appears
to us without choice or distinction.

50.
As being the Sovereign Judge of his own Art, etc. This word of Sovereign Judge
or Arbiter of his own Art, presupposes a painter to be fully instructed in all
the parts of Painting; so that being set as it were above his Art, he may be
the Master and Sovereign of it, which is no easy matter. Those of that
profession are so seldom endowed with that supreme Capacity, that few of them
arrive to be good Judges of Painting: and I should many times make more account
of their judgment, who are men of Sense, and yet have never touched a Pencil,
than of the opinion which is given by the greatest part of Painters. All
Painters therefore may be called Arbiters of their own Art, but to be Sovereign
Arbiters belongs only to knowing Painters.

52.
And permit no -- transient Beauties to escape his observation, etc. Those
fugitive or transient Beauties are no other than such as we observe in Nature
with a short and transient view, and which remain not long in their subjects.
Such are the Passions of the Soul. There are of these sort of Beauties which
last but for a moment; as the different Aires of an Assembly, upon the Sight of
an unexpected and uncommon Object, some particularity of a violent Passion,
some graceful Action, a Smile, a Glance of an Eye, a disdainful Look, a Look
of Gravity, and a thousand other such like things; we may also place in the
Catalogue of these flying Beauties, fine Clouds, such as ordinarily follow
Thunder or a Shower of Rain.

54.
In the same manner that bare practice destitute of the Lights of Art, etc. We
find in Quinctilian, that Pythagoras said, " The Theory is nothing without the
practice. And what means (says the younger Pliny) have we to retain what has
been taught us," if we put it not in practice: we would not allow that Man to
be an Orator who had the best thoughts imaginable, and who knew all the rules
of Rhetorique if he had not acquired by exercise the Art of using them, and of
composing an excellent Discourse. Painting is a long Pilgrimage; what avails it
to make all the necessary preparatives for our Voyage, or to inform our selves
of all the difficulties in the rode, if we do not actually begin the journey,
and travel at a round rate, we shall never arrive at the end of it. And as it
would be ridiculous to grow old in the study of every necessary thing, in an
Art which comprehends so many several parts; so on the other hand to being the
practice without knowing the rules, or at least with a light Tincture of them
is to expose our selves to the scorn of those who can judge of Painting, and to
make it apparent ^^o the World that we have no care of our reputation. Many are
of opinion, that we need only work and mind the practical part to become
skillful and able Painters; and that the Theory only incumbers the mind, and
ties the hand: Such Men do just like the Squirrel, who is perpetually turning
the Wheel in her Cage; she runs apace and wearies her self with her continual
Motion, and yet gets no ground. It Is not enough for doing well to walk apace,
says Quinctilian, but it is enough for walking apace to do well. It Is a bad
excuse to say, I was but a little while about it: That graceful Easiness, that
celestial Fire which animates the work, proceeds not so much from having often
done the like, as from having well understood what we have done. See what I
shall farther say, in the 51st. Rule, which concerns easiness. Others there are
who believe the Precepts and Speculation, to be of absolute necessity, but as
they were ill instructed, and what they knew rather entangl'd than cleared
their understanding, so they oftentimes stop short; and if they perform a work,
^^tis not without Anxiety and Pain. And in truth, they are so much the more
worthy of Compassion because their intentions are right, and if they advance
not in knowledge as far as others, and are sometimes cast behind, yet they are
grounded upon some sort of reason; for it is belonging to good ^^ence, not to go
over fast when we apprehend our selves to be out of the way, or even where we
doubt which way we ought to take. Others on the contrary, being well instructed
in good Maxims, and in the rules* of Art, after having done fine things yet
spoil them all by endeavoring to make them better, which is a kind of
over-doing, and are so intoxicated with their work and with an earnest desire
of being above all others, that they suffer themselves to be deceived with the
appearance of an imaginary good. Apelles one day admiring the prodigious Labor
which he saw in a Picture of Protogenes, Pliny 35. 10.
and knowing how much sweat it must have cost him, said, That Protogenes and
himself were of equal strength; nay, that he yielded to him in some parts of
Painting, but in this he surpassed him, that Protogenes never knew when he had
done well, and could never hold his hand; he also added in the nature of a
Precept, that he wished all Painters would imprint this lesson deeply in their
Memory, that with over-straining and earnestness of finishing their Pieces they
often did them more harm than good. 10. 3.
There are some (says Quinctilian) who never satisfy themselves, never are
contented with their first Notions and Expressions, but are continually
changing all, till nothing remains of their first Ideas. Others there are
(continues he,) who dare never trust themselves, nor resolve on any thing, and
who being as it were intangl'd in their own Genius, imagine it to be a laudable
correctness, when they form difficulties to themselves in their own work. And
to speak the truth, it is hard to discern whether of the two is in the greatest
Error; he who is enamored of all he does, or he whom nothing of his own can
please. For it has happened to young Men, and often even to those of the
greatest Wit, to waste their Spirits, and to consume themselves with Anxiety
and Pain of their own giving, so far as even to doze upon their work with too
much eagerness of doing well; I will now tell you how a reasonable man ought to
carry himself on this occasion: It Is certain that we ought to use our best
endeavor to give the last Perfection to our works; yet it is always to be
understood, that we attempt no more than what is in the compass of our Genius,
and according to our Vein: for to make a true Progress, I grant that diligence
and study are both requisite, but this study ought to have no mixture, either
of Self-opinion, Obstinacy, or Anxiety; for which reason, if it blows a happy
Gale we must set up all our Sails, though in so doing it sometimes happens that
we follow those Motions where our natural heat is more powerful than our care
and our correctness, provided we abuse not this license, and suffer not our
selves to be deceived by it, for all our productions cannot fail to please us
at the moment of their Birth, as being new to us.

Because the greatest Beauties cannot always be experss'd for want of terms, 61.
etc. I have learned from the mouth of Monsieur du Fresnoy, that he had
oftentimes heard Guido say, That no man could give a rule of the greatest
Beauties, and that the knowledge of them was so abstruse, that there was no
manner of speaking which could express them. This comes just to what
Quinctilian says, Declam. 19.
That things incredible wanted words to express them: for some of them are too
great and too much elevated to be comprehended by human discourse. From hence
it proceeds that the best Judges when they admire a noble Picture, seem to be
fastened to it; and when they come to themselves you would say they had lost
the use of Speech.

Pausiaca torpes, insane, Tabella, says Lib. 2. Sat. 7.
Horace, and Lib. 10. Ep. 22.
Symmachus says, that the greatness of astonishment hinders men from giving a
just applause. The Italians say Opera da stupire, when a thing is wonderfully
good.

Those Masterpieces of Antiquity, which were the first Examples of this Art,
etc. 63.
He means the most knowing and best Painters of Antiquity, that is to say, from
the last two Ages to our times.

And also moderates that fury of the Fancy, 66.
etc. There is in the Latin Text, which produces only Monsters, that is to
say, things out of all probable resemblance. Such things as are often found in
the works of Pietro Testa: It often happens, says Dionysius Longinus, a grave
Author, That some men imagining themselves to be possessed with a divine Fury;
far from being carried into the rage of Bacchanalians, often fall into toys and
trifles which are only Puerilities.

69.
A subject beautiful and noble, etc. Painting is not only pleasing and
divertising, but is also a kind of Memorial of those things which Antiquity has
had the most beautiful and the noble in their kinds, re-placing the History
before our Eyes; as if the thing at that time were effectually in Action, even
so far that beholding the Pictures wherein those noble deeds are represented,
we find our selves stung with a desire of endeavoring somewhat which is like
that Action there expressed, as if we were reading it in the History. The
Beauty of the subject inspires us with Love and Admiration for the Pictures. As
the fair mixture causes us to enter into the subject which it imitates and
imprints it the more deeply into our Imagination and our Memory: these are two
Chains which are interlink'd, which contain, and are at the same time
contained, and whose matter is equally precious and estimable.

And well seasoned, 72.
etc. Aliquid salis, somewhat that is ingenious, fine and picquant,
extraordinary of a high relish, proper to instruct and to clear the
Understanding. The Painters ought to do like the Orators, De Opt. Genesis Orat.
says Cicero. Let them instruct, let them divertise, and let them move us; this
is what is properly meant by the word Salt.

On which the whole Machine (as it may be called) of the Picture is to be
disposed, etc. 74.
It Is not without reason, nor by chance, that our Author uses the word Machine.
A Machine is a just assembling or Combination of many pieces to produce one and
the same effect. And the Disposition in a Picture is nothing else but an
Assembling of many parts, of which we are to foresee the agreement with each
other: And the justness to produce a beautiful effect, as you shall see in the
fourth Precept, which is concerning the Economy. This is also called the
Composition, by which is meant the distribution and orderly placing of things,
both in general and in particular.

Which is what we properly call Invention, etc. 75.
Our Author establishes three parts of Painting, the INVENTION, the DESIGN or
DRAWING, and the COLORING, which in some places he also calls the CROMATIQUE.
Many Authors who have written of Painting, multiply the parts according to
their pleasure; and without giving you or my self the trouble of discussing
this matter, I will only tell you, that all the parts of Painting which others
have named, are reducible into these three which are mentioned by our Author.

For which reason, I esteem this division to be the justest: and as these three
parts are Essential to Painting, so no man can be truly called a Painter who
does not posses them all together: In the same manner that we cannot give the
name of Man to any Creature which is not composed of Body, Soul, and Reason,
which are the three parts necessarily constituent of a Man. How therefore can
they pretend to the Quality of Painters, who can only copy and purloyn the
works of others who therein employ their whole industry, and with that only
Talent would pass for able Painters. And do not tell me that many great Artists
have done this; for I can easily answer you that it had been their better
course, to have abstained from so doing; that they have not thereby done
themselves much honor, and that copying was not the best part of their
reputation. Let us then conclude that all Painters ought to acquire this part
of Excellence; not to do it, is to want courage and not dare to show
themselves. It Is to creep and grovel on the ground, it is to deserve this just
reproach, O imitatores servum pecus: It Is with Painters, in reference to their
productions, as it is with Orators. A good beginning is always costly to both:
much sweat and labor is required, but it is better to expose our works and
leave them liable to censure for fifteen years, th^^n to blush for them at the
end of fifty. On this account it is necessary for a Painter to begin early to do
somewhat of his own, and to accustom himself to it by continual exercise; for
so long as endeavoring to raise himself, he fears falling, he shall be always
on the ground. See the following observation.

Invention is a kind of Muse, 76.
which being possessed of the other advantages common to her Sisters, etc. The
Attributes of the Muses are often taken for the Muses themselves; and it is in
this sense, that Invention is here called a Muse. Authors ascribe to each of
them in particular the Sciences which they have (say they) invented; and in
gen^^ra^^ the belle lettere, because they contain almost all th^^ others. These
Sciences are those advantages (...) which our Author speaks, and with which h^^
would have a Painter furnish himself sufficiently and in truth, there is no
man, though his under standing be very mean who knows not and who finds not of
himself how much Learning is necessary to animate his Genius, and to complete
it. And the reason of this is, that they who have studied, have not only seen
and learned many excellent things in their course of studies, but that also
they have acquired by that exercise a great Facility of profiting themselves by
reading good Authors. They who will make profession of Painting, must heap up
treasures out of their reading and there will find many wonderful means of
raising themselves above others, who can only creep upon the ground, or if
they elevate themselves, it is only to fall from a higher place, because they
serve themselves of other Men's Wings, neither understanding their Use nor
Virtue: It Is true that it is not the present Mode for a Painter to be so
knowing: and if any of them in these times be found to have either a great Wit
or much Learning, the multitude would not fail to say, that it was great pity,
and that the Youth might have come to somewhat in the practical part, or it may
be in the Exchequer, or in the Families of some Noblemen. So wretch'd is the
Destiny of Painting in these later ages. By Learning it is not so much the
knowledge of the Greek and Latin Tongue, which is here to be understood as the
^^eading of good Authors, and understanding those things of which they treat:
for Translations being made of the best Authors, there is not any Painter who
is not capable in some sort of understanding those Books of Humanity, which are
comprehended under the name of the belle lettere. In my opinion the Books which
are of the most advantage to those of the Profession, are these which follow.

The Bible.

The History of Josephus.

The Roman History of Coeffeteau, (for those who understand the French,) and
that of Titus Livius, translated by Vigenere, with the Notes which are both
curious and profitable. They are in two Volumes.

Homer, whom Pliny calls the Fountainhead of Invention and noble thoughts.

Virgil, and in him, particularly his Aeneids.

The Ecclesiastical History of Godeau, or the Abridgement of Baronius.

Ovid's Metamorphoses, translated into French by Du Rier, and in English by
Sandys.

Tableaux.
The Pictures of Philostratus.

Plutarch's Lives, translated from the Greek by several hands, in 5 Volumes.

Pausanias, though I doubt whether that Author be translated. He is wonderful
for giving of great Ideas; and chiefly, for such as are to be placed at a
distance, (or cast behind) and for the combining of Figures. This Author in
conjunction with Homer, make a good mingle of what is pleasing and what is
perfect.

The Religion of the Ancient Romans, by Du Choul; and in English, Godwin's
Roman Antiquities.

Trajan's Pillar, with the discourse which explains the Figures on it, and
instructs a Painter in those things with which he is undispensibly to be
acquainted. This is one of the most principal and most learned Books, which we
have for the Modes, the Customs, the Arms, and the Religion of the Romans.
Iulio Romano made his chief studies on the Marble it self.

The Books of Medals.

The Bass-Reliefs of Perrier and others, with their Explanations at the bottom
of the Pages, which give a perfect understanding of them.

Horace's Art of Poetry, by the Earl of Roscomon, because of the relation which
there is betwixt the Rules of Poetry and those of Painting.

And other Books of the like Nature, the reading of which are profitable to
warm the Imagination: such as in English, are Spencer's Fairy Queen; The
Paradise lost of Milton; Tasso translated by Fairfax; and the History of
Polybius, by Sir Henry Shere.

Some Romances also are very capable of entertaining the Genius, and of
strengthening it by the noble Ideas which they give of things; but there is
this danger in them, that they almost always corrupt the truth of History.

There are also other Books which a Painter may use upon some particular
occasions and only when he wants them: Such are,

The Mythology of the Gods.

The Images of the Gods.

The Iconology.

The Tables of Hyginus.

The practical Perspective.

And some others not here mentioned.

Thus it is necessary, that they who are desirous of a name in Painting, should
read at leisure times these Books with diligence, and make their observations
of such things as they find for their purpose in them, and of which they
believe they may sometime or other have occasion; let the Imagination be
employed in this reading, and let them make Sketches and light Touches of those
Ideas which that reading forms in their Imagination. Quinctilian, Tacitus, or
whoever was the Author of that Dialogue which is called in Latin De causis
corrup^^ae eloquentiae, says, That Painting resembles Fi^^e which is ^^ed by
the Fuel, inflamed by Motion, and ga^^hers strength by burning: For the power
of the Genius is only augmented by the abundance of matter to supply it; and
it is impossible to make a great and magnificent work, if that matter be wanting
or not disposed rightly. And therefore a Painter who has a Genius, gets nothing
by long thinking and taking all imaginable care to make a noble Composition if
he be not assisted by those studies which I have mentioned. All that he can
gain by it, is only to weary his Imagination, and to travel over many vast
Countries without dwelling on any one thing, which can give him satisfaction.

All the Books which I have named may be serviceable to all sorts of Persons as
well as to Painters. As for those Books which were of particular use to them,
they were unfortunately lost in those Ages which were before the Invention of
Printing. Neglecting the Copyers probably out of ignorance to transcribe them,
as not finding themselves capable of making the That is to the Eye by Diagrams
and ske^^ches, etc.
demonstrative Figures. In the mean time, it is evidently known by the reltaion
of Authors, that we have lost fifty Volumes of them at the least. See Pliny in
his 35th. Book; and Franc. Iunius in his 3d. Chapter of the 2d. Book of the
Painting of the Ancients. Many Moderns have written of it with small success,
taking a large compass without coming directly to the point, and talking much
without saying any thing: yet some of them have acquitted themselves
successfully enough. Amongst others Leonardo da Vinci (though without method;)
Paulo Lomazzo, whose Book is good for the greatest part, but whose discourse is
too diffusive and very tiresome. John Baptist Armenini, Franciscus Iunius,
Monsieur de Cambray, to whose Preface I rather invite you than to his Book; we
are not to forget what Monsieur Felebien has written of the Picture of
Alexander by the hand of Monsieur Le Brun: besides that the work it self is
very eloquent, the Foundations which he establishes for the making of a good
Picture are wonderfully solid. Thus I have given you very near the Library of a
Painter, and a Catalogue of such Books as he ought either to read himself or
have read to him, at least if he will not satisfy himself with possessing
Painting as the most sordid of all Trades and not as the noblest of all Arts.

It Is the business of a Painter in his choice of Postures, etc. 77.
See here the most important Precept of all those which relate to Painting. It
belongs properly to a Painter alone, and all the rest are borrowed either from
Learning, or from Physic, or from the Mathematics, or in short, from other
Arts, for it is sufficient to have a natural Wit and Learning to make that
which we call in Painting a good Invention, for the design we must have some
insight into Anatomy, to make Buildings, and other things in Perspective, we
must have knowledge in the Mathematics, and other Arts, will bring in their
Quota's to furnish out the matter of a good Picture; but for the Economy or
ordering of the whole together, none but only the Painter can understand it,
because the end of the Artist is pleasingly to deceive the Eyes, which he can
never accomplish if this part be wanting to him. A Picture may make an ill
effect, though the Invention of it be truly understood, the Design of it
correct and the Colors of it the most beautiful and fine that can be employed
in it. And on the contrary we may behold other Pictures ill invented, ill
designed and painted with the most common Colors, which shall make a very good
effect, and which shall more pleasingly deceive; Nothing pleases a man so much
as order, In Oeconomico.
says Xenophon: And Horace, in his Art of Poetry. Singula quaeque locum teneant
sortita decenter.
Set all things in their own peculiar place,
And know that Order is the greatest Grace.


This Precept is properly the use and application of all the rest; for which
reason it requires much judgment. You are therefore, in such manner to foresee
things, that your Picture may be painted in your Head: i. e. before it come
upon the Canvas. When Manander (says a celebrated Author) Comm. vetus.
had ordered the Scenes of his Comedy, he held it to be, in a manner, already
made; though he had not begun the first Verse of it. It Is an undoubted truth,
that they who are endu'd with this foresight, work with incredible pleasure and
facility; others on the contrary are perpetually changing and rechanging their
work, which when it is ended leaves them but anxiety for all their pains. It
seems to me that these sorts of Pictures remind us of those old Gothique
Castles, made at several times, and which hold together only as it were by
Rags and Patches.

It may be inferred from that which I have said, that the Invention and the
Disposition are two several and distinct parts in effect, though the last of
them depends upon the first, and that commonly it is comprehended under it: yet
we are to take take great care that we do not confound them. The Invention
simply finds out the subjects, and makes a choice of them suitable to the
History which we treat; and the Disposition distributes those things which are
thus found each to its proper place, and accommodates the Figures and the
Grouppes in particular, and the Tout Ensemble (or whole together) of the
Picture in general: so that this Economy produces the same effect in relation
to the Eyes, as a Consort of Music to the Ears.

There is one thing of great consequence to be observed in the Economy of the
whole work, which is, that at the first Sight we may be given to understand the
quality of the subject: and that the Picture at the first Glance of the Eye,
may inspire us with the principal passion of it: for Example, if the subject,
which you have undertaken to treat be of joy, it is necessary that every thing
which enters into your Picture should contribute to that Passion, so that the
Beholders shall immediately be moved with it. If the Subject be mournful, let
every thing in it have a stroke of sadness; and so of the other Passion and
Qualities of the Subjects.

Let your Compositions be conformable to the Text of Ancient Authors, 81.
etc. Take care that the Licenses. of Painters be rather to adorn the History,
than to corrupt it. And though Horace gives permission to Painters and Poets to
dare every thing, Art of Po^^try.
yet he encourages neither of them, to make things out of nature or
verisimility; for he adds immediately after, But let the Bounds of Licenses he
fixed,
Not things of disagreeing Natures mixed;
Not Sweet with Sour, nor Birds with Serpents joined,
Nor the fierce Lion with the fearful Hind.


The Thoughts of a Man endued with good Sense are not of kin to visionary
madness; Men in Fevers are only capable of such Dreams. Treat then the
Subjects of your Pictures with all possible faithfulness, and use your Licenses
with a becoming boldness, provided they be ingenious, and not immoderate and
extravagant.

Take care that whatsoever makes nothing to your Subject, 83.
etc. Nothing deadens so much the Composition of a picture, as Figures which
are not appertaining to the Subject: We may call them pleasantly enough,
Figures to be let.

This part of Painting so rarely met with, and so difficult to be found, 87.
etc. That is to say, Invention.

Which was stolen by Prometheus, etc. 89.
The Poets feign that Prometheus from'd out of Clay, so fair a Statue, that
Minerva one day having long admired it, said to the workman, that if he thought
there was any thing in Heaven which could add to its perfection, he might ask
it of her; but he being ignorant of what might be most beautiful in the
Habitation of the Gods, desired leave that he might be carried thither, and
being there to make his choice. The Goddess bore him thither upon her Shield,
and so soon as he had perceived that all Celestial things were animated with
Fire, he stole a Parcel of it, which he carried down to Earth, and applying it
to the stomach of his Statue enlivened the whole Body.

That it happens not to every one to see Corinth, 92.
etc. This is an Ancient Proverb which signefies, that every man has not the
Genius not the Disposition that is necessary for the Sciences, neither yet a
Capacity fit for the undertaking of things which are great and difficult.
Corinth was heretofore the Center of all Arts, and the place whither they sent
all those whom they would render capable of any thing. Pro lege Man.
Cicero calls it the Light of all Graeci^^.

It arrived at length to that height of perfection, 95.
etc. This was in the time of Alexander the Great, and lasted even to Augustus;
under whose reign Painting fell to great decay. But under the Emperors,
Domitian, Nerva and Trajan, it appeared in its primitive luster, which lasted
to the time of Phocas the Emperor, when vices prevailing over the Arts, and War
being kindled through all Europe, and especially in Lombardy, (occasioned by
the irruption of the Hunns,) Painting was totally extinguished. And if some few
in the succeeding Ages strained themselves to revive it, it was rather in
finding out the most glaring, gaudy and costly Colors, than in imitating the
harmonious Simplicity of those illustrious Painters who preceded them. At
length, in the fourteenth Century, some there were who began to set it again on
foot. And it may truly be said, that about the end of the fifteenth Age, and
the beginning of our Sixteenth it appeared in much Splendour by means of many
knowing Men in all parts of Italy, who were in perfect possession of it. Since
those happy times which were so fruitful of the noble Arts, we have also had
some knowing Painters but very few in number, because of the little inclination
which Sovereign Princes have had for Painting: but thanks to the zeal of our
Great Monarch, and to the care of his first Minister, Monsieur Colbert, we may
shortly behold it more flourishing than ever.

Though they are not very much inferior, 102.
etc. Our Author means this of Michael Angelo, and other able Sculptors of that
time.

A Posture therefore must be chosen according to their gusto, 103.
etc. This is the second part of Painting, which is called Design or Drawing;
as the Ancients have sought as much as possible whatsoever contributes to the
making of a perfect Body, so they have diligently examined in what consists the
beauty of good postures, as their works sufficiently inform us.

The parts of it must be great, 104.
etc. Yet not so great as to exceed a just proportion. But he means that in
noble posture, the greatest parts of the Body ought to appear foremost rather
than the less, for which reason in another passage he vehemently forbids the
foreshortinings, because they make the parts appear little, though of
themselves they are great.

Large or ample, 104.
etc. To avoid the dry manner, such as is most commonly the Nature which Lucas
van Leyden and Albert Durer have imitated.

Unequal in their Position, 105.
so that those which are before must contrast or oppose those others which are
himdermost, and all of them be equally balanced on their Center, etc. The
Motions are never natural, when the Members are not equally balanced on their
Center: and these Members cannot be balanced on their Center in an equality of
weight, but they must contrast each other. A Man who dances on the Rope, makes
a manifest Demonstration of this Truth. The Body is a weight balanced on its
Feet, as upon two Pivots, And though one of the Feet most commonly bears the
weight, yet we see that the whole weight rests Centrally upon it. Insomuch,
that if, for Example, one Arms is stretched out, it must of necessity be either
that the other Arm, or the Leg be cast backward, or the Body somewhat bowed on
the opposite Side, so as to make an Equilibrium, and be in a Situation which is
unforced. It may be, though seldom (if it be not in old Men) that the Feet bear
equally; and for that time half the weight is equally distributed on each Foot.
You ought to make use of the same Prudence, if one Foot bear three parts in
four of the Burden, and that the other Foot bore the remaining part. This in
general is what may be said of the Balance, and the Libration of the Body. In
particular, there may many things be said which are very useful and curious,
of which you may satisfy your selves in Leonardo da Vinci. He has done
wonderfully well on that subject, and one may truly say that the Ponderation,
is the best and soundest part of all his Book of Painting. It begins at the
181st. Chapter, and concludes at the 273d. I would also advise you to read
Paulo Lomazzo in his 6th. Book, Chapter 4th. Del moto del Corpo humano, that
is, the motions of a human Body. You will there find many things of great
profit; for what concerns the Contrast, I will only say in general, that
nothing gives so much grace and life to Figures. See the 43d. Precept, and what
I say upon it in the Remarks.

The parts must have their out lines in Waves resembling Flames, 107.
or the gliding of a Snake upon the ground, etc. The reason of this proceeds
from the action of the Muscles, which are as so many Well-buckets; when one of
them acts and draws, it is necessary that the other must obey; so that the
Muscles which act, drawing always toward their principle, and those which obey
stretching in length and on the side of their insertion, it must needs follow
that the parts must be designed in Waves: but beware lest in giving this form
to the parts you do not break the Bones which sustain them and which always
must make them appear firm.

This Maxim is not altogether so general, but that actions may be found where
the masses of the Muscles are situate one over against another, but this is not
very common. The out-lines which are in waves, give not only a grace to the
Parts, but also to the whole Body, when it is only supported on one Leg. As we
see in the Figures of Antinous, Meleager, the Venus of Medices, that of the
Vatican, the two others of Borghese, and that of Flora, of the Goddess Vesta,
the two Bacchus's of Borghese, and that of Ludovisio, and in fine of the
greatest number of the Ancient Figures, which are standing, and which always
rest more upon one Foot than the other. Besides, that the Figures and their
Parts, ought almost always to have a serpentine and flaming form naturally,
these sorts of out-lines have, I know not what of life and seeming motion in
them, which very much resembles the activity of the Flame, and of the Serpent.

According to the knowledge of them, 112.
which is given us by Anatomy, etc. This part is nothing known at present
amongst our modern Painters. I have shown the profit and even the necessity of
it in the Preface of a little Epitome which I have made, and which Monsieur
Torrebat has Published. I know there are some who think this Science a kind of
Monster, and believe it to be of no Advantage, either because they are mean
spirited, or that they have not considered the want which they have of it; nor
reflected as they ought, on its importance: contenting themselves with a
certain track, to which they have been used. But certain it is, that whoever is
capable of such a thought, will never be capable of becoming a great Designer.

Designed after the manner of the Graecians, 113.
etc. that is to say, according to the Ancient Statues, which for the most part
come from Greece.

Let there be a perfect relation betwixt the parts and the whole, 114.
etc. or let them agree well together, which is the same thing. His meaning in
this place, is to speak of the justness of proportions; and of the harmony
which they make with one another. Many famous Authors have thoroughly treated
this matter. Amongst others Paulo Lomazzo, whose first Book speaks of nothing
else: But there are so many subdivisions, that a Reader Must have a good Brain,
not to be turned with them. See those which our Author has remarked in general,
on the most beautiful Statues of the Ancients. I believe them to be so much
the better, as they are more conformable to those, which Vitruvius gives us, in
the first Chapter of his third Book: And which he tells us, that he learned
from the Artists themselves: because in the Preface to his Seventh Book, he
makes his boast to have had them from others, and particularly from Architects
and Painters. The Measures of a Humane Body.

The Ancients have commonly allowed eight Heads to their Figures; though some
of them have but ^^even. But we ordinarily divide the Figure into This depends
on the Age and Quality of the persons. The Apollo and Venus of Medices have
more than ten Faces.
ten Faces: that is to say, from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot
in the following manner.

From the Crown of the Head to the Forehead, is the third part of a Face.

The Face begins, at the root of the lowest Hairs, which are upon the Forehead;
and ends at the bottom of the Chin.

The Face is divided into three proportionable parts; the first contains the
Forehead, the second the Nose, and the third the Mouth and the Chin.

From the Chin, to the pit betwixt the Collarbones are two lengths of a Nose.

From the pit betwixt the Collar-bones, to the bottom of the Breast one Face.

The Appolo has a Nose more.
From the bottom of the Breasts, to the Navel one Face.

The Apollo has half a Nose more: and the upper half of the Venus de Med^^ces
is to the lower part of the Belly, and not ^^o the Privy parts.
From the Navel to the Genitories, one Face.

From the Genitories to the upper part of the Knee, two Faces.

The Knee contains half a Face.

From the lower part of the Knee to the Anckle, two Faces.

From the Anckle to the Sole of the Foot, half a Face.

A Man, when his Arms are stretched out, is, from the longest Finger of his
Right hand, to the longest of his left, as broad as he is long.

From one side of the Breasts to the other, two Faces.

The bone of the Arm called Humerus is the length of two Faces, from the
Shoulder to the Elbow.

From the end of the Elbow to the root of the little Finger, the bone called
Cubitus, with part of the Hand, contains two Faces.

From the box of the Shoulder Blade, to the pit betwixt the Collar-bones, one
Face.

If you would be satisfied in the Measures of breadth, from the extremity of
one Finger to the other; so that this breadth should be equal to the length of
the Body, you must observe that the boxes of the Elbows with the Humerus, and
of the Humerus with the Shoulder Blade, bear the proportion of half a Face,
when the Arms are Stretched out.

The Sole of the Foot is the sixth part of the Figure.

The Hand is the length of a Face.

The Thumb contains a Nose.

The inside of the Arm, from the place where the Muscle disappears, which makes
the Breast, called the Pectoral Muscle, to the middle of the Arm, four Noses.

From the middle of the Arm to the beginning of the Hand, five Noses.

The longest Toe, is a Nose long.

The two utmost parts of the Teats, and the pit betwixt the Collar-bones of a
Woman make an equailateral triangle.

For the breadth; of the Limbs no precise measures can be given; because the
measures themselves are changeable according to the quality of the persons; and
according to the movement of the Muscles.

If you would know the Proportions more particularly, you may see them in Paulo
Lomazzo: it is good to read them, once at least, and to make Remarks on them;
every man according to his own judgment, and according to the occasion which he
has for them.

Though Perspective cannot be called a certain Rule, 117.
etc. That is to say, purely of it self, without prudence, and discretion. The
greatest part of those, who understand it, desiring to practice it too
regularly, often make such things as shock the sight, though they are within
the Rules. If all those great Painters, who have left us such fair Platforms,
had rigorously observed it in their Figures, they had not wholly found their
account in it. They had indeed made things more regularly true, but withal
very unpleasing. There is great appearance that the Architects, and Statuaries
of former times, have not found it to their purpose always; nor have followed
the Geometrical Part so exactly as Perspective ordains. For He who would
imitate the Frontispiece of the Rotunda according to Perspective, would be
grossly deceived; since the Columns which are at the extremities have more
diameter, than those which are in the middle. The Cornish of the Palazzo
Farnese, which makes so beautiful an effect below, when viewed more nearly,
will be found not to have its just measures. In the Pillar of Trajan, we see
that the highest Figures are greater than those below; and make an effect quite
contrary to Perspective, increasing according to the measure of their distance.
I know there is a Rule which teaches a way of making them in that manner; and
which though it is to be found in some Books of Perspective, yet notwithstanding
is no rule of Perspective. Because it is never made use of, but only when we
find it for our purpose; for if ( for example) the Figures which are at the top
of Trajan's Pillar, were but as great as those which are at the bottom, they
would not be for all that against Perspective: and thus we may say, with more
reason, that it is a rule of Decorum in Perspective to ease the sight, and to
render objects more agreeable: It Is on this general observation, that we may
establish in Perspective, the rules of Decorum (or convenience) whenever
occasion shall offer. We may also see another Example in the base of the
Farnesian Hercules; which is not upon the level, but on an easy declivity on
the advanced part, that the feet of the Figure may not be hidden from the
sight, to the end that it may appear more pleasing: which the noble Authors of
these things have done, not in contempt of Geometry and Perspective, but for
the satisfaction of the Eyes, which was the end they proposed to themselves in
all their works.

We must therefore understand Perspective, as a Science which is absolutely
necessary; and which a Painter must not want: Yet without Subjecting our selves
so wholly to it, as to become slaves of it. We are to follow it, when it leads
us in a pleasing way, and that it shows us pleasing things; but for some time
to forsake it, if it lead us through mire, or to a precipice. Endeavor after
that which is aiding to your Art, and convenient, but avoid whatsoever is
repugnant to it; as the 59th rule teaches.

Let every Member be made for its own Head, 126.
etc. That is to say, you ought not to set the Head of a Young man on the Body
of an Old one; nor make a white Hand for a withered Body. Not to habit a
Hercules in Taffeta; nor an Apollo in course stuff: Queens and persons of the
first quality, whom you would make appear Majestical, are not to be too
negligently dressed or indishabile, no more than Old men: The Nymphs are not to
be overcharged with drapery: in fine, let all that which accompanies your
Figures, make them Known for what effectively they are.

Let the Figures to which Art cannot give a Voice, 128.
imitate the Mutes in their Actions, etc.

Mutes having no other way of speaking (or expressing their thoughts) but only
by their gestures. and their actions, it is certain that they do it in a manner
more expressive than those who have the use of Speech, for which reason the
Picture which is mute ought to imitate them, so as to make it self understood.

Let the principal Figure of the Subject, 129.
etc. It Is one of the greatest blemishes of a Picture, not to give knowledge at
the first Sight of the Subject which it represents. And truly nothing is more
perplexing, than to extinguish as it were, the principal Figure by the
opposition of some others, which present themselves to us at the first view,
and which carry a greater luster. An Orator, who had undertaken to make a
Panegyric on Alexander the Great, and who had emply'd the strongest Figures of
his Rhetorique in the praise of Bucephalus, would do quite the contrary to that
which was expected from him; Because it would be believed that he rather took
the Horse for his Subject than the Master. A Painter is like an Orator in this.
He must dispose his matter in such sort, that all things may give place to his
principal Subject. And if the other Figures, which accompany it, and are only
as Accessaries there, take up the chief place, and make themselves most
remarkable, either by the Beauty of their Colors, or by the Splendor of the
Light, which strikes upon them, they will catch the Sight, they will Stop it
short, and not suffer it to go further than themselves, till after some
considerable space of time to find out that which was not discerned at first.
The principal Figure in a Picture is like a king among his Courtiers, whom we
ought to know at the first Glance, and who ought to dim the Luster of all his
Attendants. Those Painters who proceed otherwise, do just like those who in the
relation of a story engage themselves so foolishly in long digressions, that
they are forced to conclude quite another way than they began.

Let the Members be combined in the same manner as the Figures are, 132.
etc. I cannot better compare a Grouppe of Figures than to a Consort of Voices,
which supporting themselves all together by their different parts make a
Harmony, which pleasingly fills the Ears and flatters them; but if you come to
separate them, and that all the parts are equally heard as loud as one another,
they will stun you to that degree, that you would fancy your Ears were torn in
pieces. It Is the same of Figures; if you so assemble them, that some of them
sustain the others, and make them appear; and that all together they make but
one entire Whole, then your Eyes will be fully satisfied: But if on the
contrary, you divide them, your Eyes will suffer by seeing them all together
dispersed, or each of them in particular. All together, because the visual Rays
are multiplied by the Multiplicity of Objects. Each of them in particular;
because, if you six your Sight on one, those which are about it will strike you
and attract your Eyes to them, which extremely Pains them in this sort of
Separation and Diversity of Objects, The Eye, for example, is satisfied with
the Sight of one single Grape, and is distracted, if it carries it self at one
view, to look upon many several Grapes which lie Scattered on a Table, we must
have the same regard for the Members; they aggrouppe and contrast each other in
the same manner as the Figures do. Few Painters have observed this Precept as
they ought, which is a most solid Foundation for the Harmony of a Picture.

The Figures in the Grouppes ought not to be like each other in their Motions,
137.
etc. Take heed in this contrast to do nothing that is extravagant, and let
your Postures be always natural. The Draperies, and all things that accompany
Figures, may enter into the contrast with the Members, and with the Figures
themselves: And this is what our Poet Means in these words of his Verses,
Caetera frangant.

One side of the Picture must not be void, 145.
while the other is filled etc. This sort of Symmetry, when it appears not
affected, fills the Picture pleasingly; k^^eps it in a kind of balance; and
infinitely delights the Eyes, which thereby contemplate the Work with more
repose.

As a Play is seldom good, 152.
in which there are too many Actors, etc. Annibal Caracci did not belivee that
a Picture could be good, in which there were above twelve Figures. It was
Albano who told our Author this, and from his mouth I had it. The Reasons
which he gave were, first, That he belive'd there ought not be above three
great Grouppes of Figures in any Picture; And Secondly, That Silence and
Majesty were of necessity to be there, to render it beautiful; and neither the
one nor the other could possibly be in a multitude and crowd of Figures. But
nevertheless, if you are constrained by the Subject: ( As for Example, If you
Painted the Day of Judgment, the Massacre of the Innocents, a Battle, etc.) On
such occasions you are to dispose things by great masses of Lights and Shadows,
and union of Colors, without troubling your self to finish every thing in
particular, ind^^pendently one of the other, as is usual with Painters of a
little Genius; and whose Souls are incapable of embracing a great Design, or a
great Composition. Aemylium circa ludum, Faber imus and ungues
Exprimet, and molles imitabitur aere capillos;
Infelix Operis Summa, quia ponere totum
Nesciet.
The meanest Sculptor in the Emylian Square,
Can imitate in Brass, the Nails and Hair;
Expert in Trifles, and a cunning Fool,
Able to express the Parts, but not dispose the whole.
Says Horace in his Art of Poetry.


The Extremities of the Ioints must be seldom hidden, 162.
and the Extremities or End of the Feet never, etc. These Extremities of the
Joints are as it were the Hafts or Handles of the Members. For example, the
Shoulders, the Elbows, the Thighs, and the Knees. And if a Drapery should be
found on these ends of the Joints, it is the duty of Science and of Decorum, to
mark them by Folds, but with great discretion; for what concerns the Feet,
though they should be hidden by some part of the Drapery; nevertheless, if they
are marked by Folds, and their shape be distinguished, they are supposed to be
seen. The word never, is not here to be taken in the strictest Sense; he means
but this, so rarely, that it may seem we should avoid all occasions of
dispensing with the Rule.

The Figures which are behind others, 164.
have neither Grace nor Vigor, etc. Raphael and Iulio Romano, have perfectly
observed this Maxim, and Raphael especially in his last Works.

Avoid also those Lines and Contours which are equal, 169.
which make Parallels, etc. He means principally to speak of the Postures so
ordered, that they make together those Geometrical Figures which he condemns.

Be not so strictly tied to Nature, 176.
etc. This Precept is against two sorts of Painters; first against those who
are so scrupulously tied to Nature, that they can do nothing without her, who
copy her just as they believe they see her, without adding or retrenching any
thing, though never so little, either for the Nudities or for the Draperies.
And secondly, against those who Paint every thing by Practice, without being
able to subject themselves to retouch any thing, or to examine by the Nature.
These last, properly speaking, are the Libertines of Painting, as there are
Libertines of Religion; who have no other Law but the vehemence of their
Inclinations which they are resolved not to overcome: and in the Same manner
the Libertines of Painting, have no other model but a Rhodomontado Genius, and
very irragular, which violently hurries them away. Though these two sorts of
Painters, are both of them in vicious Extremes, yet nevertheless the former
sort seems to be the more supportable; because though they do not imitate
Nature as she is accompanied by all her Beauties, and her Graces, yet at least
they imitate that Nature, which we know and daily see. Instead of which the
others show us a wild or salvage Nature, which is not of our acquaintance, and
which seems to be of a quite new Creation.

Whom you must have always present as a witness to the truth, 178.
etc. This passage seems to be wonderfully well said. The nearer a Picture
approaches to the truth, The better it is; and though the Painter, who is its
Author, be the first Judge of the Beauties which are in it, he is nevertheless
obliged not to pronounce it, till he has first consulted Nature, who is an
irreproachable evidence, and who will frankly, but withal truly tell you its
Defects and Beauties, if you compare it with her Work.

And of all other things which discover to us the Thoughts and inventions of
the Graecians, 188.
etc. As good Books, such as are Homer and Pausanias; the prints which we see
of the Antiquities, may extremely contribute to from our Genius, and to give us
great Ideas; in the same manner as the Writings of good Authors, are capable of
forming a good Style in those who are desirous of writing well.

If you have but one single Figure to work upon, 193.
etc. The reason of this is, That there being nothing to attract the Sight but
this only Figure, the Visual Rays will not be too much divided by the
Diversity of Colors and Draperies; but only take heed to put in nothing,
which shall appear too sharp or too hard; and be mindful of the 4th. Precept,
which says, that two Extremities are never to touch each other either in Color
or in Light; but that there must be a mean, partaking of the one and of the
other.

Let the Drapery be nobley Spread upon the Body; 195.
let the Folds be large, etc. As Raphael practiced, after he had forsaken the
manner of Pietro Perugino, and principally in his latter Works.

And let them follow the order of the parts, 196.
etc. As the fairest pieces of Antiquity will show us. And take heed, that the
folds do not only follow the order of the parts, but that they also mark the
most considerable Muscles; because that those Figures, where the drapery and
the naked part are seen both together, are much more graceful than the other.

Without sitting too straight upon them, etc. Painters ought not to imitate the
Ancients in this circumstance; the ancient Statuaries ma^^ their Draperies of
wet Linen, On purpose to make them sit close and straight to the parts of their
Figures, for doing which they had great reason; and in following which the
Painters would be much in the wrong: and you shall see upon what grounds those
great Genius's of Antiquity, finding that it was impossible to imitate with
Marble the fineness of stuffs or garments which is not to be discerned but by
the Colors, the Reflexes, and more especially by the Lights and Shadows,
finding it I say out of their power to dispose of those things, thought they
could not do better nor more prudentially, than to make use of such Draperies
as hindered not from seeing through their Folds, the delicacy, of the Flesh,
and the purity of the Outlines; things which truly speaking they possessed in the
last perfection, and which in all appearance were the subject of their chief
study. But Painters, on the contrary, who are to deceive the Sight, quite
otherwise than Statuaries, are bound to imitate the different sorts of
Garments, such as they naturally seem; and such as Colors, Reflexes, Lights
and Shadows (of all which they are Masters) can make them appear: Thus we see
that those who have made the nearest imitations of Nature, have made use of
such Stuffs (or Garments) which are familiar to our Sight, and these they have
imitated with so much Art that in beholding them we are pleased that they
deceive us; such were Titian, Paul Veronese, Tintoret, Rubens, Van Dyck, and
the rest of the good Colourists, who have come nearest to the truth of Nature:
Instead of which, others who have scrupulously tied themselves to the practice
of the Ancients, in their Draperies, have made their works crude and dry; and
by this means have found out the lamentable secret how to make their Figures
harder than even the Marble it self. As Andrea Mantegna, and Pietro Perugino
have done, and Raphael also had much of that way in his first Works, in which
we behold many small foldings often repleited, which look like so many
Whipcords. It Is true these repetitions are seen in the Ancient Statues, and
they are very proper there. Because they who made use of wet Linen, and close
Draperies, to make their Figures look more tender, reasonably foresaw that the
Members would be too naked, if they left not more than two or three Folds,
scarce appearing such as those sorts of Draperies afford the Sight, and
therefore have used those Repetitions of many Folds, yet in such a manner that
the Figures are always soft and tender, and thereby seem opposite to the
hardness of Marble. Add to this, that in Sculpture, it is almost impossible that
a Figure clothed with course Draperies, can make a good effect on all the
sides; and that in Painting the Draperies of what kind soever they be, are of
great advantage, either to unite the Colors and the Grouppes, or to give such
a ground as one would wish to unite or to separate, or farther, to produce such
reflections as set off, or for filling void spaces, or in short for many other
advantages, which help to deceive the Sight, and which are no ways necessary to
Sculptors, since their Work is always of Relievo.

Three things may be inferred from what I have said concerning the rule of
Draperies. First, that the Ancient Sculptors had reason to cloth their Figures
as we see them. Secondly, that Painters ought to imitate them in the order of
their Folds, but not in their quality nor in their number. Thirdly, That
Sculptors are obliged to follow them as much as they can, without desiring to
imitate unprofitably or improperly the manners of the Painters, and to make
many ample Folds, which are insufferable hardnesses, and more like a Rock than
a natural Garment. See the 211th. Remark about the middle of it.

And if the parts be too much distant from each other, 202.
etc. It Is with intent to hinder (as we have said in the rule of Grouppes) the
visual Rays, from being too much divided, and that the Eyes may not suffer by
looking on so many objects, which are separated. Guido was very exact in this
observation. See in the Text the end of the Rule which relates to Draperies.

And as the Beauty of the Limbs consists not in the quantity and rising of the
Muscles, 204.
etc. Raphael in the beginning of his Painting, has somewhat too much
multiplied the Folds; because being with reason charmed with the graces of the
Ancients, he imitated their Beauties somewhat too regularly; but having
afterward found that this quantity of Folds glittered too much upon the Limbs,
and took off that Repose and Silence which in Painting are so friendly to the
Eyes; he made use of a contrary conduct in the works which he painted
afterward, which was at that time when he began to understand the effect of
Lights, of Grouppes, and the oppositions of the Lights and Shadows, so that he
wholly changed his manner, (this was about eight years before his death) and
though he always gave a Grace to whatsoever he painted, yet he made appear in
his latter works, a Greatness, a Majesty, and a Harmony quite other than what
we see in his first manner: And this he did by lessening the number of his
Folds, making them more large and more opposing them, and by making the Masses
of the Lights and Shadows, greater and more disentagl'd. Take the pains to
examine these his different manners in the Prints which we see of that Great
Man.

As supposing them to be Magistrates, 210.
their Draperies ought to be large, etc. Yet make not your Draperies so large
that they may be big enough to cloth four or five Figures, as some there are
who follow that method. And take heed that the folding be natural and so
disposed, that the Eye may be directed to discover the Folds from the beginning
of them to the end. By Magistrates, he means all great and grave Persons, and
such as are advanced in age.

If Ladies or Damsels, light and soft, 211.
etc. By this name of Ladies, Maids, or Damsels, he means all young persons,
slender, finely shaped, aerie and delicate. Such as are Nymphs, and Naiades, and
Fountains. Angels are also comprehended under this head, whose Drapery should
be of pleasing Colors, and resembling those which are seen in the Heavens, and
chiefly when they are suspended in the Air. They are only such sorts of light
habits as are subject to be ruffl'd by the Winds, which can bear many Folds;
yet so that they may be freed from any hardnesses. It Is easy for every one to
judge that betwixt the Draperies of Magistrates, and those of young Maids;
there must be some mediocrity of Folds, such as are most commonly seen and
observed, as in the Draperies of a Christ, of a Madonna, of a King, a Queen, or
a Duchess, and of other persons of Consideration and Majesty; and those also
who are of a middle age with this distinction, that the Habits must be made
more or less rich, according to the dignity of the Persons; and that Cloth
Garments may be distinguished from those of Silk, Satin from Velvets, Brocard
from Embroidery, and that in one word the Eye may be deceived by the truth and
the difference of the Stuffs. Take notice if you please, that the light and
tender Draperies having been only given to the Female Sex, the Ancient
Sculptors have avoided as much as they could to cloth the Figures of Men,
because they thought, (as we have formerly said) that in Sculpture Garments
could not be well imitated, and that great Folds made a very bad effect. There
are almost as many examples of this truth, as amongst the Ancients there are
Statues of naked men. I will name only that of Laocoon, which according to all
probability ought to have been clothed: And in effect what likelihood can
there be, that the Son of a King, and the Priest of Apollo should appear naked
in the actual Ceremony of Sacrifice. For the Serpents passed from the Isle of
Tenedos to the Trojan Shore, and surpised Laocoon and his Sons while they were
sacrificing to Neptune on the Sea Shore, as Virgil witnesses in the second of
his Eneids. Notwithstanding which, the Polydorus, Athenodorus, and Agesander,
all Rhodians.
Sculptors who were Authors of this noble work had well considered, that they
could not give Vestments suitable to the quality of the Persons represented,
without making as it were a heap of Stones, whose Mass would rather be like a
Rock, than those three admirable Figures, which will ever be the Admiration of
all Ages. And for this reason of two inconveniences, they judged that of
Draperies to be greater, than that which was against the truth it self.

This observation well confirms what I have said in the 200th. Remark. It seems
to me, that it deserves you should make some reflection on it; and to establish
it the better in your mind, I will tell you, that Michael Angelo, following
this Maxim, has given the Prophets which he painted in the Chapel of the Pope,
such Draperies whose Folds are large, and whose Garments are course, instead of
which the Moses, which he has made in Sculpture, is habited with a Drapery much
more close to the parts and holding more of the Ancients. Nevertheless he is a
Prophet as well as those in the Chapel, a man of the same quality, and to whom
Michael Angelo ought to have given the same Draperies, if he had not been
hindered by those very reasons which have been given you.

The Marks or Ensigns of Virtues, 215.
etc. That is to say of the Sciences and Arts. The Italians call a man a
Vertuoso, who loves the noble Arts, and is a Critic in them. And amongst our
French Painters, the word Vertueux, is understood in the same Signification.

But let not the work be too much enriched with Gold or Jewels, 217.
etc. Clemens Alexandrinus relates, That Apelles having seen a Helena, Lib. 2.
Paedag. cap. 12.
which a young Scholar of his had made and adorned with a great quantity of
Golden Ornaments and Jewels, said to him, My good Friend, though thou could
not make her beautiful, at least thou have made her rich. Besides that, these
glittering things in Painting, as precious Stones prodigally strewn over the
habits are destructive to each other, because they draw the Sight to several
places at the same time, and that they hinder round Bodies from turning and
making their due effect; it is the very quantity which often makes us judge that
they are false. And be sides it is to be presumed, that precious things are
always rare. Plutarch.
Corinna, that learned Theban Lady, reproached Pindar, whom she had five times
overcome in Poetry, that he scattered through all his works the Flowers of
Parnassus too prodigally, saying to him, That men sowed with the Hand, and not
with the Sack: for which reason a Painter ought to adorn his Vestments with
great discretion. And precious Stones look exceedingly well, when they are set
in those places which we would make to come out of the Picture; as for example,
on a Shoulder, or an Arm to tie some Drapery, which of it self is of no strong
coloring. They do also perfectly well with white and other light Colors,
which are used in bringing the Parts or Bodies forward, because Jewels make a
show and glitter through the opposition of the great Lights in the deep brown,
which meet together.

It Is very expedient to make a model of those things which we have not in our
Sight, 220.
and whose nature is difficult to be retained in the Memory, etc. As for
example, the Grouppes of many Figures, the Postures difficult to be long kept,
the Figures in the Air, in Ceilings, or much raised above the Sight; and even
of Animals, which are not easily to be disposed.

By this rule we plainly see how necessary it is for a Painter to know how to
model, and to have many Models of soft Wax. Paul Veronese had so good store of
them, with so great a quantity of different sorts, that he would paint a whole
historical Composition on a perspective Plan, how great and how diversified
soever it were. Tintoret practiced the same, and Michael Angelo (as Giovan.
Bapt. Armenini relates) made use of it, for all the Figures of his day of
Judgment. It Is not that I would advise any one who would make any very
considerable work, to finish after these sorts of Models, but they will be of
vast use and advantage to see the Masses of great Lights, and great Shadows,
and the effect of the whole together. For what remains, you are to have a A
Figure made of wood or cork, turning upon joints.
Layman almost as big as the life, for every Figure in particular, besides the
natural Figure before you, on which you must also look, and call it for a
witness, which must first confirm the thing to you, and afterward to the
Spectators as it is in reality.

You may make use of these Models with delight, if you set them on a
Perspective Plan, which will be in the manner of a Table made on purpose. You
may either raise or let it down according to your convenience; and if you look
on your Figures through a hole so contrived, that it may be moved up and down,
it will serve you for a point of Sight and a point of Distance, when you have
once fixed it.

The same hole will further serve you to set your Figures in the Ceiling and
disposed upon a Grate of Iron-wire, or supported in the Air by little Strings
raised at discretion, or by both ways together.

You may join to your Figures what you see fitting, provided that the whole be
proportioned to them; and in short what you your self may judge to be of no
greater bigness than theirs. Thus, in whatsoever you do there will be more of
truth seen, your work it self will give you infinite delight, and you will
avoid many doubts and difficulties which often hinder you, and chiefly for what
relates to lineal perspective, which you will there infallibly find, provided
that you remember to proportion all things to the greatness of your Figures and
especially the points of Sight and of Distance; but for what belongs to aerial
perspective, that not being found, the judgment must supply it. Tintoret, as
Ridolphi tells us in his life, had made Chambers of Board and Past board,
proportioned to his Models with Doors and Windows, through which he distributed
on his Figures artificial Lights, as much as he thought reasonable, and often
passed some part of the night to consider and observe the effect of his
Compositions. His Models were of two Foot high.

We are to consider the places where we lay the Scene of the Picture, 221.
etc. This is what Monsieur de Chambray, calls, to do things according to
Decorum. See what he says of it, in the Interpretation of that word in his Book
of the Perfection of Painting. It Is not sufficient that in the Picture there be
nothing found which is contrary to the place, where the action which is
represented, passes; but we ought besides, to mark out the place and make it
known to the Spectator by some particular Address, that his mind may not be put
to the pains of discovering it, as whether it be Italy, or Spain, or Greece, or
France; whether it be near the Sea shore, or the Banks of some River, whether
it be the Rhine, or the Loyre; the Po, or the Tyber; and so of other things, if
they are essential to the History. "Nealces, a man of Wit and an ingenious
Painter, L^^. 25. 12.
as Pliny tells us, being to paint a Naval Fight betwixt the Egyptians and the
Persians, and being willing to make it known that the Battle was given upon the
Nile, whose waters are of the same Color with the Sea, drew an Ass drinking on
the Banks of the River, and a Crocodile endeavoring to surprise him."

Let a Nobleness and Grace, 222.
etc. It is difficult enough to say what this Grace of Painting is; it is to be
conceived and understood much more easily than to be explained by words. It
proceeds from the illuminations of an excellent Mind, which cannot be acquired,
by which we give a certain turn to things which makes them pleasing. A Figure
may be designed with all its proportions, and have all its parts regular, which
notwithstanding all this, shall not be pleasing, if all those parts are not put
together in a certain manner, which attracts the Eye to them, and holds it
fixed upon them: For which reason there is a difference to be made betwixt
Grace and Beauty. And it seems that Ovid had a mind to distinguish them, when
he said (speaking of Venus) Multaque cum forma gratia mista suit.
A matchless Grace was with her Beauty mixed.


And Suetonius speaking of Nero, says, he was rather beautiful than graceful.
Vultu pulchro, magis quam venusto. How many fair women do we see, who please us
much less than others, who have not such beautiful Features? It Is by this
grace that Raphael has made himself the most renowned of all the Italians, as
Apelles by the same means carried it above all the Greeks.

This is that in which the greatest difficulty consists, 233.
etc. For two reasons, both because great study is to be made as well upon the
ancient Beauties and on noble Pictures, as upon nature it self: and also
because that part depends entirely on the Genius, and seems to be purely the
gift of Heaven, which we have received at our Birth, upon which account our
Author adds, Undoubtedly we see but few, whom in this particular, Jupiter has
regarded with a gracious Eye, so that it belongs only to those elevated Souls,
who partake somewhat of Divinity to work such mighty wonders. Though they who
have not altogether received from Heaven this precious Gift, cannot acquire it
without great Labor, nevertheless it is needful in my opinion, that both the
one and the other should perfectly learn the character of every Passion.

All the Actions of the sensitive Appetite are in Painting called Passions,
because the Soul is agitated by them, and because the Body suffers through
them, and is sensibly altered. They are those diverse Agitations and different
Motions of the Body in general, and of every one of its parts in particular,
that our excellent Painter ought to understand, on which he ought to make his
study, and to form to himself a perfect Idea of them. But it will be proper for
us to know in the first place, that the Philosophers admit eleven, Love,
Hatred, Desire, Shunning, Joy, Sadness, Hope, Despair, Boldness, Fear and
Anger. The Painters have multiplied them not only by their different Degrees,
but also by their different Species, for they will make, for example, six
persons in the same degree of Fear, who shall express that Passion all of them
differently. And it is that diversity of Species which distinguishes those
Painters who are able Artists, from those whom we may call Mannerists, and who
repeat five or six times over in the same Picture the same Hairs of a Head.
There are a vast number of other Passions, which are as the Branches of those
which we have named: we might for example, under the Notion of Love, comprehend
Grace, Gentleness and Civility; Caresses, Embraces, and Kisses, Tranquillity
and Sweetness; and without examining whether all these things which Painters
comprize under the name of Passions, can be reduced to those of the
Philosophers, I am of opinion that every one may use them at his pleasure, and
that he may study them after his own manner; the name makes nothing. One may
even make Passions of Majesty, fierceness, Dissatisfaction, Care, Avarice,
Sloathfulness, Envy, and many other things like these. These Passions (as I
have said,) ought to be learnt from the life it self, or to be studied on the
Ancient Statues and excellent Pictures: we ought to see, for example, all
things which belong to Sadness, or serve to express it to design them
carefully, and to imprint in our Memories after such a manner, as we may
distinctly understand seven or eight kinds of them more or less, and
immediately after draw them upon Paper without any other Original than the
Image which we have conceived of them. We must be perfect Masters of them: but
above all, we must make sure of possessing them thoroughly. We are to know that
it is such or such a stroke, or such a Shadow stronger or weaker, which make
such or such a Passion in this or that degree. And thus, if any one should ask
you, what makes in Painting the Majesty of a King, the Gravity of a Hero, the
Love of a Christ, the Grief of a Madonna, the Hope of the good Thief, the
Despair of the bad One, the Grace and Beauty of a Venus, and in fine the
Character of any Passion whatsoever, you may answer positively, on the spot,
and with assurance, that it is such a Posture or such lines in the parts of the
Face, formed of such or such a fashion, or even the one and the other both
together: for the parts of the Body separately, make known the Passions of the
Soul or else conjoyntly one with the other. But of all the parts the Head is
that which gives the most of Life, and the most of Grace to the Passion, and
which alone contributes more to it, than all the rest together. The others
separately can only express some certain Passions, but the Head expresses all
of them; nevertheless there are some which are more particular to it; as, for
example, Humility, which it expresses by the stooping or bending of the Head.
Arrogance, when it is lifted, or as we say, tossed up. Languishment, when we
hang it on one side, or lean it upon one Shoulder. Obstinacy (or as the French
calls it Opiniatrete,) with a certain stubborn, unruly, barbarous Humor, when
it is held upright, stiff, and poised betwixt the Shoulders. And of the rest,
there are many marks more easily conceived than they can be expressed; as,
Bashfulness, Admiration, Indignation, and Doubt. It Is by the Head that we make
known more visibly our Supplications, our Threatenings, our Mildness, our
Haughtiness, our Love, our Hatred, our Joy, our Sadness, our Humility; in fine,
it is enough to see the Face, and to understand the Mind at half a word.
Blushing and Paleness speak to us, as also the mixture of them both.

The parts of the Face do all of them contribute to expose the Thoughts of our
Hearts; but above the rest, the Eyes, which are as it were the two Windows
through which the Soul looks out and shows it self. The Passions which they
more particularly express, are Pleasure, Languishment, Disdain, Severity,
Sweetness, Admiration and Anger. Joy and Sadness may bear their parts, if they
did not more especially proceed from the Eyebrows and the Mouth. And the two
parts last named agree more particularly in the expression of those two
Passions; nevertheless if you join the Eyes as a third, you will have the
Product of a wonderful Harmony for all the Passions of the Soul.

The Nose has no Passion which is particular to it, it only lends its
assistance to the others before named, by the stretching of the Nostrils, which
is as much marked in Joy, as it is in Sadness. And yet it seems that Scorn
makes us wrinkle up the Nose and stretch the Nostrils also, at the same time,
drawing up the upper Lip to the place which is near the corners of the Mouth.
The Ancients made the Nose the seat of Derision; eum subdolae irr^^sioni
dicaverunt, says Pliny; that is, they dedicated the Nose to a cunning sort of
Mockery. We read in the 3d. Satyr of Persius, Disce, sed ira cadat Naso,
rugosaque sanna; Learn; but let your Anger fall from your Nose and the sneering
Wrinkles be dismounted. And Philostratus in the Picture of Pan whom the Nymphs
had bound, and scornfully insulted over, says of that God; " that before this,
he was accustomed to sleep with a peaceable Nose, softning in his slumbers the
Wrinkles of it, and the Anger which commonly mounted to that part; but now his
Nostrils were widen'd to the last degree of Fury." For my own part, I should
rather believe that the Nose was the seat of Wrath in Beasts than in Mankind,
and that it was unbecoming of any God but only Pan, who had very much of the
Beast in him, to wrinkle up his Nose in Anger, like other Animals. The moving
of the Lips ought to be but moderate, if it be in Conversation, because we
speak much more by the Tongue than by the Lips: And if you make the Mouth very
open, it is only when you are to express the violence of Passion, and more
properly of Anger.

For what concerns the Hands, they are the Servants of the Head, they are his
Weapons and his Auxiliaries; without them the action is weak, languishing, and
half dead, their Motions which are almost infinite, make innumerable
expressions: Is it not by them, that we desire, that we hope, that we promise,
that we call toward us, and that we reject? besides, they are the instruments
of our Threats, of our Petitions, of the Horror which we show for things, and
of the Praises which we give them: By them we fear, we ask Questions, we
approve, and we refuse, we show our Joy and our Sadness, our Doubts, and our
Lamentations, our Concernments of Pity, and our Admirations. In short, it may
be said, that they are the Language of the Dumb, that they contribute not a
little to the speaking of the universal Tongue, common to all the World, which
is that of Painting.

Now to tell you how these parts are to be disposed, so as to express the
different Passions, is impossible; no precise Rules can be given of it, both
because the task it self is infinite, and also because every one is left to the
Conduct of his own Genius, and to the Fruit of his former Studies; only
remember to be careful, that all the actions of your Figures must be natural.
" It seems to me, says Quinctilian, speaking of the Passions, That this part
which is so noble and so great, is not altogether unaccessible, and that an
easy way may be found to it; it is to consider nature and to copy her, for the
Spectators are satisfied, when in artificial things they can discern that
nature which they are accustomed to behold." This passage of Quinctilian is
perfectly explained by the words of an excellent Master which our Author
proposes to us for a rule: they are these which follow. That the studied
Motions of the Soul, are never so natural as those which we see in the
transport of a true passion. These Motions will better be expressed, and be
much more natural, if we enter into the same thoughts, become of the same
piece, and imagine our selves to be in the same circumstances with those whom
we would represent. " For Nature, says Horace in his Art of Poetry, disposes
the inside of Mankind to all sorts of Fortunes, sometimes she makes us
contented, sometimes she drives us into Choler, and sometimes she so oppresses
us with Grief, that she seems to tread us down and plunge us into mortal
Anxieties; and on all these occasions, she drives outward the Motions of the
Heart by the Tongue which is her Interpreter." Now instead of the Tongue, let
the Painter say by the Actions, which are her Interpreters. " What means have
we, (says Quinctilian,) to give a Color to a thing if we have not the same
Color; it is necessary that we our selves should first be touched with a
Passion before we endeavor to move others with it. And how, continues he, can
we be touch^^d, since the Passions are not in our power? This is the way in my
opinion; We must form to our selves the Visions and Images of absent things, as
if they were in reality before our Eyes; and he who conceives these Images with
the greatest strength of Imagination, shall possess that part of the Passions
with the most advantage and the greatest ease." But we must take care, as I
have already said, that in these visions, the Motions may be natural, for there
are some who imagine they have given abundance of Light to their Figures, when
they have made them do violent and extravagant Actions, which we may more
reasonably call the Convulsions or Contorsions of the Body, than the Passions
of the Mind; and by this means often put themselves to much pains, to find a
strong Passion, where no Passion is required. Add to all that I have said
concerning the Passions, that we are to have a very serious regard to the
quality of the Persons who are to be expressed in Passions. The Joy of a King
ought not to resemble that of a Serving-man. And the Fierceness of a private
Soldier must not be like that of an Officer. In these differences consists all
the Fineness and Delicacy of the Passions. Paulo Lomazzo has written at large
on every Passion in particular, in his second Book, but beware you dwell not
too long upon it, and endeavor not to force your Genius.

Some Relics of it took Sanctuary under ground, 247.
etc. All the ancient Painting that was in Italy perished in the Invasion of
the Hunns and Goths, excepting those works which were hidden under ground or
there painted, which by reason they had not been much exposed to view, were
preserved from the insolence of those Barbarians.

The Cromatique part or Coloring, 256.
etc. The third and last part of Painting, is called the Cromatique or
Coloring. Its object is Color, for which reason, Lights and Shadows are
therein also comprehended, which are nothing else but white and brown (or
dark,) and by consequence have their place among the Colors. Philostratus says
in his life of Apollonius, "That it may be truly called Painting which is made
only with two Colors, provided the Lights and Shadows be observed in it: for
there we behold the true resemblance of things with their Beauties; we also see
the Passions, though without other Colors: so much of life may be also
expressed in it, that we may perceive even the very Blood: the Color of the
Hair and of the Beard, are likewise to be discerned, and we can distinguish
without confusion, the fair from the black, and the young from the old, the
differences betwixt the white and the flaxen hair; we distinguish with ease
betwixt the Moors and the Indians; not only by the Camus Noses of the Blacks,
their woolly Hair and their high Iaws, but also by that black Color which is
natural to them." We may add to what Philostratus has said, that with two only
Colors, the Light and the Dark, there is no sort of Stuff or Habit but may be
imitated; we say then, that the coloring makes its observations on the Masses
or Bodies of the Colors, accompanied with Lights and Shadows more or less
evident by degrees of diminution, according to the Accidents. First of a
luminous Body; as for example, the Sun or a Torch. Secondly, of a diaphanous or
transparent Body, which is betwixt us and the object, as the Air either pure or
thick, or a red Glass, etc. Thirdly, of a solid Body illuminated, as a Statue
of white Marble, a green Tree, a black Horse, etc. Fourthly, from his part, who
regards the Body illuminated, as beholding it either near or at a distance,
directly in a right Angle, or aside in an obtuse Angle, from the top to the
bottom, or from the bottom to the top. This part in the knowledge which it has
of the virtue of Colors, and the Friendship which they have with each other,
and also their Antipathies, it comprehends the Strength, the Relievo, the
Briskness, and the Delicacy which are observed in good Pictures, the management
of Colors, and the labor depend also on this last part.

Her Sister, 263.
etc. That is to say, the Design or Drawing, which is the second part of
Painting; which consisting only of Lines, stands altogether in need of the
Coloring to appear. It Is for this reason, that our Author calls this part her
Sisters Procurer, that is, the Coloring shows us the Design, and makes us fall
in love with it.

The Light produces all kinds of Colors, 267.
etc. Here are three Theorems successively following, which our Author proposes
to us, that from thence we may draw some conclusions. You may likewise find
others, which are in the nature of so many Propositions to which we ought to
agree, that from thence we may draw the Precepts contained in the following
part of this Treatise; they are all founded on the Sense of Seeing.

Which ought to be the most, 280.
etc. See the Remark of number 152.

That you may make the Bodies appear enlightened by the shadows which bound your
Sight, 283.
etc. That is properly to say, that after the great Lights, there must be great
Shadows, which we call reposes: because in reality the Sight would be tired, if
it were attracted by a Continuity of glittering objects. The Lights may serve
for a repose to the Darks, and the Darks to the Lights. I have said in another
place, that a Grouppe of Figures ought to be considered, as a Choir of Music,
in which the Bases support the Trebles, and make them to be heard with greater
pleasure. These reposes are made two several ways, one of which is Natural, the
other Artificial. The Natural is made by an extent of Lights or of Shadows;
which naturally and necessarily follow solid Bodies, or the Masses of solid
Bodies aggroupp'd when the Light strikes upon them. And the Artificial consists
in the Bodies of Colors, which the Painter gives to certain things, such as
pleases him; and composes them in such a manner, that they do no injury to the
objects which are near them. A Drapery, for example, which is made yellow or
red on some certain place, in another place may be brown, and will be more
suitable to it, to produce the effect required. We are to take occasion as much
as possibly we can, to make use of the first manner, and to find the repose of
which we speak, by the Light and by the Shadow, which naturally accompany solid
Bodies. But since the Subjects on which we work are not always favorable to
dispose the Bodies as we desire, a Painter in such a case may take his
advantage by the Bodies of Colors, and put into such places as ought to be
darkened, Draperies or other things which we may suppose to be naturally brown
and sullied, which will produce the same effect and give him the same reposes
as the Shadows would which could not be caused by the disposition of the
objects.

Thus, an understanding Painter will make his advantages both of the one manner
and the other. And if he makes a design to be engraved, he is to remember that
the Gravers dispose not their Colors as the Painters do; and that by
consequence he must take occasion to find the reason of his Design, in the
natural Shadows of the Figures, which he has disposed to cause the effect.
Rubens has given us a full information of this in those prints of his which he
caused to be engraved; and I believe that nothing was ever seen more beautiful
in that kind: the whole knowledge of Grouppes, of the Lights and Shadows, and
of those Masses which Ti^^ian calls a Bunch of Grapes, is there exposed so
clearly to the Sight, that the view of those Prints and the careful
observation of them, might very much contribute to the forming of an able
Painter. The best and fairest of them are graven by Vorsterman, Pontius, and
Bolsvert, all of them admirable Gravers, whose works Rubens himself took care
to oversee, and which without doubt you will find to be excellent if you
examine them. But expect not there the Elegance of Design, nor the Correctness
of the Out-lines.

It Is not but the Gravers can, and ought to imitate the Bodies of the Colors
by the degrees of the Lights and Shadows, as much as they shall judge that this
imitation may produce a good effect: on the contrary, it is impossible in my
opinion to give much strength to what they grave, after the works of the
School, and of all those who have had the knowledge of Colors and of the
Contrast of the Lights and Shadows, without imitating in some sort the Color
of the Objects, according to the relation which they have to the degrees of
white and black. We see certain Prints of good Gravers different in their
kinds, where these things are observed, and which have a wonderful strength.
And there appears in public of late years, a Gallery of Archduke Leopold,
which though very ill graven, yet shows some part of the Beauty of its
Originals, because the Gravers who have executed it, though otherwise they were
sufficiently ignorant, have observed in almost the greatest parts of their
Prints, the Bodies of Colors in the relation which they have to the degrees of
the Lights and Shadows. I could wish the Gravers would make some reflection
upon this whole Remark, it is of wonde^^full consequence to them; for when they
have attained to the knowledge of these reposes, they will easily resolve those
difficulties which many times perplex them: And then chiefly when they are to
engrave after a Picture, where neither the Lights and Shadows, nor the Bodies
of the Colors are skilfully observed, though in its other parts the Picture
may be well performed.

In the same manner as we behold it in a Unequal Mirror, 286.
etc. A Unequal Mirror alters the objects which are in the middle, so that it
seems to make them come out from the Superficies. The Painter must do in the
same manner in respect of the Lights and Shadows of his Figures, to give them
more Relievo and more Strength.

And let those which turn be of broken Colors, 290.
as being less distinguished and nearer to the borders, etc. It Is the duty of a
Painter, even in this also, to imitate the Unequal Mirror, and to place nothing
which glares either in Color or in Light at the borders of his Picture; for
which, there are two reasons, the first is, that the Eye at the first view
directs it self to the midst of the object, which is presented to it, and by
consequence, must there necessarily find the principal object, in order to its
satisfaction. And the other reason is, that the sides or borders being
overcharged with a strong and glittering work attract the Eyes thither, which
are in a kind of Pain, not to behold a continuity of that work, which is on the
sudden interrupted, by the borders of the Picture; instead of which the borders
being lightened and eased of so much work, the Eye continues fixed on the Center
of the Picture, and beholds it with greater pleasure. It Is for the same reason,
that in a great composition of Figures, those which coming most forward, are
cut off by the bottom of the Picture, will always make an ill effect.

A bunch of Grapes, 329.
etc. It Is sufficiently manifest, that Titian by this judicious and familiar
comparison, means that a Painter ought to collect the objects, and to dispose
them in such a manner, as to compose one whole; the several contiguous parts of
which, may be enlightened; many shadowed and others of broken Colors to be in
the turnings, as on a Bunch of Grapes, many Grapes, which are the parts of it,
are in the Light, many in the Shadow, and the rest faintly colored to make
them go farther back. Titian once told Tintoret, That in his greatest works, a
Bunch of Grapes had been his principal rule and his surest guide.

Pure or unmixed white, 330.
either draws an object nearer or carries it off to farther distance. It draws
it nearer with black, and throws it backward without it, etc. All agree that
white can subsist on the fore-ground of the Picture, and there be used without
mixture; the question therefore is to know, if it can equally subsist and be
placed in the same manner, upon that which is backward, the Light being
universal and the Figures supposed in a Campaign and open Field.

Our Author concludes affirmatively, and the reason on which he establishes his
rule is this, That there being nothing which partakes more of the Light than
Whiteness, and the Light being capable of subsisting well in remoteness (or at
a long distance, as we daily see in the rising and setting of the Sun) it
follows that white may subsist in the same manner. In Painting, the Light and a
white Color are but one and the same thing. Add to this, that we have no
Color, which more resembles the Air than white, and by consequence no Color
which is lighter, from whence it comes that we commonly say, the Air is heavy,
when we see the Heavens covered with black Clouds, or when a thick fog takes
from us that clearness, which makes the Lightness or Serenity of the Air.
Titian, Tintoret, Paul Veronese, and all those who best understood Lights, have
observed it in this manner, and no man can go against this Precept, at least
without renouncing any skill in Landtschape, which is an undoubted confirmation
of this truth. And we see that all the great Masters of Landtschape, have
followed Titian in this, who has always employed brown and earthly Colors upon
the forepart, and has reserved his greatest Lights for remotenesses and the
back parts of his Landtschapes.

It may be objected against this opinion, that white cannot maintain it self in
remotenesses, because it is ordinarily used to bring the Objects nearer, on the
advanced part. It Is true, that so it is used, and that to very good purpose, to
render the Objects more sensible, by the opposition of the Dark, which must
accompany it; and which retains it, as it were by force, whether the Dark
serves it for a ground, or whether it be combined to it. For example, If you
would make a white Horse on the fore-ground of your Picture, it is of absolute
Necessity, that the ground must be of a mixed brown, and large enough, or that
the Furniture must be of very sensible Colors; or lastly, that some Figure
must be set upon it, whose Shadows and the Color may bring it forward.

But it seems (say you) that blue is the most flying or transient Color,
because the Heavens and Mountains, which are at the greatest distance, are of
that Color. It Is very true that blue is one of the lightest and sweetest
Colors: But it is also true, that it possesses these qualities so much the
more, because the white is mingled in it, as the example of the distances
demonstrate to us. But if the Light of your Picture be not universal, and that
you suppose your Figures in a Chamber, then recall to your Memory that Theorem
which tells you that the nearer a Body is to the Light, and the more directly
it is opposed to us, so much the more it is enlightened, because the Light grows
languishing, the farther it removes from its original.

You may also extinguish your white, if you suppose the Air to be somewhat
thicker, and if you foresee that this supposition will make a good effect in
the Economy of the whole work; but let not this proceed so far, as to make
your Figures so brown, that they may seem as it were in a filthy Fog, or that
they may appear to be part of the ground. See the following Remark.

But as for pure black, 332.
there is nothing that brings the Object nearer to the Sight, etc. Because
black is the heaviest of all Colors, the most earthly, and the most sensible.
This is clearly understood by the qualities of white which is opposed to it,
and which is, as we have said, the lightest of all Colors. There are few who
are not of this opinion; and yet I have known some, who have told me, that the
black being on the advanced part, makes nothing but holes. To this there is
little else to be answered, but that black always makes a good effect, being
set forward, provided it be placed there with Prudence. You are therefore so to
dispose the Bodies of your Pictures which you intend to be on the fore-ground,
that those sorts of holes may not be perceived, and that the blacks may be
there by Masses, and insensibly confused. See the 47th. Rule.

That which gives the Relievo to a Bowl, (may some say to me) is the quick
Light, or the white, which appears to be on the side, which is nearest to us,
and the black by consequence distances the Object: we are here to beware, not
to confound the turnings with the distances: the question is only in respect
of Bodies, which are separated by some distance of a backward Position, and not
of round Bodies, which are of the same Continuity: the brown which is mingled
in the turnings of the Bowl, makes them go off, rather in confounding them, as
we may say, than in blackning them. And do you not see, that the reflects are
an Artifice of the Painter, to make the turnings seem more Light, and that by
this means the greatest blackness remains toward the middle of the Bowl, to
sustain the white, and make it deceive us with more pleasure.

This Rule of White and Black is of so great consequence, that unless it be
exactly practiced, it is impossible for a Picture to make any great effect, that
the Masses can be disentangl'd, and the different distances may be observed at
the first Glance of the Eye without trouble.

It may be inferred from this Precept, that the Masses of other Colors, will
be so much the more sensible, and approach so much the nearer to the Sight the
more brown they bear; provided this be amongst other Colors which are of the
same Species. For example, A yellow brown shall draw nearer to the Sight, than
another which is less yellow. I said provided it be amongst other Colors,
which are of the same Species, because there are simple Colors, which
naturally are strong and sensible, though they are clear, as Vermillion; there
are others also, which notwithstanding that they are brown, yet cease not to be
soft and faint, as the blue of Ultrama^^ine. The effect of a Picture comes not
only therefore from the Lights and Shadows, but also from the nature of the
Colors. I thought it was not from the purpose in this place to give you the
qualities of those Colors which are most in use, and which are called Capital,
because they serve to make the composition of all the rest, whose number is
almost infinite.

Red Oker is one of the most heavy Colors.

Yellow Oker is not so heavy, because it is clearer.

And the Masticot is very Light, because it is a very clear yellow, and very
near to white.

Ultramarine or Azure, is very light and a very sweet Color.

Vermillion is wholly opposite to Ultramarine.

Lake is a middle Color betwixt Ultramarine and Vermillion, yet it is rather
more sweet than harsh.

Brown Red is one of the most earthy and most sensible Colors.

Pinck is in its nature an indifferent Color, (that is) very susceptible of
the other Colors by the mixture: if you mix brown-red with it, you will make
it a very earthy Color; but on the contrary, if you join it with white or
blue, you shall have one of the most faint and tender Colors.

Terre Verte (or green Earth) is light; it is a mean betwixt yellow Oker and
Ultramarine.

Umbre is very sensible and earthy; there is nothing but pure black which can
dispute with it.

Of all Blacks, that is the most earthly, which is most remote from Blue.
According to the Principle which we have established of white and black, you
will make every one of these Colors before-nam'd more earthy and more heavy,
the more black you mingle with them, and they will be light the more white you
join with them.

For what concerns broken or compound Colors, we are to make a judgment of
their strength by the Force of those Colors which compose them. All who have
thoroughly understood the agreement of Colors, have not employed them wholly
pure and simple in their Draperies, unless in some Figure upon the fore-ground
of the Picture; but they have used broken and compound Colors, of which they
made a Harmony for the Eyes, by mixing those which have some kind of Sympathy
with each other, to make a Whole, which has an Union with the Colors which are
neighboring to it. The Painter who perfectly understands the force and power
of his Colors, will use them most suitably to his present purpose, and
according to his own Discretion.

But let this be done relatively, 355.
etc. One Body must make another Body fly off in such a manner that it self may
be chased by those Bodies which are advanced before it. "We are to take care
and use great attention, says Quinctilian, not only of one separate thing, but
of many which follow each other: and by a certain relation which they have with
each other, are as it were continued in the same manner, as if in a straight
Street, we cast our Eyes from one end of it to the other, we discover at once
those different things which are presented to the Sight, so that we not only
see the last, but whatsoever is relating to the last."

Let two contrary extremities never touch each other, 361.
etc. The Sense of seeing has this in common with all the rest of the Senses,
that it abhorrs the contrary Extremities. And in the same manner as our hands,
when they are very cold feel a grievous pain, when on the sudden we hold them
near the Fire, so the Eyes which find an extreme white, next to an extreme
black, or a fair cool Azure next to a hot Vermillion, cannot behold these
extremities without Pain, though they are always attracted by the Glareing of
two contraries.

This rule obliges us to know those Colors which have a Friendship with each
other, and those which are incompatible, which we may easily discover in mixing
together those Colors of which we would make trial.

And if by this mixture, they make a gracious and sweet Color, which is
pleasing to the Sight, it is a Sign that there is an Union and a Sympathy
betwixt them: but if, on the contrary, that Color which is produced by the
mixture of the two be harsh to the Sight, we are to conclude, that there is a
Contrariety and Antipathy betwixt these two Colors. Green, for example, is a
pleasing Color, which may come from a blue and a yellow mixed together, and by
consequence blue and yellow are two Colors which sympathize: and on the
contrary, the mixture of Blue with Vermillion, produces a sharp, harsh, and
unpleasant Color; conclude then that Blue and Vermillion are of a contrary
Nature. And the same may be said of other Colors of which you make the
experiment. And to clear that matter once for all, (see the Conclusion of the
332d. Remark, where I have taken occasion to speak of the force and quality of
every Capital Color,) yet you may neglect this Precept, when your Piece
consists but of one or two Figures, and when amongst a great number you would
make some one Figure more remarkable than the rest. One I say, which is one of
the most considerable of the Subject, which otherwise you cannot distinguish
from the rest. Titian in his triumph of Bacchus, having placed Ariadne on one
of the Borders of the Picture, and not being able for that reason to make her
remarkable by the brightness of Light, which he was to keep in the middle of
his Picture, gave her a Scarf of a Vermillion Color, upon a blue Drapery, as
well to loosen her from his ground, which was a blue Sea, as because she is one
of the principal Figures of his Subject, upon which he desired to attract the
Eye. Paulo Veronese, in his Marriage of Canaa, because Christ who is the
principal Figure of the Subject, is carried somewhat into the depth of the
Picture, and that he could not make him distinguishable by the strength of the
Lights and Shadows, has clothed him with Vermillion and Blue, thereby to
conduct the Sight to that Figure.

The hostile Colors may be so much the more allied to each other, the more you
mix them with other Colors, which mutually sympathize; and which agree with
those Colors, which you desire to reconcile.

It Is labor in vain to paint a High-noon, 365.
etc. He said in another place, Endeavor after that which aids your Art, and
is suitable to it, and shun whatsoever is repugnant: it is the 59th. Precept. If
the Painter would arrive to the end he has proposed, which is to deceive the
^^ight, he must make choice of such a Nature, as agrees with the weakness of
his Colors; because his Colors cannot accommodate themselves to every sort of
Nature. This Rule is particularly to be observed, and well considered, by those
who paint Landtschapes.

Let the Field or Ground of the Picture, 378.
etc. The reason of it is, that we are to avoid the meeting of those Colors,
which have an Antipathy to each other, because they offend the Sight, so that
this Rule is proved sufficiently by the 41st. which tells us, that two contrary
Extremities are never to touch each other, whether it be in Color, or in
Light, but that there ought to be a mean betwixt them, which partakes of both.

Let your Colors be lively, 382.
and yet not look (according to the Painters Proverb) as if they had been
sprinkled with Meal, etc. Donner dans la farine, is a Phrase amongst Painters,
which perfectly expresses what it means, which is to paint with clear, or
bright Colors, and dull Colors together; for being so mingled, they give no
more life to the Figures, than if they had been rubbed with Meal. They who make
their flesh Colors very white, and their Shadows gray or inclining to green,
fall into this inconvenience. Red Colors in the Shadows of the most delicate
or finest Flesh, contribute wonderfully to make them lively, shining and
natural; but they are to be used with the same discretion, that Titian, Paul
Veronese, Rubens and Van Dyck, have taught us by their example.

To preserve the Colors fresh, we must paint by putting in more Colors, and
not by rubbing them in, after they are once laid; and if it could be done, they
should be laid just in their proper places, and not be any more touched, when
they are once so placed; it would be yet better, because the Freshness of the
Colors is tarnish'd and lost, by vexing them with the continual Drudgery of
Daubing.

All they who have colored well, have had yet another Maxim to maintain their
Colors fresh and flourishing, which was to make use of white Grounds, upon
which they painted, and oftentimes at the first Stroke, without retouching any
thing, and without employing new Colors. Rubens always used this way; and I
have seen Pictures from the hand of that great Person painted up at once, which
were of a wonderful Vivacity.

The reason why they made use of those kind of Grounds, is, because white as
well preserves a Brightness, under the Transparency of Colors, which hinders
the Air from altering the whiteness of the Ground, as that it likewise repairs
the injuries which they receive from the Air, so that the Ground and the
Colors assist and preserve each other. It Is for this reason that glazed
Colors have a Vivacity which can never be imitated by the most lively and most
brillant Colors, because according to the common way, the different Teints are
simply laid on each in its place one after another. So true it is, that white
with other strong Colors, with which we paint at once that which we intend to
glaze, are as it were, the Life, the Spirit, and the Luster of it. The Ancients
most certainly have found, that white Grounds were much the best, because,
notwithstanding that inconvenience, which their Eyes received from that Color,
yet they did not forbear the use of it; as Galen testifies in his tenth Book of
the use of the parts. "Painters, says he, when they work upon their white
Grounds, place before them dark Colors, and others mixed with blue and green,
to recreate their Eyes, because white is a glareing Color, which wearies and
pains the Sight more than any other." I know not the reason why the use of it
is left off at present, if it be not that in our days there are few Painters
who are curious in their Coloring, or that the first Strokes which are begun
upon white, are not seen soon enough, and that a more than French Patience is
required to wait till it be accomplished; and the Ground, which by its
whiteness tarnishes the Luster of the other Colors, must be entirely covered
to make the whole work appear pleasingly.

Let the parts which are nearest to us and most raised, 383.
etc. The reason of this is, that upon a flat superficies, and as much united
as a Cloth can be, when it is strained, the least Body is very appearing, and
gives a heightning to the place which it possesses; do not therefore load those
places with Colors, which you would make to turn; but let those be well
loaded, which you would have come out of the Canvass.

Let there be so much Harmony or Consent in the Masses of the Pictures, 385.
that all the shadowings may appear as if they were but one, etc. He has said
in another place, that after great Lights, great Shadows are necessary, which
he calls Reposes. What he means by the present Rule, is this, That whatsoever
is found in those great Shadows, should partake of the Colors of one another,
so that the different Colors which are well distinguished in the Lights seem
to be but one in the Shadows, by their great Union.

Let the whole Picture be made of one Piece, 386.
etc. That is to say, of one and the same Continuity of Work, and as if the
Picture had been painted up all at once; the Latin says all of one Pallet.

The Looking Glass will instruct you, 387.
etc. The Painter must have a principal Respect to the Masses, and to the
Effect of the whole together. The Looking-Glass distances the Objects, and by
consequence gives us only to see the Masses, in which all the little parts are
confounded. The Evening, when the Night approaches, will make you better
understand this observation, but not so commodiously, for the proper time to
make it, lasts but a quarter of an hour, and the Looking-Glass may be useful
all the day.

Since the Mirror is the rule and Master of all Painters, as showing them their
faults by distancing the Objects, we may conclude that the Picture which makes
not a good effect at a distance cannot be well done; and a Painter must never
finish his Picture, before he has examined it at some reasonable distance, or
with a Looking-Glass, whether the Masses of the Lights and Shadows, and the
Bodies of the Colors be well distributed. Giorgione and Correggio have made
use of this method.

As for a Portrait, 393.
or Pictures by the Life, etc. The end of Portraits is not so precisely as some
have imagined, to give a smiling and pleasing Air together with the
resemblance; this is indeed somewhat, but not enough. It consists in expressing
the true temper of those persons which it represents, and to make known their
Physiognomy. If the Person whom you draw, for example, be naturally sad, you
are to beware of giving him any Gayety, which would always be a thing which is
foreign to his Countenanc. If he or she be merry, you are to make that good
Humor appear by the expressing of those parts where it acts, and where it
shows it self. If the Person be grave and majestical, the Smiles or Laughing,
which is too sensible, will take off from that Majesty and make it look
childish and undecent. In short, the Painter, who has a good Genius must make a
true Discernment of all these things, and if he understands Physiognomy, it
will be more easy to him, and he will succeed better than another. Pliny tells
us, " That Apelles made his Pictures so very like, that a certain Physiognomist
and Fortuneteller, (as it is related by Appion the Grammarian) foretold by
looking on them the very time of their Deaths, whom those Pictures represented,
or at what time their Death happened, if such persons were already dead."

You are to paint the most tenderly that possibly you can, 403.
etc. Not so as to make your Colors die by force of tormenting them, but that
you should mix them as hastily as you can, and not retouch the same place, if
conveniently you can avoid it.

Large Lights, 403.
etc. It Is in vain to take pains if you cannot preserve large Lights, because
without them, your work will never make a good effect at a distance; and also
because little Lights are confused and effaced, proportionably, as you are at a
distance from the Picture. This was the perpetual Maxim of Correggio.

Ought to have somewhat of Greatness in them, 417.
and their Out-lines to be noble, etc. As the Pieces of Antiquity will
evidently show us.

422.
There is nothing more pernicious to a Youth, etc. It Is common to place our
selves under the Discipline of a Master of whom we have a good opinion, and
whose manner we are apt to embrace with ease, which takes root more deeply in
us, and augments the more we see him work, and the more we copy after him. This
happens oftentimes to that degree, and makes so great an Impression in the Mind
of the Scholar, that he cannot give his approbation to any other manner
whatsoever, and believes there is no man under the Cope of Heaven, who is so
knowing as his Master.

But what is most remarakble in this point is, that nature appears to us always
like that manner which we love, and in which we have been taught, which is just
like a Glass through which we behold Objects, and which communicates its Color
to them without our perceiving it. After I have said this, you may see of what
consequence is the choice of a good Master, and of following in our beginning
the manner of those who have come nearest to Nature. And how much injury do you
think have the ill manners which have been in France, done to the Painters of
that Nation, and what hindrance have they been to the knowledge of what is well
done, or of arriving to what is so when once we know it. The Italians say to
those whom they see infected with an ill manner, which they are not able to
forsake, "If you knew just nothing, you would soon learn something."

Search whatsoever is aiding to your Art and convenient, 433.
and avoid those things which are repugnant to it, etc. This is an admirable
Rule; a Painter ought to have it perpetually present in his Mind and Memory. It
resolves those difficulties which the Rules beget; it loosens his hands, and
assists his understanding. In short, this is the Rule which sets the Painter at
liberty, because it teaches him that he ought not to subject himself servilely,
and be bound like an Apprentice to the Rules of his Art; but that the Rules of
his Art ought to be Subject to him, and not hinder him from following the
Dictates of his Genius, which is superior to them.

Bodies of diverse Natures which are aggroupp'd or combined together are
agreeable and pleasant to the Sight, 434.
etc. As Flowers, Fruits, Animals, Skins, Sattins, Velvets, beautiful Flesh,
Works of Silver, Armors, Instruments of Music, Ornaments of Ancient
Sacrifices, and many other pleasing Diversities which may present themselves to
the Painters imagination. It Is most certain that the diversity of Objects
recreates the Sight, when they are without confusion; and when they diminish
nothing of the Subject on which we work. Experience teaches us, that the Eye
grows weary with poring perpetually on the same thing, not only on Pictures,
but even on Nature it self. For who is he who would not be tired in the Walks
of a long Forest, or with beholding a large plain which is naked of Trees, or
in the Sight of a Ridge of Mountains, which instead of Pleasure, give us only
the view of Heights and Bottoms. Thus to content and fill the Eye of the
Understanding, the best Authors have had the Address to sprinkle their Works
with pleasing Digressions, with which they recreate the Minds of Readers.
Discretion, in this as in all other things is the surest Guide: and as tedious
Digressions, which wander from their Subject, are impertinent, so the Painter
who under Pretense of diverting the Eyes, would fill his Picture with such
varieties as alter the truth of the History, would make a ridiculous Piece of
Painting, and a mere Gallimaufry of his Work.

As also those things which appear to be performed with ease, 435.
etc. This ease attracts our Eyes, and Spirits so much the more, because it is
to be presumed that a noble work, which appears so easy to us, is the product
of a skillful Hand which is Master of its Art. It was in this part, that
Apelles found himself superior to Protogenes, when he blamed him, for not
knowing when to lay down his Pencil (and as I may almost say) to make an end of
finishing his Piece. And it was on this account he plainly said, " That nothing
was more prejudicial to Painters than too much exactness; and that the greatest
part of them knew not when they had done enough:" as we have likewise a
Proverb, which says, An Englishman never knows when he is well. It Is true, that
the word enough is very difficult to understand. What you have to do, is to
consider your Subject thoroughly, and in what manner you intend to treat it
according to your rules, and the Force of your Genius; after this you are to
work with all the ease and all the speed you can, without breaking your head so
very much, and being so very industrious in starting Scruples to your self, and
creating difficulties in your work. But it is impossible to have this Facility
without possessing perfectly all the Precepts of the Art, and to have made it
habitual to you. For ease consists in making precisely that work which you
ought to make, and to set every thing in its proper place with speed and
Readiness, which cannot be done without the Rules, for they are the assured
means of conducting you to the end that you design with Pleasure. It Is then
most certain, (though against the opinion of many,) that the Rules give
Facility, Quiet of Mind, and readiness of Hand to the flowest Genius, and that
the same Rules increase, and guide that ease in those who have already received
it at their Birth from the happy influence of their Stars.

From whence it follows that we may consider Facility two several ways, either
simply, as Diligence and a readiness of Mind and of the Hand; or as a
Disposition in the Mind, to remove readily all those difficulties which can
arise in the work. The first proceeds from an active temper full of Fire; and
the second from a true knowledge and full possession of infallible Rules; the
first is pleasing, but it is not always without Anxiety, because it often leads
us astray, and on the contrary, the last makes us act with a Repose of Mind,
and wonderful Tranquillity; because it ascertains us of the goodness of our
work. It Is a great advantage to possess the first, but it is the height of
perfection to have both in that manner which Rubens and Van Dyck possessed
them, excepting the part of Design or Drawing, which both too much neglected.

Those who say that the Rules are so far from giving us this Facility, that on
the contrary they puzzle and perplex the Mind and tie the hand, are generally
such people who have passed half their lives in an ill practice of Painting,
the habit of which is grown so inveterate in them, that to change it by the
Rules, is to take as it were their Pencils out of their hands, and to put them
out of condition of doing any thing; in the same manner as we make a
Countryman dumb whom we will not allow to speak, but by the Rules of Grammar.

Observe, if you please, that the Facility and Diligence of which I spoke,
consists not in that which we call bold strokes and a free handling of the
Pencil, if it makes not a great effect at a distance. That sort of Freedom
belongs rather to a Writing-Master than a Painter. I say yet further, that it is
almost impossible that things which are painted should appear true and natural,
where we observe these sorts of bold strokes. And all those who have come
nearest to nature, have never used that manner of Painting, those tender Hairs,
and those hatching strokes of the Pencil, which make a kind of minced meat in
Painting, are very fine I must confess, but they are never able to deceive the
Sight.

Nor till you have present in your Mind a perfect Idea of your work, 442.
etc. If you will have pleasure in Painting, you ought to have so well
considered the economy of your work, that it may be entirely made and disposed
in your head before it be begun upon the Cloth. You must I say, foresee the
effect of the Grouppes, the ground and the Lights and Shadows of every thing,
the Harmony of the Colors, and the intelligence of all the Subject, in such a
manner, that whatsoever you shall put upon the Cloth, may be only a Copy of
what is in your Mind. If you make use of this Conduct, you will not be put to
the trouble of so often changing and rechanging.

Let the Eye be satisfied in the first place, 443.
even against and above all other Reasons, etc. This passage has a respect to
some particular Licenses which a Painter ought to take: And as I despair not to
treat this matter more at large; I adjourn the Reader to the first opportunity
which I can get for his farther satisfaction on this point to the best of my
Ability: but in general he may hold for certain, that those Licenses are good
which contribute to deceive the Sight, without corrupting the truth of the
Subject on which the Painter is to work.

Profit your self by the Counsels of the knowing, 445.
etc. Parrhasius and Cliton thought themselves much obliged to Socrates for the
knowledge which he gave them of the Passions. See their Dialogue in Xenophon
toward the end of the third Book of Memoirs: 8. 20.
"They who the most willingly bear reproof, says Pliny the Younger, are the
very men in whom we find more to commend than in other people." Lysippus was
extremely pleased when Apelles told him his opinion; and Apelles as much, when
Lysippus told him his. 5. 8.
That which Praxiteles said of Nicias in Pliny, shows the Soul of an
accomplished and an humble man. "Praxiteles being asked which of all his Works
he valued most? Those, says he, which Nicias has retouch'd." So much account he
made of his Criticisms and his opinions. You know the common practice of
Apelles, when he had finished any work, he exposed it to the Sight of all
Passengers, and concealed himself to hear the Censure of his faults, with the
Prospect of making his advantage of the Informations which unknowingly they
gave him. Being sensible that the people would examine his works more
rigorously than himself, and would not forgive the least mistake.

The Opinions and Counsels of many together are always preferable to the advice
of one single person. Tuscul. lib. 5.
And Cicero wonders that any are besotted on their own Productions, and say to
one another, Very good, if your works please you, mine are not unpleasing to
me. In effect there are many who through Presumption or out of Shame to be
reprehended, never let their works be seen. But there is nothing can be of
worse consequence; for the disease is nourished and increases, Georg. 3. 1. 5.
says Virgil, while it is concealed. There are none but Fools, says Horace, who
out of Shamefacedness hide their Ulcers, which if shown might easily be healed.
Stultorum incurata malus pudor ulcera celat: Ep. 16.
There are others who have not altogether so much of this foolish Bashfulness,
and who ask every ones opinion with Prayers and Earnestness; but if you freely
and ingenuously give them notice of their Faults, they never fail to make some
pitiful excuse for them, or which is worse, they take in ill part the Service
which you thought you did them, which they but seemingly desired of you, and
out of an established Custom amongst the greatest part of Painters. If you
desire to get your self any honor, and acquire a Reputation by your works,
there is no surer way than to show them to persons of good Sense, and chiefly
to those who are Critics in the Art; and to take their Counsel with the same
Mildness and the same Sincerity, as you desired them to give it you. You must
also be industrious to discover the opinion of your Enemies, which is commonly
the truest, for you may be assured, that they will give you no quarter, and
allow nothing to complaisance.

But if you have no knowing Friend, 449.
etc. Quinctilian gives the reason of this, when he says, " That the best means
to correct our faults, is doubtless this, To remove our designs out of Sight,
for some space of time, and not to look upon our Pictures, to the end, that
after this interval, we may look on them as it were with other Eyes, and as a
new work which was of another hand, and not our own." Our own Productions do
but too much flatter us; they are always too pleasing, and it is impossible not
to be fond of them at the moment of their Conception. They are Children of a
tender age, which are not capable of drawing our Hatred on them. It Is said,
That Apes, as soon as they have brought their Young into the World, keep their
Eyes continually fastened on them, and are never weary of admiring their
Beauty: so amorous is Nature of whatsoever she produces.

To the end that he may cultivate those Talents which make his Genius, 458.
etc. Qui sua metitur pondera, far potest. "That we may undertake nothing
beyond our forces, Offic. B. 1.
we must endeavor to know them." " On this Prudence our reputation depends.
Cicero calls it a good Grace, because it makes a man seen in his greatest
Luster. 1 Off.
"'It Is, ( says he) a becoming Grace, which we shall easily make appear, if we
are careful to cultivate that which Nature has given us in propriety, and made
our own, provided it be no Vice or Imperfection: we ought to undertake nothing
which is repugnant to Nature in general; and when we have paid her this duty,
we are bound so religiously to follow our own Nature, that though many things
which are more serious and more important, present themselves to us, yet we are
always to conform our Studies and our Exercises to our natural Inclinations. It
avails nothing to dispute against Nature, and think to obtain what she refuses;
for then we eternally follow what we can never reach; for, as the Proverb says,
There is nothing can please, nothing can be graceful which we enterprise in
spite of Minerva; that is to say, in spite of Nature. When we have considered
all these things attentively, it will then be necessary, that every man should
regard that in particular, which Nature has made his portion, and that he
should cultivate it with care; it is not his business to give himself the
trouble of trying whether it will become him to put on the Nature of another
man; or as one would say, to act the person of another: there is nothing which
can more become us, than what is properly the Gift of Nature. Let every one
therefore endeavor to understand his own Talent, and without flattering
himself, let him make a true judgment of his own Virtues, and his own Defects
and Vices; that he may not appear to have less judgment than the Comedians, who
do not always choose the best Plays, but those which are best for them; that is,
those which are most in the compass of their acting. Thus we are to fix on
those things for which we have the strongest Inclination. And if it sometimes
happen that we are forced by necessity to apply our selves to such other things
to which we are no ways inclined; we must bring it so about by our Care and
Industry, that if we perform them not very well, at least we may not do them so
very ill as to be shamed by them: we are not so much to strain our selves to
make those Virtues appear in us which really we have not, as to avoid those
Imperfections which may dishonor us." These are the Thoughts and the Words of
Cicero, which I have translated, retrenching only such things as were of no
concernment to my Subject: I was not of opinion to add any thing, and the
Reader I doubt not will find his satisfaction in them.

While you meditate on these Truths, 464.
and observe them diligently, etc. There is a great Connection betwixt this
Precept and that other, which tells you, That you are to pass no day without
drawing a line. It Is impossible to become an able Artist, without making your
Art habitual to you: and it is impossible to gain an exact Habitude, without an
infinite number of Acts, and without perpetual Practice. In all Arts the Rules
of them are learned in little time; but the perfection is not acquired without
a long Practice and a severe Diligence. We never saw that Laziness produced any
thing which was excellent, Diss. 34.
says Maximus Tyrius: and Quinctilian tells us, That the Arts draw their
beginning from Nature; the want we often have of them causes us to search the
means of becoming able in them, and exercise makes us entirely Masters of them.

The morning is the best and most proper part of the day, 466.
etc. Because then the Imagination is not clouded with the Vapors of Meat, nor
distracted by Visits which are not usually made in the morning. And the Mind by
the Sleep of the foregoing Night, is refreshed and recreated from the Toyls of
former Studies. Malherbe says well to this purpose. Le plus beau de nos jours,
est dans leur matinee.
The sprightly Morn is the best part of Day.


Let no day pass over you without drawing a line, 468.
etc. That is to say, without working, without giving some strokes of the
Pencil or the Crayon. This was the Precept of Apelles; and it is of so much the
more necessity, because Painting is an Art of much length and time, and is not
to be learned without great Practice. Michael Angelo at the Age of fourscore
years, said, That he learned something every day.

Be ready to put into your Table Book, 473.
etc. As it was the custom of Titian and the Carraches; there are yet remaining
in the hands of some who are curious in Painting; many thoughts and
observations which those great Men have made on Paper, and in their Table-books
which they carried continually about them.

Wine and good Cheer are no great Friends to Painting, 475.
they serve only to recreate the Mind when it is oppressed and spent with
Labor, etc. "During the time, says Pliny, that Protogenes was drawing the
Picture of Jalysus, which was the best of all his Works, he took no other
nourishment than Lupines mixed with a little water, which served him both for
Meat and Drink, for fear of clogging his Imagination by the Luxury of his
Food." Michael Angelo, while he was drawing his day of Judgment, fed only on
Bread and Wine at Dinner. And Vasari observes in his life, that he was so sober
that he slept but little, and that he often rose in the Night to work, as being
not disturbed by the Vapors of his thin Repasts.

But delights in the liberty which belongs to the Batchelors Estate, 478.
etc. We never see large and beautiful and well-tasted Fruits proceeding from
a Tree which is encompassed round, and choked with Thorns and Briars. Marriage
draws a world of business on our hands, subjects us to Lawsuits, and loads us
with multitudes of domestic Cares, which are as so many Thorns that encompass
a Painter, and hinder him from producing his works in that perfection of which
otherwise he is capable. Raphael, Michael Angelo, and Hannibal Carracci were
never married: and amongst the Ancient Painters we find none recorded for being
married, but only Apelles, to whom Alexander the Great made a present of his
own Mistress Campaspe; which yet I would have understood without offense to the
Institution of Marriage, for that calls down many Blessings upon Families, by
the Carefulness of a virtuous Wife. If Marriage be in general a remedy against
Concupiscence, it is doubly so in respect of Painters; who are more frequently
under the occasions of Sin than other Men; because they are under a frequent
necessity to seeing Nature barefaced. Let every one examine his own strength
upon this point: but let him prefer the interest of his Soul to that of his
Art and of his Fortune.

Painting naturally withdraws from noise and tumult, 480.
etc. I have said at the end of the first Remark, that both Poetry and Painting
were upheld by the strength of Imagination. Now there is nothing which warms it
more than Repose and Solitude: Because in that estate, the Mind being freed
from all sorts of business, and in a kind of Sanctuary undisturbed by vexatious
Visits, is more capable of forming noble Thoughts and of Application to its
Studies. Carmina secessum scribentis and otia quaerunt.
Good Verse, Recess and Solitude requires:
And Ease from Cares, and undisturbed Desires.
We may properly say the same of Painting, by reason of its conformity with
Poetry, as I have shown in the first Remark.

Let not the covetous design of growing rich, 484.
etc. We read in Pliny, 1500. l.
that Nicias refused Sixty Talents from King Attalus, and rather chose to make
a free Gift of his Picture to his Country. "I inquired of a prudent man,
Petron. Ar biter.
( says a grave Author) in what times those noble Pictures were made which now
we see; and desired him to explain to me some of their Subjects, which I did
not well understand. I asked him likewise the reason of that great negligence
which is now visible amongst Painters: And from whence it proceeded, that the
most beautiful Arts were now buried in Oblivion, and principally Painting, a
faint Shadow of which is at present remaining to us. To which he thus replied,
That the immoderate desire of Riches had produced this change: For of old, when
naked Virtue had her Charms, the noble Arts then flourished in their Vigor:
and if there was any contest amongst men, it was only who should be the first
Discoverer of what might be of advantage to posterity. Lysippus and Myron,
those renowned Sculptors, who could give a Soul to Brass, left no Heirs, no
Inheritance behind them, because they were more careful of acquiring Fame than
Riches. But as for us of this present Age, it seems by the manner of our
Conduct, that we upbraid Antiquity for being as covetous of Virtue as we are of
Vice: wonder not so much therefore, if Painting has lost its Strength and
Vigor, because many are now of opinion, that a heap of Gold is much more
beautiful than all the Pictures and Statues of Apelles and Phidias, and all
the noble Performances of Greece."

I would not exact so great an act of Abstinence from our modern Painters, for
I am not ignorant that the hope of gain is a wonderful sharp spur in Arts, and
that it gives industry to the Artist; from whence it was that Iuvenal said even
of the Greeks themselves, who were the Inventors of Painting, and who first
understood all the Graces of it and its whole perfection; Graeculus esuriens,
in Coelum, jusseris, ibit.
A hungry Greek, if bidden, scales the Skies.
But I could heartily wish, that the same hope which flatters them did not also
corrupt them: and did not snatch out of their hands a lame, imperfect Piece,
rudely daubed over with too little Reflection and too much haste.

The qualities requisite to form an excellent Painter, 487.
etc. It Is to be confessed that very few Painters have those qualities which
are required by our Author, because there are very few, who are able Painters.
There was a time when only they who were of noble Blood, were permitted to
exercise this Art; because it is to be presumed, that all these Ingredients of
a good Painter, are not ordinarily found in men of vulgar Birth. And in all
appearance, we may hope that though there be no Edict in France which takes
away the Liberty of Painting from those to whom Nature has refused the Honor
of being born Gentlemen, yet at least that the Royal Academy will admit
hence-forward only such who being endu'd with all the good Qualities and the
Talents which are required for Painting, those endowments may be to them
instead of an honorable Birth. It Is certain, that which debases Painting, and
makes it descend to the vilest and most despicable kind of Trade, is the great
multitude of Painters who have neither noble Souls nor any Talent for the Art,
nor even so much as common Sense. The Origin of this great Evil, is that there
have always been admitted into the Schools of Painting all sorts of Children
promiscuously, without Examination of them, and without observing for some
convenient space of time, if they were conducted to this Art by their inward
Disposition, and all necessary Talents, rather than by a foolish Inclination of
their own, or by the Avarice of their Relations, who put them to Painting, as a
Trade which they believe to be somewhat more gainful than another. The
qualities properly required, are these following.

A good Judgment, That they made do nothing against Reason and Verisimility.

A docible Mind, That they may profit by instructions, and receive without
Arrogance the opinion of every one, and principally of knowing Men.

A noble Heart, That they may propose Glory to themselves, and Reputation
rather than Riches.

A Sublimity, and Reach of Thought, To conceive radily, to produce beautiful
Ideas, and to work on their Subjects nobly and after a lofty manner, wherein we
may observe somewhat that is delicate, ingenious and uncommon.

A warm and vigorous Fancy, To arrive a least to some degree of Perfection,
without being tired with the Pains and Study which are required in Painting.

Health, To resist the dissipation of Spirits, which are apt to be consumed by
Pains-taking.

Youth, Because Painting requires a great Experience and a long Practice.

Beauty or Handsomeness, Because a Painter paints himself in all his Pictures,
and Nature loves to produce her own Likeness.

A convenient Fortune, That he may give his whole time to study, and may work
cheerfully, without being haunted with the dreadful Image of Poverty, ever
present to his Mind.

Labor, Because the Speculation is nothing without the Practice.

A Love for his Art, We suffer nothing in the Labor which is pleasing to us:
or if it happen that we suffer, we are pleased with the Pain.

And to be under the Discipline of a knowing Master, etc. Because all depends
on the Beginnings, and because commonly they take the manner of their Master,
and are formed according to his Gusto: See Verse 422, and the Remark upon it.
All these good qualities are insignificant and unprofitable to the Painter, if
some outward dispositions are wanting to him. By which I mean favorable times,
such as are times of Peace, which is the Nurse of all noble Arts; there must
also some fair occasion offer to make their Skill manifest by the performance
of some considerable Work within their power: and a Protector, who must be a
Person of Authority, one who takes upon himself their care of the Fortune, at
least in some measure; and knows how to speak well of them in time and place
convenient. It Is of much importance, says the Younger Pliny, in what times
Virtue appears. And there is no Wit, howsoever excellent it may be, which can
make it self immediately known. Time and Opportunity are necessary to it, and a
person who can assist us with his favor and be a Moecenas to us.

And Life is so short, 496.
that it is not sufficient for so long an Art, etc. Not only Painting but all
other Arts considered in themselves require almost an infinite time to possess
them perfectly. It Is in this Sense that Hippocrates begins his Aphorisms with
this saying, That Art is long and Life is short. But if we consider Arts, as
they are in us, and according to a certain degree of Perfection, sufficient
enough, to make it known that we possess them above the common sort, and are
comparatively better than most others, we shall not find that Life is too short
on that account, provided our time be well employed. It Is true, that Painting
is an Art which is difficult and a great undertaking. But they who are endu'd
with the qualities that are necessary to it, have no reason to be discouraged
by that apprehension. Veget. de re Milit. lib. 2.
Labor always appears difficult before it is tried. The passages by Sea, and
the Knowledge of the Stars, have been thought impossible, which notwithstanding
have been found and compassed, and that with ease by those who endeavored
after them. Lib. 1. de fin.
It Is a shameful thing, says, Cicero, to be weary of Enquiry, when what we
search is excellent. That which causes us to lose most of our time, is the
repugnance which we naturally have to Labor, and the Ignorance, the Malice,
and the Negligence of our Masters: we waste much of our time in walking and
talking to no manner of purpose, in making and receiving idle Visits, in Play
and other Pleasures which we indulge, without reckoning those hours which we
lose in the too great care of our Bodies; and in Sleep, which we often lengthen
out till the day is far advanced: and thus we pass that Life which we reckon to
be short, because we count by the years which we have lived, rather than by
those which we have employed in study. It Is evident that they who lived before
us, have passed through all those difficulties to arrive at that Perfection
which we discover in their Works, though they wanted some of the Advantages
which we possess, and that none had labored for them as they have done for us.
For it is certain that those Ancient Masters, and those of the last preceding
Ages, have left such beautiful Patterns to us, that a better and more happy
Age can never be than ours; and chiefly under the Reign of our present King,
who encourages all the noble Arts, and spares nothing to give them the share of
that Felicity of which he is so bountiful to his Kingdom: and to conduct them
with all manner of advantages to that supreme Degree of Excellence, which may
be worthy of such a Master, and of that Sovereign Love which he has for them.
Let us therefore put our hands to the work, without being discouraged by the
length of time, which is requisite for our Studies; but let us seriously
contrive how to proceed with the best Order, and to follow a ready, diligent,
and well understood Method.

Take Courage therefore, 500.
O ye noble Youths! you legitimate Offspring of Minerva, who are born under the
influence of a happy Planet. etc. Our Author intends not here to sow in a
barren, ungrateful Ground, where his Precepts can bear no Fruit: He speaks to
young, Painters, but to such only who are born under the Influence of a happy
Star; that is to say, those who have received from Nature the necessary
dispositions of becoming great in the Art of Painting: and not to those who
follow that Study through Caprice or by a sottish Inclination, or for Lucre,
who are either incapable of receiving the Precepts, or will make a bad use of
them when received.

You will do well, 509.
etc. Our Author speaks not here of the first Rudiments of Design; as for
example, The management of the Pencil, the just relation which the Copy ought
to have to the Original, etc. He supposes, that before he begins his Studies,
one ought to have a Facility of Hand to imitate the best Designs, the noblest
Pictures and Statues, that in few words he should have made himself a Key,
wherewith to open the Closet of Minerva, and to enter into that Sacred Place,
where those fair Treasures are to be found in all abundance, and even offer
themselves to us, to make our advantage of them by our Care and Genius.

You are to begin with Geometry, 509.
etc. Because that is the Ground of Perspective, without which nothing is to be
done in Painting: besides, Geometry is of great use in Architecture, and in all
things which are of its dependence; it is particularly necessary for Sculptors.

Set your self on designing after the Ancient Greeks, 510.
etc. Because they are the Rule of Beauty, and give us a good Gusto: For which
reason it is very proper to tie our selves to them, I mean generally speaking;
but the particular Fruit which we gather from them, is what follows. To learn
by heart four several Airs of Heads: of a Man, a Woman, a Child, and an Old
Man. I mean those which have the most general Approbation; for example those of
the Apollo, of the Venus de Medices, of the little Nero, (that is, when he was
a Child,) and of the God Tiber. It would be a good means of learning them, if
when you have designed one after the Statue it self, you design it immediately
after from your own Imagination, without seeing it; and afterward examine, if
your own work be conformable to the first Design. Thus exercising your self on
the same Head, and turning it on ten or twelve sides; you must do the same to
the Feet, to the Hands, to the whole Figure. But to understand the Beauty of
these Figures, and the justness of their Outlines, it will be necessary to
learn Anatomy: when I speak of four Heads and four Figures, I pretend not to
hinder any one from designing many others after this first Study, but my
meaning is only to show by this, that a great Variety of things undertaken at
the same time, dissipates the Imagination, and hinders all the Profit; in the
same manner as too many sorts of Meat are not easily digested, but corrupt in
the Stomach instead of nourishing the parts.

And cease not Day or Night from Labor, 511.
till by your continual Practice, etc. In the first Principles, the Students
have not so much need of Precepts as of Practice: And the Antique Statues being
the rule of Beauty, you may exercise your selves in imitating them without
apprehending any consequence of ill Habits and bad Ideas, which can be formed
in the Soul of a young Beginner. It Is not, as in the School of a Master, whose
Manner and whose Gust are ill, and under whose Discipline the Scholar spoils
himself the more he exercises.

And when afterward your Judgment shall grow stronger, 514.
etc. It Is necessary to have the Soul well formed, and to have a right Judgment
to make the Application of his rules upon good Pictures, and to take nothing
but the good. For there are some who imagine, that whatsoever they find in the
Picture of a Master, who has acquired Reputation, must of necessity be
excellent; and these kind of people never fail when they copy to follow the bad
as well as the good things; and to observe them so much the more, because they
seem to be extraordinary and out of the common road of others, so that at last
they come to make a Law and Precept of them. You ought not also to imitate what
is truly good in a crude and gross Manner, so that it may be found out in your
works, that whatsoever Beauties there are in them, come from such or such a
Master. But in this imitate the Bees, who pick from every Flower that which
they find most proper in it to make Honey. In the same manner a young Painter
should collect from many Pictures what he finds to be the most beautiful, and
from his several Collections form that Manner which thereby he makes his own.

A certain Grace which was wholly natural and peculiar to him, 520.
etc. Raphael in this may be compared to Apelles, who in praising the Works of
other Painters, said That Gracefulness was wanting to them: and that without
Vanity he might say, it was his own peculiar portion. See the Remark on the
218th. Verse.

Julio Romano, 522.
( educated from his Childhood in the Country of the Muses,) etc. He means in
the Studies of the belle lettere, and above all in Poesy, which he infinitely
loved. It appears, that he formed his Ideas and made his Gust from reading
Homer; and in that imitated Zeuxis and Polignotus, who, as Tyrius Maximus
relates, treated their Subjects in their Pictures, as Homer did in his Poetry.

To these Remarks I have annexed the Opinions of our Author upon the best and
chiefest Painters of the two foregoing Ages. He tells you heartily and briefly
what were their Excellencies, and what their Failings.

I pass in Silence many things which will be more amply treated in the ensuing
Commentary. 541.
It Is evident by this, how much we lose, and what damage we have sustained by
our Authors death, since those Commentaries had undoubtedly contained things of
high Value and of great instruction.

To entrust with the Muses, 544.
etc. That is to say, to write in Verse, Poetry being under their Protection,
and consecrated to them.

THE JUDGMENT OF Charles Alphonse du Fresnoy, On the Works of the Principal and
Best PAINTERS of the two last Ages.
PAINTING was in its Perfection amongst the Greeks. The principal Schools were
at Sycion, afterward at Rhodes, at Athens, and at Corinth, and at last in
Rome. Wars and Luxury having overthrown the Roman Empire, it was totally
extinguished, together with all the noble Arts, the Studies of Humanity, and
the other Sciences.

It began to appear again in the Year 1450 amongst some Painters of Florence,
of which DOMENICO GHIRLANDAIO was one, who was Master to Michael Angelo, and
had some kind of Reputation, though his manner was Gothique and very dry.

MICHAEL ANGELO his Scholar, flourished in the times of Julius the second, Leo
the tenth, Paul the third, and of eight successive Popes. He was a Painter, a
Sculptor, and an Architect, both Civil and Military. The Choice which he made
of his Postures was not always beautiful or pleasing: His Gust of Designing
was not the finest, nor his Out-lines the most elegant: The Folds of his
Draperies, and the Ornaments of his Habits, were neither noble nor graceful.
He was not a little fantastical and extravagant in his Compositions; he was
bold even to Rashness, in taking Liberties against the Rules of Perspective.
His Coloring is not over true or very pleasant. He knew not the Artifice of
the Lights and Shadows: But he designed more learnedly, and better understood
all the Knittings of the Bones, with the Office and Situation of the Muscles,
than any of the modern Painters. There appears a certain Air of Greatness and
Severity in his Figures, in both which he has oftentimes succeeded: But above
the rest of his Excellencies, was his wonderful skill in Architecture, wherein
he has not only surpassed all the Moderns, but even the Ancients also: The St.
Peter's of Rome, the St. John's of Florence, the Capitol, the Palazzo Farnese,
and his own House, are sufficient Testimonies of it. His Scholars were Marcello
Venusto, Andrea de Vaterra, Il Rosso, Georgio Vasari, Fra. Bastiano, (who
commonly painted for him) and many other Florentines.

PIETRO PERUGINO designed with sufficient knowledge of Nature, but he is dry
and his manner little. His Scholar was

RAPHAEL SANTIO, who was born on Good Friday, in the Year 1483, and died on
Good Friday, in the Year 1520: So that he lived only 37 years complete. He
surpassed all modern Painters, because he possessed more of the excellent parts
of Painting than any other; and it is believed, that he equaled the Ancients,
excepting only that he designed not naked Bodies with so much Learning, as
Michael Angelo: But his Gust of Designing is purer and much better. He painted
not with so good, so full, and so graceful a manner as Correggio; nor has he
any thing of the Contrast of the Lights and Shadows, or so strong and free a
Coloring, as Titian; but he had a better disposition in his Pieces without
comparison, than either Titian, Correggio, Michael Angelo, or all the rest of
the succeeding Painters to our days. His Choice of Postures, of Heads, of
Ornaments, the Suitableness of his Drapery, his manner of Designing, his
Varieties, his Contrasts, his Expressions, were beautiful in Perfection; but
above all, he possessed the Graces in so advantageous a manner, that he has
never since been equaled by any other. There are Protraits (or single Figures
of his) which are finished Pieces. He was an admirable Architect. He was
handsome, well made, and tall of Stature, civil, and well-natur'd, never
refusing to teach another what he knew himself. He had many Scholars, amongst
others, Julio Romano, Polydore, Gaudens, Giovanni d'Udine, and Michael Coxis.
His Graver was Marc Antonio, whose Prints are admirable for the correctness of
their Out-lines.

JULIO ROMANO was the most excellent of all Raphael's Scholars; he had
Conceptions which were more extraordinary, more profound, and more elevated,
than even his Master himself. He was also a great Architect, his Gust was pure
and exquisite. He was a great Imitator of the Ancients, giving a clear
Testimony in all his Productions, that he was desirous to restore to Practice
the same Forms and Fabrics which were ancient. He had the good Fortune to find
great persons who committed to him the care of Edifices, Vestibules and
Portico's, all Tetrastyles, Xistes, Theaters, and such other places as are not
now in use. He was wonderful in his Choice of Postures. His manner was drier
and harder than any of Raphael's School. He did not exactly understand the
Lights and Shadows or the Colors. He is frequently harsh and ungracefull: The
Folds of his Draperies are neither beautiful nor great, easy nor natural, but
all extravagant and too like the Habits of fantastical Comedians. He was very
knowing in humane Learning. His Scholars were Pirro Ligorio, (who was admirable
for Ancient Buildings, as for Towns, Temples, Tombs, and Trophies, and the
Situation of Ancient Edifices) Aeneas Vico, Bonasone, Georgio Mantuano, and
others.

POLYDORE, Scholar to Raphael, designed admirably well, as to the practical
part, having a particular Genius for Freezes, as we may see by those of white
and black, which he has painted at Rome. He imitated the Ancients, but his
manner was greater than that of Julio Romano: Nevertheless Julio seems to be
the truer. Some admirable Grouppes are seen in his Works, and such as are not
elsewhere to be found. He colored very seldom, and made Landtschapes of a
reasonable good Gusto.

GIO. BELLINO, one of the first who was of any consideration at Venice, painted
very drily according to the manner of his time. He was very knowing both in
Architecture and Perspective. He was Titian's first Master, which may easily be
observed in the first Painting of that noble Scholar, in which we may remark
that Propriety of Colors which his Master has observed.

About this time GEORGIONE the Contemporary of Titian came to excel in
Portraits or Face-painting, and also in great Works. He first began to make
choice of Glowing and Agreeable Colors; the Perfection and entire Harmony of
which were afterward to be found in Titian's Pictures. He dressed his Figures
wonderfully well: And it may be truly said, that but for him, Titian had never
arrived to that height of Perfection, which proceeded from the Rivalship and
Iealousy of Honor betwixt those two.

TITIAN was one of the greatest Colourists, who was ever known; he designed
with much more Ease and Practice than Georgione. There are to be seen Women and
Children of his hand, which are admirable both for the Design and Coloring:
the Gust of them is delicate, charming and noble, with a certain pleasing
Negligence of the Head-dresses, the Draperies and Ornaments of Habits, which
are wholly peculiar to him. As for the Figures of Men, he has designed them but
moderately well. There are even some of his Draperies, which are mean and
savor of a little gust. His painting is wonderfully glowing, sweet and
delicate. He made Portraicts, which were extremely noble; the Postures of them
being very graceful, grave, diversified, and adorned after a very becoming
fashion. No man ever painted Landtschape, with so great a manner, so good a
coloring, and with such a resemblance of Nature. For eight or ten years space,
he copied with great labor and exactness whatsoever he undertook; thereby to
make himself an easy way, and to establish some general maxims for his future
conduct. Besides the excellent gust which he had of Colors, in which he
excelled all Mortal Men, he perfectly understood how to give every thing the
touches which were most suitable, and proper to them, such as distinguished
them from each other; and which gave the greatest Spirit, and the most of
Truth. The Pictures which he made in his beginning, and in the declension of
his Age, are of a dry, and mean manner. He lived ninety nine years. His
Scholars were Paulo Veronese, Giacomo Tintoret, Giacomo da Ponte, Bassano, and
his Brothers.

PAULO VERONESE was wonderfully graceful in his Airs of Women: with great
variety of shining Draperies; and incredible vivacity, and ease. Nevertheless
his Composition is sometimes improper; and his Design is uncorrect. But his
coloring, and whatsoever depends on it, is so very charming in his Pictures,
that it surprises at the first sight, and makes us totally forget those other
qualities which are wanting in him.

TINTORET was Scholar to Titian, great in the practical part of Designing; but
sometimes also sufficiently extravagant. He had an admirable Genius for
Painting, if he had had as great an affection to his Art, and as much patience
in undergoing the difficulties of it, as he had fire and vivacity of Nature: He
has made Pictures, not inferior in beauty to those of Titian: his Composition
and his Dresses, are for the most part improper; and his Out-lines are not
correct: But his Coloring, and the dependencies of it, like that of his
Master, are most admirable.

The BASSANS had a more mean and poorer gust in Painting than Tintoret; and
their Designs were also less correct than his. They had indeed an excellent
gust of Colors; and have touched all kinds of Animals with an admirable
manner: But were notoriously imperfect in the Composition and Design.

CORREGGIO painted at Parma two large Cupolo's in Fresco, and some
Altar-pieces. This Artist, found out certain natural and unaffected Graces, for
his Madonnas', his Saints, and little Children, which were particular to him.
His Manner is exceeding great, both for the design and for the work, but
withal is very uncorrect. His Pencil was both easy and delightful, and it is
to be acknowledged, that he painted with great Strength, great Heightning,
great Sweetness, and liveliness of Colors, in which none surpassed him.

He understood how to distribute his Lights in such a manner as was wholly
peculiar to himself, which gave a great force and great roundness to his
Figures. This manner consists in extending a large Light, and then making it
lose it self insensibly in the dark shadowings, which he placed out of the
Masses. And those give them this great roundness, without our being able to
perceive from whence proceeds so much of force, and so vast a pleasure to the
Sight. It Is probable, that in this part the rest of the Lombard School copied
him: he had no great choice of graceful Postures, nor of distribution for
beautiful Grouppes: his Design oftentimes appears lame, and the Positions are
not much observed in them. The Aspects of his Figures are many times
unpleasing; but his manner of designing Heads, Hands, Feet, and other parts, is
very great, and well deserves our imitation. In the conduct and finishing of a
Picture, he has done wonders; for he painted with so much Union, that his
greatest Works seemed to have been finished in the compass of one day; and
appear, as if we saw them from a Looking-glass. His Landtschape is equally
beautiful with his Figures.

At the same time with Correggio, lived and flourished PARMEGIANO; who besides
his great manner of well Coloring, excelled also both in Invention and Design,
with a Genius full of gentleness and of spirit, having nothing that was
ungracefull in his choice of Postures and in the dresses of his Figures, which
we cannot say of Correggio: there are Pieces of his to be seen, which are both
beautiful and correct.

These two Painters last mentioned, had very good Scholars, but they are known
only to those of their own Province; and besides there is little to be
credited of what his Countrymen say, for Painting is wholly extinguished
amongst them.

I say nothing of LEONARDO da VINCI, because I have seen but little of his,
though he restored the Arts at Milan, and had many Scholars there.

LUDOVICO CARRACCI, Uncle to Hannibal and Augustine, studied at Parma after
Correggio; and excelled in Design and Coloring, with such a Gracefulness, and
so much Candor, that Guido the Scholar of Hannibal, did afterward imitate him
with great success. There are some of his Pictures to be seen, which are very
beautiful, and well understood. He made his ordinary residence at Bologna, and
it was He, who put the Pencil into the hands of Hannibal his Nephew.

HANNIBAL in a little time excelled his Master, in all parts of Painting: He
imitated Correggio, Titian, and Raphael, in their different manners as he
pleased, excepting only that you see not in his Pictures, the Nobleness, the
Graces, and the Charms of Raphael, and that his Out-lines are neither so pure,
nor so elegant as his. In all other things, he is wonderfully accomplished, and
of an Universal Genius.

AUGUSTINO, Brother to Hannibal, was also a very good Painter, and an admirable
Graver. He had a Natural Son, called ANTONIO, who dyed at the age of 35, and
who according to the general opinion, would have surpassed his Uncle Hannibal:
for by what he left behind him, it appears that he was of a more lofty Genius.

GUIDO chiefly imitated Ludovico Carracci, yet retained always somewhat of the
manner which his Master Lawrence the Flemming taught him. This Lawrence lived
at Bologna, and was Competitor and Rival to Ludovico Carracci: Guido made the
same use of Albert Durer, as Virgil did of old Ennius: borrowed what pleased
him, and made it afterward his own: that is, he accommodated what was good in
Albert to his own manner: which he executed with so much gracefulness and
beauty, that He alone got more Money, and more Reputation in his time, than his
own Masters, and all the Scholars of the Carraches, though they were of greater
capacity than himself. His Heads yield no manner of precedence to those of
Raphael.

SISTO BADOLOCCHI designed the best of all his Scholars: but he died young.

DOMENICHINO was a very knowing Painter, and very laborious, but otherwise of
no great Natural Endowments: it is true, he was profoundly skilled in all the
parts of Painting, but wanting Genius, as I said, he had less of nobleness in
his Works than all the rest who studied in the School of the Carraches.

ALBANO was excellent in all that belonged to Painting, and adorned with
variety of Learning.

JOHN LANFRANC, a Man of a great and sprightly wit, supported his Reputation
for a long time with an extraordinary gust of Design and Coloring. But his
foundation being only on the practical part, be at length lost ground in point
of correctness: so that many of his Pieces appear extravagant and fantastical.
And after his Decease, the School of the Carraches went daily to decay in all
the parts-Painting.

GIO. VIOLA was very old before he learned Landtschape, the knowledge of which
was imparted to him by Hannibal Carracche, who took pleasure to instruct him,
so that he painted many of that kind which are wonderfully fine and well
colored.

If we cast our eyes toward Germany and the Low Countries, we may there behold
ALBERT DURER, LUCAS VAN LEYDEN, HOLBEIN, ALDEGRAVE, and ISBIN, who were all
Contemporaries. Amongst these, Albert Durer and Holbein, were both of them
wonderfully knowing and had certainly been of the first form of Painters, had
they traveled into Italy: For nothing can be laid to their charge, but only
that they had a Gothique Gust. As for Holbein, he performed yet better than
Raphael; and I have seen a Portrait of his Painting, with which one of Titian's
could not come in Competition.

Amongst the Flemmings, we had RUBENS, who derived from his Birth, a lively,
free, noble and universal Genius. A Genius which was capable not only of
raising him to the rank of the Ancient Painters, but also to the highest
employment in the Service of his Country: so that he was chosen for one of the
most important Embassies of our Age. His Gusto of Designing savours somewhat
more of the Flemming than of the Beauty of the Antique, because he stayed not
long at Rome. And though we cannot but observe in all his Paintings, somewhat
of great and noble; yet it must be confessed, that generally speaking, he
designed not correctly: But for all the other parts of Painting, he was as
absolute a Master of them, and possessed them all as thoroughly as any of his
Predecessors in that noble Art. His principal Studies were made in Lombardy,
after the Works of Titian, Paul Veronese and Tintoret; whose Cream he has
skimm'd (if you will allow the Phrase) and extracted from their several
Beauties many general Maxims and infallible Rules, which he always followed,
and by which he has acquired in his Works, a greater Facility than that of
Titian; more of Purity, Truth and Science, than Paul Veronese; and more of
Majesty, Repose and Moderation, than Tintoret. To conclude, His manner is so
solid, so knowing, and so ready, that it may seem, this rare accomplished
Genius was sent from Heaven to instruct Mankind in the Art of Painting.

His School was full of admirable Scholars, amongst whom VAN DYCK was he, who
best comprehended all the Rules and general Maxims of his Master; and who has
even excelled him in the delicacy of his Coloring and in his Cabinet Pieces;
but his Gust in the designing Part, was nothing better than that of Rubens.

A Short Account Of the most Eminent PAINTERS BOTH Ancient and Modern,
Continued down to the PRESENT TIMES According to the Order of their Succession.

LONDON, Printed for W. Rogers at the Sun against St. Dunstans Church in
Fleetstreet. 1695.

THE PREFACE.
THE Title having only promised a short Account of the most Eminent Masters,
etc. the Reader must expect to find very little more in the small Compass of
these few Sheets, than the Time when, the Place where, by whose Instructions,
and in what particular Subject each of those great Men became Famous.

In the first part, which comprehends the prime Masters of Antiquity, I have
followed Pliny: yet not blindly, or upon his Authority alone, but chiefly in
those places, where I have found his Evidence confirmed by the concurrent
Testimony of other Writers. The Catalogue of Fran. Junius I have diligently
perused, and examined most of the Records cited in it. I have also read over
the Lives of the Four Principal Painters of Greece, written in Italian, by
Carlo Dati of Florence, together with his learned Annotations upon them: and in
a word, have left nothing unregarded, that could give me any manner of
Assistance in this present Undertaking.

In the Chronological part, because I foresaw that the Olympiads, and the Years
of Rome, would be of little use to the generality of Readers, I have adjusted
them to the two Vulgar Aeras (viz.) the Creation of the World, and the Birth of
Christ. The Greek Talents I have likewise reduced into English Money: but to
justify my Account, must observe, that here (as in most Authors, where a
Talent is put absolutely, and without any other Circumstance) the Talentum
Atticum Minus is to be understood; which according to the nearest Computation
comes to about 187 l. 10 s. of our Money, the Majus being about 62 l. 10 s.
more.

In the latter part, which contains the Masters of greatest Note amongst the
Moderns, I have been equally diligent, not only searching into all the most
considerable Writers, who have left us any Memorandums relating to them; but
also in procuring from Rome, and other places, the best Advice that possibly I
could get, concerning those Painters who are but lately deceased, and whose
Lives have never yet appeared in Print. In Italy I have taken such Guides, as I
had reason to believe, were best acquainted in that Country: and in France,
Germany, Flanders, and Holland, have been governed by the Authors who have been
most conversant in those Parts. For the Roman, Florentine, and some other
particular Masters, I have applied my self to the Vite de' Pittori, etc. of
Giorgio Vasari, and that excellent Treatise of Gio: Pietro Bellori on the same
Subject. For the Lombard School, I have consulted the Maraviglie dell' Art of
Cavalier Ridolfi. For the Bolognese Painters, the Felsina Pittrice of Conte
Carlo Cesare Malvasia. For those of Genoua, the Vite de' Pittori, etc. of
Rafaelle Soprani nobile Genouese. For the French Masters, the Entretiens sur
les Vies, etc. of Felibien. For the German, Flemish, and Dutch Painters, (of
whom I have admitted but very few into this Collection) the Academia
nobilissimae Artis Pictoriae, of Sandrart, and the Schilder-Boeck of Carel van
Mander. For those of our own Country, I am ashamed to acknowledge how difficult
a matter I have found it, to get but the least Information touching some of
those Ingenious Men, whose Works have been a Credit and Reputation to it. That
all our Neighbors have a greater value for the Professors of this noble Art,
is sufficiently evident, in that there has hardly been any one Master^^ of
tolerable Parts amongst them, but a Crowd of Writers, nay some Pens of Quality
too, have been employed in adorning their Lives, and in transmitting their
Names honorably to Posterity.

For the Characters of the Italians of the first Form, I have all along
referred the Reader to the Judgment of Monsieur du FRESNOY in the preceding
Pages. But for the rest, I have from the Books abovementioned, and the
Opinions of the Learned, briefly shown, wherein their different Talents and
Perfections consisted: choosing always (in the little Room to which I have been
confined) to set the best side forwards, especially where their few Faults have
been over-balanc'd by their many Virtues.

By the Figures in the Margin it will easily appear, how careful I have
everywhere been, to preserve the Order of Time, which indeed was the thing
principally intended in these Papers. Some few Masters however must be
excepted; whom yet I have placed next to their Contemporaries, though I could not
fix them in any particular Year. In all of them I have been very exact in
setting down their respective Names, just as they themselves used to do, when
they did not write them in Latin.

If it should be Objected, that several of the Masters herein after-mention'd,
have already appeared amongst us, in an English Dress: I can only answer, That
as the Method here made use of, is more regular, and quite different from any
thing that has been hither to published in this kind; so, whosoever shall think
it worth his while to compare these little Sketches with the Originals from
which I have copied them, will find, that I have taken greater Care in drawing
them true, and that my Out-lines are generally more correct, whatever Defects
may be in the Coloring part.

Ancient Masters.
BY whom, and in what particular Age the Art of Painting was first invented in
Greece, Ancient Authors are not agreed. Aristotle ascribes the honor of it to
EUCHIR, An. Mun. 2730.
a Kinsman of the famous Daedalus, who flourished Anno 1218 before the Birth of
Christ; Theophrastus pleads for POLIGNOTUS the Athenian, Athenagoras for
SAURIAS of Samos; some contend for PHILOCLES the Egyptian, and others again for
CLEANTHES of Corinth. But howsoever the Learned may differ in their Opinions
touching the Inventer, yet as to the Art it self, all of them are unanimous,
that its first appearance amongst the Greeks, was in no better a dress than the
bare Shadow of a Man, or some other Body, circumscribed with a single line
only, called by them Sciagraphia, and by the Latins, Pictura Linearis.

The first step made toward the advancement of Painting, was by ARDICES the
Corinthian, and TELEPHANES of Sicyon, or CRATO of the same City; who began to
add other lines, by way of shadowing their Figures, to make them appear round,
and with greater strength. But so inconsiderable were the advantages, which the
Authors of this Manner (called Graphice) gained by their Invention, that they
still found it necessary, to write under each piece, the name of every
individual thing which they endeavored to represent, least otherwise the
Spectators should never be able to discover what they intended by it.

The next Improvement, was by CLEOPHANTUS of Corinth, who first attempted to
fill up his Out-lines with a single Color: from whence his Pieces, and those
of HYGIEMON, DINIAS, and CHARMAS his followers, got the name of Monochromata,
(viz.) Pictures of one color.

EUMARUS the Athenian, began to paint Men and Women in a manner different from
each other, and ventured to imitate all sorts of Objects: but was far excelled
by his Disciple.

CIMON the Cleonaean, who found out the Art of Painting Historically, designed
his Figures in variety of Postures, distinguished the several parts of the Body
by their Joints, and was the first who took notice of the folds of Draperies in
his Pieces.

In what Century the Masters abovementioned lived, Antiquity has given us no
Account: yet certain it is, An. Mun. 3198.
that about the time of the Foundation of Rome, Anno 750 ante Chr. the Grecians
had carried Painting to such a height of Reputation, that Candaules King of
Lydia, sirnam'd Myrsilus, the last of the Heraclidae, and who was killed by
Gyges Anno quarto Olymp. 16. for a Picture made by BULARCHUS, representing a
Battle of the Magnesians, gave its weight in Gold.

PANAENUS of Athens, lived Olymp. 83. Anno 446 ante Chr. and is celebrated for
having painted the Battle at Marathon, 3502.
between the Athenians and Persians, so very exactly, that Miltiades, and all
the General Officers on both sides, were easily to be known, and distinguished
from each other in that Piece.

PHIDIAS his Brother, the Son of Charmidas, flourished Olymp. 84. Anno 442 ante
Chr. and was famous both for Painting and Sculpture: 3506.
but particularly in the latter so profoundly skilled, that his Statue of
Jupiter Olympius was by the Ancients esteemed one of the Seven wonders of the
World, as his Minerva, in the Citadel of Athens, made of Ivory and Gold, was
(by way of Eminence) called the Beautiful Form. He was very intimate with
Pericles, the Athenian General; and so much envied upon that account, and for
the Glory which he acquired by his Works, that his Enemies could never be at
rest till they had plotted him into a Prison, and had there (as some say) taken
away his Life by Poison.

POLYCLETUS, a Native of Sicyon, and the most renowned Sculptor in his time,
An. Mun. 3518.
lived Olymp. 87. Anno 430 ante Chr. and beside the Honor which he gained, by
having brought the Bass-Relievo to perfection, is commended for diverse
admirable pieces of work; but chiefly, for being the Author of that most
accomplished Model, called the Canon: which comprehending in it self alone all
the several perfections, both of Feature, and Proportion, in Humane Bodies, by
the joint consent of the most eminent Artists, as well Painters as Sculptors,
then in being, was unanimously agreed upon to be handed down to Posterity, a^^
the Standard, or infallible Rule of true Beauty.

In this Olympiad also were MYRON, and SCOPAS, both excellent in Sculpture; and
in some respects equal even to Polycletus himself.

POLYGNOTUS the Thasian, was the Disciple of his Father Aglaophon, and
particularly famous for representing Women; whom he painted in lightsom and
shining Draperies, adorning their heads with dresses of sundry colors, and
giving a greater freedom to his Figures, than had been used by any of his
Predecessors. His principal Works, were those which he made gratis in the
Temple at Delphi, and the grand Portico at Athens, called the Various; in
honor of which it was solemnly decreed, in a great Council of the Amphictyons,
that wherever he should travel in Greece, his charges should be born by the
Public. He died sometime before the 90 Olymp. An. Mun. 3530.
which was Anno 418 ante Chr.

APOLLODORUS the Athenian, lived Olymp. 94. Anno 402 ante Chr. and was the
first who invented the Art of mingling his Colors, and of expressing the
Lights and Shadows. 3546.
He was admired also for his judicious choice of Nature, and in the beauty and
strength of his Figures surpassed all the Masters who went before him. He
excelled likewise in Sculpture, but was surnamed the Madman, from a strange
humor which he had, of destroying even his very best Pieces, if after he had
finished them, he could discover any fault, tho never so inconsiderable.

ZEUXIS of Heraclea, An. Mun. 3553.
flourished Anno quarto Olymp. 95. Anno 395 ante Chr. and was famed for being
the most excellent Colourist of all the Ancients; though Cicero, Pliny, and
other Authors tell us, there were but four Colors then in use ( viz.) white,
yellow, red and black. He was censured by some, for making his Heads too big;
and by Aristotle, for not being able to express the Manners, and Passions. He
was very famous notwithstanding for the Helena which he painted for the People
of Crotona; in the Composition of which he collected from five naked Virgins
(the most beautiful the Town could produce) whatever he observed Nature had
formed most perfect in each, and united all those admirable parts in that
single Figure. He was extolled likewise for several other Pieces; but being
very rich, could never be prevailed upon to fell any of them, because he
thought them to be above any price; and therefore chose rather to give them
away freely to Princes, and Cities. He died (as it is generally said) of a fit
of Laughter, at the sight of a Comical old Woman's Picture, which he had drawn.

PARRHASIUS a Native of Ephesus, and Citizen of Athens, was the Son and
Disciple of Evenor, and the Contemporary of Zeuxis, whom he overcame in the
noted Contest between them, by deceiving him with a Curtain, which he had
painted so excellently well, that his Antagonist mistook it for the Nature it
self. He was the first who observed the Rules of Symmetry in his works; and was
much admired for the liveliness of his expression, and for the gayety and
graceful Airs of his Heads: but above all, for the softness and elegance of his
Out-lines, and for rounding off his Figures, so as to make them appear with the
greater strength and relievo. He was wonderfully fruitful of Invention, had a
particular talent in small pieces, especially in wanton Subjects, and finished
all his works to the last degree of perfection. But withal was so
extravagantly vain and arrogant, that he commonly writ himself Parrhasius the
Beau, the Sir Courtly ((...),) went clothed in purple, with a Crown of Gold
upon his Head, pretended to derive his Pedigree from Apollo, and styled himself
the Prince of his Profession. Yet, to his great affliction, was humbl'd at last
by

TIMANTHES of Sicyon (or as some say, of Cythnus) who in a Dispute betwixt
them, was by the majority of Votes declared the better Painter: And besides was
as eminent for the singular modesty and sweetness of his Disposition, as for
the agreeable variety of his Invention, and peculiar happiness in moving the
Passions. His most celebrated works were the sleeping Polyphemus, and the
Sacrifice of Iphigenia; in both which (as in all his other Performances) his
distinguishing Character appeared, in making more to be understood, than was
really expressed in his Pieces.

In this time also flourished EUPOMPUS of Sicyon, an excellent Artist, and
whose Authority was so very considerable, that out of the two Schools of
Painting, the Asiatick and the Greek, he made a third, by dividing the last
into the Attick and the Sicyonian. His best Disciple was

PAMPHILUS a Native of Macedonia, who to the Art of Painting joined the Study
of the Liberal Arts, especially the Mathematics: and used to say, that without
the help of Geometry, no Painter could ever arrive at perfection. He was the
first who taught his Art for set rates, but never took a Scholar for less time
than ten years. What reputation and interest he had in his own Country, and
what use he made of it, for the honor and advancement of his Profession, see
Page 83.

PAUSIAS of Sicyon, a Disciple of Pamphilus, was the first who painted upon
Walls and Ceilings: and amongst many rare qualities, was excellent at
fore-shortening his Figures. His most famous Piece was the Picture of his
Mistress Glycera, in a sitting posture, composing a Garland of Flowers: for a
Copy of which L. Lucullus, a noble Roman, gave two Talents (375 lib.)

EUPHRANOR the Isthnian, flourished Olymp. An. Mun. 3586.
104, Anno 362 ante Chr. He was an Universal Master, and admirably skilled both
in Sculpture and Painting. His Conceptions were noble and elevated, his Style
masculine and bold; and he was the first who signalized himself by representing
the Majesty of Heroes. He writ several Volumes of the Art of Coloring, and of
Symmetry, and yet notwithstanding fell into the same Error with Zeuxis, of
making his Heads too big in proportion to the other parts.

PRAXITELES the famed Sculptor, particularly celebrated for his Venus of
Gnidus, and other excellent performances in Marble, was the Contemporary of
Euphranor.

CYDIAS of Cythnus, An. Mun. 3594.
lived Olymp. 106, Anno 354 ante Chr. and raised his reputation so much by his
works, that Hortensius the Roman Orator, gave 44 Talents, (8250 lib.) for one
of his Pieces, containing the Story of the Argonauts, and built a noble
Apartment on purpose for it, in his Villa at Tusculum.

APELLES the Prince of Painters, was a Native of Coos, an Island in the
Archipelago (now known by the name of Lango) and flourished Olymp. 112, 3618.
Anno 330 ante Chr. He improved the noble talent which Nature had given him, in
the School of Pamphilus; and afterward by degrees became so much in esteem
with Alexander the Great, that by a public Edict he strictly commanded, that no
other Master should presume to make his Portrait; that none but Lysippus of
Sicyon should cast his Statue in Brass; and that Pyrgoteles only should grave
his Image in Gems and Precious Stones. And in farther testimony of his
particular respect to this Artist, he presented him, even with his most
beautiful and charming Mistress Campaspe, with whom Apelles had fallen in Love,
and by whom 'twas supposed he copied his Venus (Anadyomene) rising out of the
Sea. Grace was his peculiar portion, as our Author tells us, Page 150, and 211.
In which, and in knowing when he had done Enough, he transcended all who went
before him, and did not leave his Equal in the world. He was miraculously
skilled in taking the true lineaments and features of the Face: Insomuch that
(if Apion the Grammarian may be credited) Physiognomists upon sight of his
Pictures only, could tell the precise time of the parties death. He was
admirable likewise in representing people in their last Agonies. And in a word,
so great was the veneration paid by Antiquity to his Works, that several of
them were purchased with heaps of Gold, and not by any set number or weight of
pieces. He was moreover extremely candid and obliging in his temper, willing to
instruct all those who asked his advice, and generous even to his most potent
Rivals.

PROTOGENES of Caunus, a City of Caria subject to the Rhodians, was by the
Ancients esteemed one of the four best Painters in Greece: but lived miserably
poor, and very little regarded in his own Country, till Apelles having made him
a visit, to bring him into Reputation, bought up several of his Pictures, at
greater rates than he asked for them; and pretending, that he designed to sell
'em again for his own work, the Rhodians were glad to redeem them upon any
terms. Whose Disciple he was, is not certainly known; but it is generally
affirmed, that he spent the greatest part of his life in painting Ships, and
Sea-pieces only: yet applying himself at last to nobler Subjects, he became an
Artist so well accomplished, that Apelles confessed he was in all respects at
least equal to himself, excepting only, that never knowing when to leave off,
by overmuch diligence, and too nice a correctness, he often dispirited and
deaden'd the Life. He was famous also for several Figures which he made in
Brass: but his most celebrated piece of Painting, was that of Ialysus, which
cost him seven years study and labor, and which saved the City of Rhodes from
being burnt by Demetrius Poliorcetes. Vide Page 84.

Of MELANTHIUS we have nothing certain, but that he was brought up at Sicyon,
(the best School of Greece) under Pamphilus, at the same time with Apelles.
That he contributed both by his Pen, and Pencil, to the Improvement of his Art;
and amongst many excellent Pieces, painted Aristratus the Sicyonian Tyrant, in
a Triumphal Chariot, attended by Victory, putting a wreath of Laurel upon his
Head; which was highly esteemed.

ARISTIDES of Thebes, the Disciple of Euxenidas, lived in the same Olympiad
with Apelles, and was the first who by the Rules of Art, attained a perfect
knowledge of expressing the Passions and Affections of the Mind. And though his
coloring was somewhat hard, and not so very beautiful as could be wished, yet
notwithstanding so much were his Pieces admired, that after his decease,
Attalus King of Pergamus, gave an hundred Talents (18750 lib.) for one of them.

His Contemporary was ASCLEPIODORUS the Athenian, equally skilled in the Arts
of Sculpture and Painting; but in the latter, chiefly applauded for the
beauties of a correct Style, and the truth of his Proportion: In which Apelles
declared himself as much inferior to this Artist, as he was to AMPHION, in the
ordering, and excellent disposition of his Figures. The most famous Pictures of
Asclepiodorus, were those of the twelve Gods, for which Mnason the Tyrant of
Elatea, gave him the value of about 300 l. Sterling. a-piece.

About the same time also were the several Masters following (viz.)
THEOMNESTUS, famed for his admirable talent in Portraits.

NICHOMACHUS, the Son and Disciple of Aristodemus, commended for the incredible
facility and freedom of his Pencil.

NICOPHANES, celebrated for the Elegance of his Design, and for his grand
Manner, and Majesty of Style; in which few Masters were to be compared to him.

PYREICUS was famous for little pieces only; and from the sordid and mean
Subjects to which he addicted himself (such as a Barbers, or Shoemakers Shop,
the Stil-life, Animals, Herbage, etc.) got the surname of Rhyparographus. Yet
though his Subjects were poor, his Performance was admirable; And the smallest
Pictures of this Artist, were esteemed more, and sold at greater Rates, than
the larger Works of many other Masters.

ANTIDOTUS the Disciple of Euphranor, was extremely diligent, and industrious,
but very slow at his Pencil; which as to the coloring part was generally hard
and dry. He was chiefly remarkable for having been the Master of

NICIAS of Athens, An. Mun. 3626.
who painted Women in Perfection, and flourished about the 114. Olymp. Anno 322
ante Chr. being universally extolled for the great variety and noble choice of
his Subjects, for the force and relievo of his Figures, for his great skill in
the distribution of the lights and shadows, and for his wonderful dexterity in
representing all sorts of four-footed Animals, beyond any Master in his time.
His most celebrated Piece was that of Homer's Hell; for which having refused 60
Talents (11250 lib.) offered him by King Ptolemy the Son of Lagus, he
generously made a Present of it to his own Country. He was likewise much
esteemed by all his Contemporaries for his excellent Talent in Sculpture; and
as Pliny reports, by Praxiteles himself: which yet seems highly improbable,
considering, that by his own account, there were at least 40 years betwixt them.

ATHENION of Maronea, a City of Thrace, a Disciple of Glaucion the Corinthian,
was about this time also as much in vogue as Nicias: and though his coloring
was not altogether so agreeable, yet in every other particular he was even
superior to him, and would have mounted to the highest pitch of Perfection, if
the length of his Life had been but answerable to the great extent of his
Genius.

FABIUS a noble Roman, An. Mun. 3647.
painted the Temple of Health in Rome, Anno U. C. 450, ante Chr. 301: and
gloried so much in his Performances there, that he assumed to himself for ever
after, the surname of Pictor, and thought it no disparagement to one of the
most Illustrious Families in Rome, to be distinguished by that Title.

NEALCES lived Olymp. 132, Anno 250 ante Chr. 3698.
in the time of Aratus the Sicyonian General, who was his Patron, and intimate
Friend. His particular Character, was a strange vivacity of thought, a fluent
fancy, and a singular happiness in explaining his intentions (as appears Page
148.) He is besides frequently mentioned by Writers, for that having painted a
Horse, and being wearied with often trying in vain to express the foam
proceeding from his Mouth, he flung his Pencil in a great passion against the
Picture, which lighted so luckily, that to his amazement he found, Chance had
finished his Design, much better than he with all his art and labor could have
done.

METRODORUS flourished Anno 168 ante Chr. An. Mun. 3780.
and lived in so much credit and reputation at Athens, that Paulus Aemilius,
after he had overcome Perseus King of Macedon, Anno 3 Olymp. 152. having
desired the Athenians to send him one of their most learned Philosophers to
breed up his Children, and a skilful Painter to adorn his Triumph, Metrodorus
was the person unanimously chosen, as the fittest for both Employments.

MARCUS PACUVIUS of Brundusium, 3797.
the Nephew of old Ennius, was not only an eminent Poet himself, and famous
for several Tragedies which he wrote, but excelled also in Painting: Witness
his celebrated Works, at Rome, in the Temple of Hercules, in the Forum Boarium.
He flourished Anno U. C. 600, ante Chr. 151, and died at Tarentum, almost 90
years of age.

TIMOMACHUS of Byzantium (now Constantinople) lived Anno U. C. 704, 3901.
ante Chr. 47, in the time of Julius Caesar, who gave him 80 Talents (15000
lib.) for his Pieces of Ajax and Medea, which he placed in the Temple of Venus,
from whom he derived his Family. He was commended also for his Orestes and
Iphigenia: but his Masterpiece was the Gorgon, or Medusas Head.

About the same time also ARELLIUS was famous at Rome, being as much admired
for his excellent talent in Painting, as he was condemned for the scandalous
use which he made of it, in taking all his Idea's of the Goddesses from common
Strumpets, and in placing his Mistresses in the Heavens, amongst the Gods, in
several of his Pieces.

LUDIUS lived in great Reputation, An. Mun. 3907.
under Augustus Caesar, who began his Reign Anno U. C. 710, ante Chr. 41. He
excelled in grand Compositions, and was the first who painted the Fronts of
Houses, in the Streets of Rome: which he beautified with great variety of
Landtschapes, and pleasant Views, together with all other sorts of different
Subjects, managed after a most noble manner.

TURPILIUS a Roman Knight, An. Dom. 69.
lived in the time of Vespasian, who was chosen Emperor, An. Dom. 69. And
though he painted every thing with his left hand, yet was much applauded for
his admirable Performances at Verona.

His Contemporaries were CORNELIUS PINUS, and ACTIUS PRISCUS, who with their
Pencils adorned the Temples of Honor and Virtue, repaired by Vespasian. But of
the two, Priscus came nearest in his style and manner of Painting, to the
purity of the Grecian School.

And thus have I given the Reader a short Account, of all the most eminent
Masters who flourished in Greece, and Rome, in the compass of more than a
thousand Years. It Is true indeed, that for a long time after the Reigns of
Vespasian, and Titus his Son, Painting and Sculpture continued, in great
reputation in Italy. Nay, we are informed, that under their Successors
Domitian, Nerva, and Trajan, they shined with a Luster almost equal to what
they had done under Alexander the Great. It Is true also, that the Roman
Emperors Adrian, Antonine, Alexander Severus, Constantine, and Valentinian,
were not only generous Encouragers of these Arts, but in the pracice of them
also so well skilled, that they wrought several extraordinary Pieces with their
own hands; and by their Example, as well as their Patronage, raised up many
considerable Artists in both kinds. But the Names of all those excellent Men
being unhappily lost with their Works, we must here conclude our Catalogue of
the ANCIENT MASTERS: and shall only take notice, that under that Title, All
those are to be comprehended, who practiced Painting or Sculpture either in
Greece or Rome; An. Dom. 580.
before the year of our Lord 580. At which time the Latin Tongue ceasing to be
the common Language of Italy, and becoming mute, All the noble Arts and
Sciences (which in the two preceding Centuries had been brought very low* and
by the continual Invasions of the Northern Nations reduced to the last
extremities) expired with it: and in the Reign of Phocas the Emperor, soon
after, lay buried together, as in one common Grave, in the Ruins of the Roman
Empire.

Modern Masters.
GIOVANNI CIMABUE, nobly descended, and born at Florence, Anno 1240, 1240.
was the first who revived the Art of Painting in Italy. He was a Disciple of
some poor ordinary Painters, sent for by the Government of Florence from
Greece: whom he soon surpassed, both in Drawing, and Coloring, and gave
something of strength and freedom to his Works, at which they could never
arrive. And though he wanted the Art of managing his Lights and Shadows, was
but little acquainted with the Rules of Perspective, and in diverse other
particulars but indifferently accomplished; yet the Foundation which he laid
for future Improvement, entitled him to the name of the Father of the First
Age, or Infancy of the Modern Painting. Some of his Works are yet remaining at
Florence, where he was famous also for his skill in Architecture, Aet. 60.
and where he died very rich, Anno 1300.

GIOTTO his Disciple, born near Florence, Anno 1276, 1276.
was a good Sculptor and Architect, as well as a better Painter than Cimabue.
He began to shake off the stiffness of the Greek Masters; endeavoring to give
a finer Air to his Heads, and more of Nature to his Coloring, with proper
Postures to his Figures. He attempted likewise to draw after the Life, and to
express the different Passions of the Mind: but could not come up to the
liveliness of the Eyes, the tenderness of the Flesh, or the strength of the
Muscles in naked Figures. He was sent for, and employed by Pope Benedict IX. in
St. Peter's Church at Rome, and by his Successor Clement V. at Avignon. He
painted several Pieces also at Padoua, Naples, Ferrara, and in other parts of
Italy; and was every where much admired for his Works: but principally, for a
Picture which he wrought in one of the Churches of Florence, representing the
Death of the B. Virgin, with the Apostles about her: the Attitudes of which
Story, M. Angelo Buonaroti used to say, could not be better designed. He
flourished in the time of the famous Dante and Petrarch, and was in great
esteem with them, Aet. 60.
and all the excellent Men in his Age. He died Anno 1336.

ANDREA TAFFI, and GADDO GADDI were his Contemporaries, and the Restorers of
Mosa^^c-work in Italy: which the former had learnt of Apollonius the Greek, and
the latter very much improved.

At the same time also was MARGARITONE, a Native of Arezzo in Tuscany, who
first invented the Art of Gilding with Leaf-gold, upon Bole-armeniac.

SIMONE MEMMI, born at Siena, a City in the borders of the Dukedom of Florence,
Anno 1285, 1285.
was a Disciple of Giotto, whose manner he improved in drawing after the Life:
and is particularly celebrated by Petrarch, for an excellent Portrait, which he
made of his beloved Laura. He was applauded for his free and easy Invention,
and began to understand the Decorum in his Compositions. Aet. 60.
Obiit Anno 1345.

TADDEO GADDI, another Disciple of Giotto 1300.
born at Florence, Anno 1300, excelled his Master in the beauty of his
Coloring, and the liveliness of his Figures. He was also a very skilful
Architect, and much commended for the Bridge which he built over the River
Arno, Aet. 50.
at Florence. He died Anno 1350.

TOMASO, 1324.
called GIOTTINO, for his affecting and imitating Giotto's manner, born also at
Florence, Anno 1324, began to add strength to his Figures, Aet. 32.
and to improve the Art of Perspective. He died Anno 1356.

JOHANNES ab EYK, 1370.
commonly called JOHN of BRUGES, born at Maseech on the River Maez in the
Low Countries, Anno 1370, was a Disciple of his Brother Hubert, and a
considerable Painter: but above all things famous for having been the happy
Inventer of the ART of PAINTING IN OIL, Anno 1410, (thirty years before
Printing was found out by John Guttemberg, of Strasburgh.) He died Anno 1441,
Aet. 71.
having some years before his decease communicated his Invention to

ANTONELLO of Messina, who traveled from his own Country into Flanders on
purpose to learn the Secret: and returning to Sicily, and afterward to Venice,
was the first who practiced, and taught it in Italy. He died Anno Aetat. 49.

In the preceding Century flourished several other Masters of good Repute: but
their Manner being the same, or but very little different from that of Giotto,
it will be sufficient to mention the Names only of some of the most Eminent,
and such were Andrea Orgagna, Pietro Cavallino, Stefano, Bonamico Buffalmacco,
Pietro Laurati, Lippo, Spinello, Casentino, Pisano, etc. And thus the Art of
Painting continued almost at a stand for about an hundred years; advancing but
slowly, and gathering but little strength, till the time of

MASACCIO, 1417.
who was born in Tuscany, Anno 1417, and for his copious Invention, and true
manner of Designing; for his delightful way of Coloring, and the graceful
Actions which he gave his Figures; for his looseness in Draperies, and
extraordinary Judgment in Perspective, is reckoned to have been the Master of
the Second, or Middle Age of Modern Painting: which it is thought he would have
carried to a much higher degree of Perfection, Aet. 26.
if death had not stopped him in his Career (by Poison, as it was supposed) An.
1443.

GENTILE, and GIOVANNI, the Sons and Disciples of GIACOMO BELLINO, 1421.
were born at Venice, (Gentile, Anno 1421.) and were so eminent in their time,
that Gentile was sent for to Constantinople, by Mahomet II. Emperor of the
Turks: for whom having (amongst other things) painted the Decollation of S.
John Baptist, the Emperor, to convince him that the Neck after its separation
from the Body, could not be so long as he had made it in his Picture, ordered a
Slave to be brought to him, and commanded his Head to be immediately struck off
in his presence: which so tetrifi'd Gentile, that he could never be at rest,
till he got leave to return home: which the Emperor granted, after he had
Knighted him, and nobly rewarded him for his Services. The most considerable
Works of these Brothers are at Venice, where Giovanni lived to the age of 90
years, having very rarely painted any thing but Scripture-Stories and Religious
Subjects, which he performed so well, as to be esteemed the most excellent of
all the Bellini. Aet. 80.
See more of him Page 217. Gentile died Anno 1501.

ANDREA MANTEGNA, born at Padoua, Anno 1431, 1431.
a Disciple of Squarcione, was very correct in Designing, admirable in fore^^
short'ning his Figures, well versed in Perspective, and arrived to great
knowledge in the Antiquities, by his continued application to the Statues, Bass
Relievo's, etc. Yet however his neglect of seasoning his Studies after the
Antique, with the living Beauties of Nature, has given him a Pencil somewhat
hard and dry: And besides, his Drapery is generally stiff, according to the
manner of those times, and too much perplexed with little folds. The best of
his Works (and for which he was Knighted, by the Marquess Lodovico Gonzaga, of
Mantoua) are the Triumphs of Julius Caesar, now at Hampton Court. He died Anno
1517, having been the first (according to Vasari) who practiced the Art of
Graving in Italy. Aet. 86.


ANDREA VERROCCHIO a Florentine, born Anno 1432, 1432.
was well skilled in Geometry, Optics, Sculpture, Music, and Painting: but left
off the last, because in a Piece which he had made of St. John Baptizing our
Savior, Leonardo da Vinci, one of his Scholars, had by his order, painted an
Angel, holding up some part of our Savior's Garments, which so far excelled
all the rest of Andrea's Figures, that enraged to be outdone by a Young Man,
he resolved never to make use of his Pencil any more. He was the first who
found out the Art of taking and preserving the likeness of any Face, by
moulding off the Features in Plaster. He died Anno 1488. Aet. 56.


LUCA SIGNORELLI of Cortona, a City in the Dukedom of Florence, 1439.
born Anno 1439, was a Disciple of Pietro S. Sepulchro, and so ex^^ellent at
designing Nakeds, that from a Piece which he painted in a Chapel of the great
Church at Orvieto, M. Angelo Buonaroti transferred several entire Figures into
his Last^^Iudgment. He died very rich, Aet. 82.
Anno 1521.

PIETRO di COSIMO a Florentine, born Anno 1441, 1441.
was a Disciple of Cosimo Rosselli (whose name he retained) and a very good
Painter; but so strangely fantastical, and full of Caprichio's, that all his
delight was in painting Satyrs, Fauns, Harpies, Monsters, and such like
extravagant Figures: and therefore he applied himself, for the most part, to
Bacchanalia's, Masquerades, Aet. 80.
etc. Obiit Anno 1521.

LEONARDO da VINCI, born in a Castle so called, 1445.
near the City of Florence, Anno 1445, was bred up under Andrea Verrocchio, but
so far surpassed him, and all others his Predecessors, that he is owned to have
been the Master of the Third, or Golden Age of Modern Painting. He was in every
respect one of the compleatest Men in his time, and the best furnished with all
the perfections both of Body and Mind: was an excellent Sculptor and Architect,
a skilful Musician, an admirable Poet, very expert in Anatomy and Chemistry,
and thoroughly learned in all the parts of the Mathematics. He was extremely
diligent in the performance of his Works, and so wonderfully neat, and curious,
that he left several of them unfinished, believing his hand could never reach
that Idea of perfection, which he had conceived of them. He lived many years at
Milan, highly esteemed for his celebrated Piece of Our Saviors Last Supper,
and some of his other Paintings; and as much applauded for his Art in
contriving the Canal, that brings the Water from the River Adda, to that City.
He was a great Contender with M. Angelo Buonaroti, and upon account of the
enmity betwixt them, went into France (Anno Aet. 70.) where after several
considerable Services done for Francis I. he expired in the Arms of that
Monarch, being taken speechless the very moment, in which he would have raised
up himself, to thank the King for the honor done him in that Visit. Aet. 75.
Anno 1520.

PIETRO PERUGINO, so called from the place where he was born in the
Ecclesiastical State, 1446.
Anno 1446, was another Disciple of Andrea Verrocchio. What Character he had,
see Page 215. He was so very miserable and covetous, that the loss of his Money
by Thieves, Aet. 78.
broke his Heart, Anno 1524.

DOMENICO GHIRLANDAIO, a Florentine born, 1449.
Anno 1449, was at first designed for the Profession of a Goldsmith; but
followed his more prevailing inclinations to Painting with such success, that
he is ranked amongst the prime Masters in his time. See farther Page 213. Aet.
44.
He died Anno 1493.

FRANCESCO RAIBOLINI, commonly called FRANCIA, 1450.
born at Bologna, Anno 1450, was at first a Goldsmith, or Ieweller, afterward
a Graver of Coins and Medals, but at last applying himself to Painting,
acquired great Reputation by his Works: And particularly, by a Piece of St.
Sebastian, whom he had drawn bound to a Tree, with his hands tied over his
head. In which Figure, besides the delicacy of its Coloring, and gracefulness
of the Posture, the proportion of its Parts was so admirably just and true,
that all the succeeding Bolognese Painters, even to Hannibal Carrache himself,
studied its measures as their Rule, and followed them in the same manner as the
Ancients had done the Canon of Polycletus. It was under the Discipline of this
Master, that Marc' Antonio, Raphaels best Graver, learnt the Rudiments of his
Art. He died about the year 1526, and not Anno 1518, Aet. 76.
as Vasari erroneously has recorded.

FRA BARTOLOMEO, 1469.
born at Savignano, a Village about ten miles from Florence, Anno 1469, was a
Disciple of Cosimo Rosselli: but much more beholden to the Works of Leonardo da
Vinci, for his extraordinary Skill in Painting. He was very well versed in the
fundamentals of Design: and besides, had so many other laudable Qualities; that
Raphael, after he had quitted the School of Perugino, applied himself to this
Master, and under him, studied the Rules of Perspective, together with the Art
of Managing, and Uniting his Colors. He turned Dominican Friar, Anno 1500, and
after some time, was by his Superiors sent to the Convent of St. Mark, in
Florence. He painted both Portraits and Histories, but his scrupulous
Conscience would hardly ever suffer him to draw Naked Figures. He died Anno
1517, and is said to have been the first who invented, Aet. 48.
and made use of a Layman.

ALBERT DURER, born at Nuremberg, Anno 1470, by the Instructions of his Father,
1470.
a curious Ieweller; the Precepts of Michael Wolgemuth, a considerable Painter;
and the Rules of Geometry, Architecture, and Perspective, became the most
excellent of all the German Masters. And notwithstanding that his manner of
Designing is generally hard, stiff, and ungraceful, yet however he was
otherwise so very well Accomplished, that his Prints were had in great esteem
all over Italy; copied at Venice, by the famous Marc' Antonio, and so much
admired even by Raphael himself, that he hung them up in his own Chamber, and
used frequently to lament the misfortune of so great a Genius, to be brought up
in a Country where nothing was to be seen, that might furnish him with noble
Idea's, or give him any light into things necessary for grand Compositions. His
principal Works were made at Prague, in the Palace of the Emperor Maximilian
I. who had so great a respect for him, that he presented him with a Coat of
Arms, as the Badge of Nobility. He was also much in favor with the Emperor
Charles V. and for his modest and agreeable temper beloved by every body, and
happy in all places, but only at home; where 'twas thought, the penurious and
sordid humors of a miserable wretch his Wife, Aet. 58.
shortened his days, Anno 1528. Vide Page 95.

ANTONIO da CORREGGIO, so named from the place where he was born, 1472.
in the Dukedom of Modena, Anno 1472, was a Man of such admirable natural
parts, that nothing but the unhappiness of his Education (which gave him no
opportunities either of seeing Rome, or Florence; or of consulting the
Antiquities, for perfecting himself in the Art of Designing) hindered him from
being the most excellent Painter in the world. Yet nevertheless, he was Master
of a Pencil so wonderfully soft, tender, beautiful and charming, that Iulio
Romano having seen a Leda, and a naked Venus painted by him, for Frederick Duke
of Modena (who intended them a present for the Emperor) declared, he thought
it impossible for any thing of Colors ever to go beyond them. His chief Works
are at Modena, and Parma: at the last of which places he spent most of his
Life, retired and little taken notice of, working hard to maintain his Family,
which was somewhat large. He was extremely modest and obliging in his
Behavior: and died very much lamented, about the year 1512; having thrown
himself into a Fever, by drinking cold water, when his body was overheated,
with bringing home some Copper Money, which he had received for one of his
Pieces. Aet. 40.
See more Page 220 and 221.

MICHELANGELO BUONAROTI, nobly descended, 1474.
born near Florence, Anno 1474; was a Disciple of Domenico Ghirlandaio, and
most profoundly skilled in the Arts of Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture.
He has the name of the greatest Designer who ever has been: and it is
universally allowed him, that never any Painter in the World understood Anatomy
so well. He was also an excellent Poet, and not only highly esteemed by
several Popes successively; by the Grand Duke of Tuscany, by the Republic of
Venice, by the Emperor Charles V. by King Francis I. and by most of the
Monarchs and Princes of Christendom: but was also invited over into Turkey, by
Solomon the Magnificent, upon a Design he then had of making a Bridge over the
Hellespont, from Constantinople to Pera. His most celebrated Piece of Painting,
is that of the Last Judgment, in the Popes Chapel. He died in great Wealth at
Rome, from whence his Body was translated to Florence, and there honorably
interred, Aet. 90.
Anno 1564. Vide Page 214.

GEORGIO del CASTLE FRANCO, called GEORGIONE, because of his noble and comely
Aspect, was born at Trevisano, a Province in the State of Venice, Anno 1477;
1477.
and received his first Instructions from Giovanni Bellino: but having
afterward studied the Works of Leonardo da Vinci, he soon arrived to a manner
of Painting superior to them both; designed with greater Freedom, colored with
more Strength and Beauty, gave a better Relievo, more Life, and a nobler Spirit
to his Figures, and was the first who found out the admirable effects of strong
Lights and Shadows, amongst the Lombards. He excelled both in Portraits and
Histories: but his most valuable Piece in Oil, is that of Our Savior carrying
his Cross, now at Venice; where it is had in wonderful Esteem and Veneration.
He died young of the Plague (which he got in the Arms of his Mistress, who was
infected with it) Anno 1511: having been likewise as famous for his
performances in Music, Aet. 34.
as his productions in Painting. Vide Page 217, and 218.

TITIANO the most universal Genius of all the Lombard School, 1477.
the best Colourist of all the Moderns, and the most eminent for Histories,
Landtschapes, and Portraits; was born at Cadore in the Venetian Territories,
Anno 1477, being descended from the ancient Family of the Vecelli. He was bred
up in the School of Gio. Bellino, at the same time with Georgione: but improved
himself more by the Emulation that was betwixt him and his Fellow-Disciple,
than by the Instructions of his Master. He was censured indeed by M. Angelo
Buonaroti, for want of correctness in Designing, (a fault common to all the
Lombard Painters, who had not been acquainted with the Antiquities) yet that
defect was abundantly supplied in all the other parts of a most accomplished
Artist. He made three several Portraits of the Emperor Charles V. who loved
him so entirely, that he honored him with Knighthood, created him Count
Palatine, made all his Descendents Gentlemen, assigned him a considerable
Pension out of the Chamber of Naples, and what other remarkable proofs of his
Affection he showed him, see page 86, 87. and a Character of his Works, page
218, and 219. He painted also his Son Philip II. Solomon Emperor of the Turks,
two Popes, three Kings, two Empresses, several Queens, and almost all the
Princes of Italy, together with Lud. Ariosto, and Peter Aretine, the famed
Italian Wits, his intimate Friends. Nay, so great was the Name and Reputation
of Titian, that there was hardly a person of any Eminence then living, from
whom he did not receive some particular mark of Esteem: and besides, being of a
temper wonderfully obliging and generous, his house at Venice was the constant
Rendezvous of all the Virtuosi, and People of the best Quality. He was so happy
in the constitution of his Body, that he never had been sick till the year
1576, when he died of the Plague, full of Honor, Glory and Riches, leaving
behind him two Sons and a Brother, of whom Pomponio the eldest was a
Clergy^^man, Aet. 99.
and well preferred, but

ORATION, the youngest Son, painted several Portraits that might stand in
Competition with those of his Fathers. He was famous also for many
History-pieces which he made at Venice in concurrence with Paul Veronese, and
Tintoret. But bewitched at last with the hopes of finding the Philosophers
Stone, he laid aside his Pencil, and having reduced most of what had been got
by his Father into Smoke; died of the Plague soon after him.

FRANCESCO VECELLIO, Titian's Brother, was an Artist so well instructed in the
fundamental Maxims of Design, that Titian grew jealous of him; and fearing,
that he might in time come to eclipse his Reputation, sent him upon pretended
business to Ferdinand King of the Romans: and there found such means to divert
him from Painting, that he quite gave over the study of it, and never any
farther attempted it, unless it were to make a Portrait now and then, at the
request of his particular Acquaintance.

ANDREA del SARTO, 1478.
(so called, because a Taylor's Son) born at Florence, Anno 1478; was a
Disciple of Pietro di Cosimo, very careful and diligent in his Works, and his
Coloring was wonderfully sweet: but his Pictures generally want Strength and
Life, as well as their Author, who was naturally mild, timorous, and
poor-spirited. He was sent for to Paris, by Francis I. where he might have
gathered great Riches, but that his Wife and Relations would not suffer him to
continue long there. He lived in a mean and contemptible condition, because he
set but a very little value upon his own Performances: yet the Florentines had
so great an Esteem for his Works; that during the ^^ury of the Popular Factions
amongst them, they preserved his Pieces from the Flames, when they neither
spared Churches or any thing else. He died of the Plague, Anno 1520. Aet. 42.


RAFAELLE da URBINO, born Anno 1483, 1483.
was one of the handsomest and best tempered men living. See some account of
him Page 215, and add to it, That by the general consent of Mankind, he is
acknowledged to have been the Prince of the Modern Painters: and is oftentimes
styled the Divine Raphael, for the inimitable Graces of his Pencil, and for the
excellence of his Genius, which seemed to have something more than Humane in
its Composition. That he was beloved in the highest degree by the Popes Julius
II. and Leo X. That he was admired and courted by all the Princes and States of
Europe, and particularly by Henry VIII. who would fain have obliged him to come
over into England. That his Person was the wonder and delight of Rome, as his
Works are now the Glory of it. That he lived in the greatest State and Splendour
imaginable, most of the eminent Masters in his time being ambitious of working
under him: and that he never went abroad without a Crowd of Artists, and
others, who attended and followed him purely out of respect. That he declined
Marriage (though very advantageous offers had been made him) in hopes of a
Cardinals Cap, which he expected: but falling sick in the mean time, and
concealing the true cause of his distemper from his Physicians, Death
disappointed him of the reward due to his most extraordinary Merits, Aet. 37.
Anno 1520.

GIO. ANTONIO LICINIO da PORDENONE, 1484.
born at a place so called, not far from Udine in the Venetian Territories,
Anno 1484, after some time spent in Letters and Music, applied himself to
Painting; yet without any other Guide to conduct him, beside his own prompt and
lively Genius, and the Works of Georgione: which he studied at Ven^^ce with so
much attention, that he soo^^ arrived to a manner of Coloring nothing in^^rior
to his Pattern. But that which tended yet more to his improvement, was the
continued Emulation betwixt Titian and himself: which inspired him with noble
Designs, quickened his Invention, and produced several excellent Pieces in Oil,
Distemper, and Fresco. From Venice he went to Genoua, where he undertook some
things in competition with Pierino del Vaga: but not being able to come up to
the perfections of Pierinos Pencil, he returned to Venice, and afterward
visited several other parts of Lombardy: was Knighted by the Emperor Charles
V. and at last being sent for to Ferrara, was so much esteemed there, that he
is said to have been poisoned by some who envied the Favors which he received
from the Duke, Anno 1540. Aet. 56.


SEBASTIANO del PIOMBO, a Native of Venice, Anno 1485, 1485.
took his name from an Office given him by Pope Clement VII. in the Lead-Mines.
He was designed by his Father for the Profession of Music, which he practiced
for some time; till following at last the more powerful Dictates of Nature, he
betook himself to Painting, and became a Disciple of Gio. Bellino: continued
his studies under Georgione, and having attained his excellent manner of
Coloring, went to Rome; where he insinuated himself so far into the favor of
Michael Angelo, by siding with him and his Party, against Raphael; that pleased
with the sweetness and beauty of his Pencil, he immediately furnished him with
some of his own Designs, and letting them pass under Sebastians name, cried him
up for the best Painter in Rome. And indeed so universal was the Applause which
he gained by his Piece of Lazarus raised from the dead, (the design of which
had likewise been given him by Michael Angelo) that nothing but the famous
Transfiguration of Raphaels could eclipse it. He has the name of being the
first who invented the Art of preparing Plaister-walls for Oyl-painting: but
was generally so slow, and lazy in his Performances, that other hands were
oftentimes employed in finishing what he had begun. Aet. 62.
He died Anno 1547.

BARTOLOMEO (in the Tuscan Dialect called BACCIO) BANDINELLI, 1487.
a Florentine Painter and Sculptor, born Anno 1487; was a Disciple of Gio.
Francesco Rustici, and by the help of Anatomy, joined with his other Studies,
became a very excellent and correct Designer: but in the Coloring part was so
unfortunate, that after he had heard Michael Angelo condemn it, for being hard
and unpleasant, he never could be prevailed upon to make any farther use of his
Pencil, but always engaged some other hand in Coloring his Designs. Yet
however, in Sculpture he succeeded better: and for a Descent from the Cross, in
Mezzo Relievo, was Knighted by the Emperor. He was likewise much in favor
with Francis I. and acquired great Reputation by several of his Figures: which
yet are more admired for their true Out-line, and Proportion, Aet. 72.
than for being either graceful or gentile. He died Anno 1559.

GIULIO ROMANO, born Anno 1492, 1492.
was the greatest Artist, and most universal Painter of all the Disciples of
Raphael: beloved by him as if he had been his Son, for the wonderful sweetness
of his temper; and made one of his Heirs, upon condition, that he should assist
in finishing such things as he had left imperfect. He was profoundly learned in
all the parts of the Antiquities: and by his conversation with the works of the
most excellent Poets, and particularly Homer, had made himself an absolute
Master of the qualifications necessary required in a great Designer. He
continued for some years at Rome, after the death of Raphael: and by the
directions of Pope Clement VII. wrought several admirable Pieces in the Hall of
Constantine, and other public places. But his principal performances were at
Mantoua: where he was sent for by the Marquess Frederico Gonzaga; and where he
made his name illustrious, by a noble and stately Palace built after his Model,
and beautified with variety of Paintings after his Designs. And indeed in
Architecture he was so eminently skilful; that he was invited back to Rome,
with an offer made him of being the chief Architect of St. Peter's Church: but
whilst he was debating with himself, whether or no he should accept of this
opportunity, of returning gloriously into his own Country, Death interposed,
Aet. 54.
Anno 1546. Vide Page 216.

GIACOMO da PUNTORMO, so called from the place of his Birth, Anno 1493, 1493.
studied under Leonardo da Vinci, Mariotto Albertinelli, Pietro di Cosimo, and
Andrea del Sarto: but chiefly followed the manner of the last, both in Design
and Coloring. He was of so unhappy a temper of mind, that though his Works had
stood the Test even of Raphael and Michael Angelo, the best Judges, yet he
could never order them so as to please himself: and was so far from being
satisfied with any thing he had ever done, that he was in great danger of
losing the gracefulness of his own manner, by imitating that of other Masters,
and particularly the Style of Albert Durer in his Prints. He spent most of his
time at Florence, where he painted the Chapel of St. Laurence: but was so
wonderfully tedious about it, that in the space of eleven years he would admit
no body to see what he had performed. He was also of so mean and pitiful a
spirit, that he chose rather to be employed by Ordinary People, for
inconsiderable gains; than by Princes and Noblemen, at any rates: so that he
died poor, Aet. 63.
Anno 1556.

GIOVANNI D'UDINE, 1494.
so named from the place where he was born (being the Metropolis of Frioul)
Anno 1494; was instructed by Georgione at Venice, and at Rome became a Disciple
of Raphael: and is celebrated, for having been the first who found out the
Composition of Stucco-work, in use amongst the ancient Romans, and discovered
in the Subterranean Vaults of Titus's Palace; which he restored to its full
Splendour and Perfection. He was employed by Raphael, in adorning the Apartments
of the Vatican; and afterward by several Princes, and Cardinals, in the chief
Palaces of Rome and Florence: and by the agreeable variety and richness of his
Fancy, and his peculiar happiness in expressing all sorts of Animals, Fruit,
Flowers, and the Still-life, both in Bass relievo, and Colors, acquired the
reputation of being the best Master in the world, for Ornaments in Stucco, and
Grotesque. He died Anno 1564, and was buried, according to his desire, in the
Rotunda, Aet. 70.
near his dear Master Raphael.

BATTISTA FRANCO his Contemporary, a Native of Venice, was a Disciple of
Michael Angelo; whose manner he followed so close, that in the correctness of
his Out-line, he surpassed most of the Masters in his time. His Paintings are
somewhat numerous, and dispersed all over Italy, and other parts of Europe: but
his Coloring being very dry, they are not much more esteemed than the Prints
which he etch'd. He died Anno 1561.

LUCAS van LEYDEN, 1494.
so called from the place where he was born, Anno 1494, was at first a Disciple
of his Father, a Painter of note, and afterward of Cornelius Engelbert: and
wonderfully cried up in Holland, and the Low Countries, for his skill in
Painting, and Graving. He was prodigiously laborious in his Works, and a great
Emulator of Albert Durer: with whom he became at length so intimate, that they
drew each others Picture. And indeed their Manner, and Style are in all
respects so very much alike, that it seemed as if one and the same Soul had
animated them both. He died Anno 1533, after an interview betwixt him and some
other Painters at Middleburgh: where disputing, and falling out in their Cups,
Lucas fancying they had poisoned him, Aet. 39.
languish'd by degrees, and pined away purely with conceit.

QUINTIN MATSYS of Antwerp, was the Contemporary of Lucas; and famous for
having been transformed from a Blacksmith to a Painter, by the force of Love,
and for the sake of a Mistress, who disliked his former profession. He was a
painful and diligent Imitator of the ordinary Life, and much better at
representing the defects, than the Beauties of Nature. One of his best Pieces
is a Descent from the Cross (in a Chapel of the Cathedral at Antwerp) for
which, and a multitude of other Histories, and Portraits, he gained a great
number of admirers; especially for his Curiosity and Neatness, which in truth,
was the principal part of his Character. He died Anno 1529.

Beside the two Masters last mentioned, there were several other
History-painters, who flourished in Germany, Flanders, and Holland about this
time. But their manner being generally Gothique, Hard, and Dry; more like the
Style of Cimabue, in the Dawning of the Art of Painting, than the Gusto of
Raphael, in its Meridian Luster; we shall only give you the names of some of
the most noted; and such were Mabuse, Aldegraef, Schoorel, Frans Floris, Martin
Hemskerck, Chris. Schwarts, etc.

POLIDORO of CARAVAGGIO, in the Duchy of Milan, was born Anno 1495, 1495.
and brought up to no better an employment than carrying Stone and Mortar, in
the New-buildings of Pope Leo X. But being tempted at last by the performances
of Gio. d'Udine, to try his Talent in Designing: by the assistance of one of
his Scholars, and his own continued Application to the Antiquities, in a little
time he became so skilful an Artist, that he had the honor of contributing
much to the finishing those glorious Works in the Vatican. He associated
himself both in the Study and Practice of his Art with one MATURINO, a
Florentine; and their Genius being very conformable, they lived together like
Brothers, working in Fresco upon several Frontispieces of the most noble
Palaces in Rome: whereby they acquired great reputation; their Invention being
the richest, and their Design the easiest that could any where be seen. But
Maturino dying Anno 1527, and Rome being then in the hands of the Spaniards,
Polidoro retired to Naples, and from thence to Messina; where his excellent
Talent in Architecture also being highly commended, he was ordered to prepare
the Triumphal Arches for the reception of the Emperor Charles V. from Tunis;
for which he was nobly rewarded: and being afterward desirous of seeing Rome
once more; in his return thither was murdered by his Servant and Accomplices,
for the sake of his Money, and buried at Messina, Aet. 48.
Anno 1543. Vide Page 217.

ROSSO (so called from his red Hair) born at Florence, Anno 1496; 1496.
was educated in the study of Philosophy, Music, etc. and having learnt the
first Rudiments of Design from the Cartoons of Michael Angelo, improved himself
by the help of Anatomy; which he understood so very well, that he composed two
Books upon that Subject. He had a copious Invention, great skill in the mixture
of his Colors, and in the management of his Lights and Shadows: was very happy
also in his Naked Figures, which he expressed with a good Relievo, and proper
Attitudes; and would have excelled in all the parts of Paintinig, had he not
been too licentious and extravagant sometimes, and suffered himself rather to
be hurried away with the heat of an unbounded Fancy, than governed by his own
Judgment, or the Rules of Art. From Florence his Curiosity carried him to Rome
and Venice, and afterward into France; where by his Works in the Galleries at
Fountainbleau, and by several proofs which he gave of his extraordinary
knowledge in Architecture, he recommended himself so effectually to Francis I.
that he made him Super-intendent General of all his Buildings, Pictures, etc.
and gave him other opportunities of growing so vastly rich; that for some time
he lived like a Prince himself, in all the Splendour and Magnificence
imaginable: till at last being robbed of a considerable Sum of Money, and
suspecting one of his intimate Friends (a Florentine who frequented his house)
he caused him to be imprisoned, and put to the Torture, which he underwent with
courage; and having in the highest extremities maintained his innocence with so
much constancy, as to procure his Release; Rosso, partly out of remorse for the
barbarous treatment of his Friend, and partly out of fear of the ill
consequence from his just Resentment, Aet. 45.
made himself away by Poison, Anno 1541.

FRANCESCO PRIMATICCIO, a famous Painter and Architect of Bologna, succeeded
Rosso in the Honors and Employments which he enjoyed by the favor of Francis.
I. and besides, being very well descended, was made Abbot of St. Martin de
Troy, in Champagne. He finished all the several Works begun by his Predecessor
at Fountainbleau, by the assistance of NICOLO dell' ABBATE, an excellent
Artist, his Disciple: and enriched that Palace with abundance of noble Statues,
and other Pieces of Antiquity, which he brought purposely from Italy by the
Kings order. He had been bred up at Mantoua under Iulio Romano, as well to
Stucco-work as Painting: and by studying his manner, together with the
Performances of other great Masters, became perfect in the Art of Designing,
and well versed in grand Compositions. He continued in France during the
remainder of his Life: lived in Pomp and State, more like a Nobleman than a
Painter; and was very well esteemed in four several Reigns.

DON GIULIO CLOVIO, the celebrated Limner, born in S^^lavonia, Anno 1498, 1498.
at the age of eighteen years went to Italy: and under the Conduct of Iulio
Romano, applied himself to Miniature with such admirable Success, that never
did ancient Greece, or modern Rome produce his Fellow. He excelled both in
Portraits and Histories: and (as Vasari his Contemporary reports) was another
Titian in the one, and a second Michael Angelo in the other. He was entertained
for some time in the service of the King of Hungary: after whose decease he
returned to Italy; and being taken Prisoner at the sacking of Rome, by the
Spaniards, made a Vow, to retire into a Convent, as soon as ever he should
recover his Liberty; which he accordingly performed not long after in Mantoua:
but upon a Dispensation obtained from the Pope, by Cardinal Grimani, soon laid
aside the religious Habit, and was received into the Family of that Prince. His
Works were wonderfully esteemed throughout Europe; highly valued by several
Popes, by the Emperors Charles V. and Maximilian II. by Philip King of Spain,
and many other illustrious Personages: and so much admired at Rome; that those
Pieces which he wrought for the Cardinal Farnese (in whose Palace he spent the
latter part of his Life) were by all the Lovers of Art, reckoned in the number
of the Rarities of that City. Aet. 80.
Ob. Anno 1578.

HANS HOLBEIN, born at Basil, in Switzerland, Anno 1498, 1498.
was a Disciple of his Father; by whose assistance and his own industry, he
made a wonderful Progress in the Art of Painting: and acquired such a name by
his Piece of Deaths-dance, in the Town Hall of Basil, that the famous Erasmus,
after he had obliged him to draw his Picture, sent him over with it into
England, and gave him Letters recommendatory to Sir Thomas Moore then Ld.
Chancellor; who received and entertained him with the greatest respect
imaginable, employed him in making the Portraits of himself and Family; and
which the sight of them so charmed King Henry VIII. that he immediately took
him into his service, and by the many signal Instances which he gave him of his
Royal Favor and Bounty, brought him likewise into esteem with all the
Nobility, and People of Eminence in the Kingdom. One of his best Pieces, is
that of the said King with his Queen, etc. at White Hall; which with diverse
other admirable Portraits of his hand (some as big, and others less than the
Life; and as well in Watercolors, as Oil) may challenge a place amongst those
of the most famed Italian Masters: Vid. Page 224. He was eminent also for a
rich vein of Invention, very conspicuous in a multitude of Designs, which he
made for Gravers, Sculptors, Iewellers, etc. and was particularly remarkable
for having (like Turpilius the Roman) performed all his Works with his Left
hand. Aet. 56.
He died of the Plague, at London, Anno 1554.

PIERINO del VAGA, was born at Florence, Anno 1500, 1500.
of such mean Parentage; that his Mother being dead at two months end, he was
afterward suckled by a Goat. The name of Vaga he took from a Country Painter,
who carried him to Rome: where he left him in such poor circumstances, that he
was forced to spend three days of the week in working for Bread; but yet
setting apart the other three for his improvement; in a little time, by
studying the Antique, together with the Works of Raphael, and Michael Angelo,
he became one of the boldest and best Designers of the Roman School: and
understood the Muscles in naked Bodies, and all the difficulties of the Art so
well; that Raphael took an affection to him, and employing him in the Popes
Apartments, gave him a lucky opportunity of distinguishing himself from his
Fellow-disciples, by the mavelous beauty of his Coloring, and his peculiar
Talent in Grotesque. His chief Works are at Genoua: where he grew famous
likewise for his skill in Architecture; having designed a noble Palace for
Prince Doria, which he also painted, and adorned with his own hand. From Genoua
he removed to Pisa, and afterward to several other parts of Italy; his
rambling humor never suffering him to continue long in one place: till at
length returning to Rome, he had a Pension settled on him, for looking after
the Pope's Palace, and the Casa Farnese. But Pierino having squandered away in
his Youth, that which should have been the support of his old Age; and being
constrained at last to make himself cheap, by undertaking any little Pieces,
for a small Sum of ready money; fell into a deep Melancholy, and from that
extreme into another as bad, of Wine and Women, and the next turn was into his
Grave, Aet. 47.
Anno 1547.

FRANCESO MAZZUOLI, called PARMEGIANO, because born at Parma, Anno 1504, 1504.
was an eminent Painter when but sixteen years old, famous all over Italy at
nineteen, and at twenty three performed such wonders; that when the Emperor
Charles V. had taken Rome by Storm, some of the common Soldiers in sacking the
Town, having broke into his Apartments, and found him intent upon his work,
were so astonished at the charming Beauty of his Pieces, that instead of
Plunder and Destruction, which was then their business, they resolved to
protect him (as they afterward did) from all manner of violence. But besides
the perfections of his Pencil (which was one of the gentilest, the most
graceful, and the most elegant of any in his time) he delighted much in Music,
and therein also excelled. His principal Works are at Parma; where, for several
years he lived in great Reputation, till falling unhappily into the study of
Chemistry, he wasted the most considerable part of his Time and Fortunes in
search of the Philosophers-Stone, and died poor, in the flower of his age, Anno
1540. See farther Page 221: and note, that there are extant many valuable
Prints, Aet. 36.
etch'd by this Master.

GIACOMO PALMA, Senior, commonly called PALMA VECCHIO, was born at Serinalta,
in the State of Venice, Anno 1508; 1508.
and made such good use and advantage of the instructions which he received
from Titian, that few Masters are to be named, who have shown a nobler Fancy in
their Compositions, a better Judgment in their Designs, more of Nature in their
Expression, or of Art in finishing their Works. Venice was the place where he
usually resided, and where he died, Anno 1556. His Pieces are not very
numerous, by reason of his having spent much time, in bringing those which he
has left behind him to such wonderful perfection. Aet. 48.


DANIELE RICCIARELLI, surnamed da VOLTERRA, from a Town in Tuscany where he was
born, Anno 1509, 1509.
was a person of a melancholy and heavy temper, and seemed to be but meanly
qualified by Nature for an Artist: Yet by the instructions of Balthazar da
Siena, and his own continued Application and Industry, he surmounted all
difficulties, and at length became so excellent a Designer, that his Descent
from the Cross, in the Church of the Trinity on the Mount, is ranked amongst
the principal Pieces in Rome. He was chosen by Pope Paul IV. to cloth some of
the Nudities, in Michael Angelo's Last Judgment; which he performed with good
success. He was as eminent likewise for his Chisel, as his Pencil; and wrought
several considerable things in Sculpture. Aet. 57.
Ob. Anno 1566.

FRANCESCO SALVIATI, a Florentine, born Anno 1510, 1510.
was at first a Disciple of Andrea del Sarto, and afterward of Baccio
Bandinelli; and very well esteemed both in Italy, and France, for his several
works in Fresco, Distemper, and Oil. He was quick at Invention, and as ready in
the execution; Graceful in his Naked Figures, and as Gentile in his Draperies:
Yet his Talent did not lie in great Compositions; And there are some of his
Pieces in two Colors only, which have the name of being his best
Performances. He was naturally so fond and conceited of his own Works, that he
could hardly allow any body else a good word: And it is said, that the Jealousy
which he had of some Young men then growing up into reputation, made him so
uneasy, that the very apprehensions of their proving better Artists than
himself, Aet. 53.
hastened his Death, Anno 1563.

PIRRO LIGORIO, a Neapolitan, lived in this time: and though he addressed himself
chiefly to the study of Architecture, and for his skill in that Art was
employed, and highly encouraged by Pope Pius IV. yet he was withal an
excellent Designer; and by the many noble Cartoons which he made for
Tapestries, etc. gave sufficient proof, that he was more than indifferently
learned in the Antiquities. There are several Volumes of his Designs preserved
in the Cabinet of the Duke of Savoy; of which some part consists in a curious
Collection of all the Ships, and other sorts of Vessels, in use amongst the
Ancients. He died about the year 1573. Vide Page 217.

GIACOMO da PONTE da BASSANO, 1510.
so called from the place where he was born in the Marca Trevisana, Anno 1510,
was a Disciple of Bonifacio, a noted Painter, at Venice; by whose Assistance,
and his own frequent copying the Works of Titian, and Parmegiano, he brought
himself into a pleasant and most agreeable way of Coloring: but returning into
the Country, upon the death of his Father, he applied himself wholly to the
imitation of Nature; and from his Wife, Children and Servants, took the Ideas
of most of his Figures. His Works are very numerous, all the Stories of the Old
and New Testament having been painted by his hand, besides a multitude of other
Histories. He was famous also for several excellent Portraits, and particularly
those of the celebrated Poets Ludovico Ariosto, Bernardo Tasso, and Torquato
his Son. In a word, so great was the Reputation of this Artist at Venice, that
Titian himself was glad to purchase one of his Pieces (representing The
entrance of Noah and his Family into the Ark) at a very considerable Price. He
was earnestly solicited to go over into the service of the Emperor: but so
charming were the pleasures which he found in the quiet enjoyment of Painting,
Music, and good Books, that no Temptations whatsoever could make him change his
Cottage for a Court. He died Anno 1592, Aet. 82.
leaving behind him four Sons, of whom

FRANCESCO the Eldest, settled at Venice, where he followed the manner of his
Father, and was well esteemed, for diverse Pieces which he made in the Ducal
Palace and other public places, in conjunction with Paul Veronese, Tintoret,
etc. But his too close Application to Painting having rendered him unfit for
all other business, and ignorant even of his own private Affairs; he contracted
by degrees a deep Melancholy, and at last became so much crazed, that fancying
Sergeants were continually in pursuit of him, he leaped out of his Window, to
avoid 'em (as he imagined) and by the fall occasioned his own Death, Anno 1594,
Aet. 43.

LEANDRO, the Third Son, had so excellent a Talent in Face-painting, (which he
principally studied) that he was Knighted for a Portrait which he made of the
Doge Marin Grimano. He likewise finished several things left imperfect by his
Brother Francesco; composed some History-pieces also of his own, and was as
much admired for his perfection in Music, as his skill in Painting. Obiit Anno
1623, Aet. 65.

GIO. BATTISTA, the Second Son, and GIROLAMO the Youngest, applied themselves
to copying their Fathers Works; which they did so very well, that they are
oftentimes taken for Originals. Gio. Battista died Anno 1613, Aet. 60; and
Girolamo Anno 1622, Aet. 62: See more of the Bassans Page 220.

GIACOMO ROBUSTI, called TINTORETTO, because a Dyers Son, born at Venice, Anno
1512; 1512.
was a Disciple of Titian; who having observed something very extraordinary in
his Genius, dismissed him from his Family, for fear he should grow up to rival
his Master. Yet he still pursued Titians way of Coloring, as the most natural;
and studied Michael Angelos Gusto of Design, as the most correct. Venice was
the place of his constant Abode; where he was made a Citizen, and wonderfully
beloved, and esteemed for his Works; the Character of which see Page 219. He
was called the Furious Tintoret, for his bold manner of Painting, with strong
Lights and deep Shadows; for the rapidity of his Genius, and grand vivacity of
Spirit, much admired by Paul Veronese. But then, on the other hand, he was
blamed by him, and all others of his Profession, for under-valuing himself, and
his Art, by undertaking all sorts of business for any Price; thereby making so
great a difference in his several Performances, that (as Hannibal Carrach
observed) he is sometimes equal to Titian, and at other times inferior even to
himself. He was extremely pleasant and affable in his Humor: and delighted so
much in Painting and Music, his bel^^ved Studies, that he would hardly suffer
himself to taste any other Pleasures. He died Anno 1594, leaving behind him a
Daughter, Aet. 82.
and a Son, of whom the Eldest

MARIETTA TINTOREITA, was so well instructed by her Father in his own
Profession, as well as in Music, that by her Pencil she got great Reputation;
and was particularly eminent for an admirable Style in Portraits. She died
young, Anno 1590, Aet. 30.

DOMENICO TINTORETTO his Son, gave great hopes in his youth, that he would one
day render the name of Tintoret yet more illustrious than his Father had made
it: but neglecting to cultivate by study the Talent which Nature had given him,
he fell short of those mighty things expected from him, and became more
considerable for Portraits, than Historical Compositions. He died Anno 1637,
Aet. 75.

PARIS BORDONE, well descended, and brought up to Letters, Music, and other
gentile Accompl^^shments, was a Disciple of Titian, and flourished in the time
of Tintoret: but was more commended for the Delicacy of his Pencil, than the
Purity of his Out lines. He was in great favor and esteem with Francis I. for
whom, besides abundance of Histories, he made the Portraits of several Court
Ladies, in so excellent a manner, that the Original Nature was hardly more
charming. From France he returned home to Venice, laden with Honor and Riches;
and having acquired as much Reputation in all the parts of Italy, as he had
done abroad, died Anno Aet. 75.

GEORGIO VASARI, born at Arezzo a City in Tuscany, Anno 1514, 1514.
equally famous for his Pen and Pencil, and as eminent for his skill in
Architecture, was a Disciple of Michael Angelo, and Andrea del Sarto; and by
his indefatigable diligence in studying and copying all the best Pieces of the
most noted Artists, improved his Invention and Hand to such a degree, that he
attained a wonderful Freedom in both. He spent the most considerable part of
his Life in traveling over Italy; leaving in all places marks of his Industry,
and gathering every where materials for his History of the Lives of the most
excellent Painters, Sculptors, Architects, etc. which he published at Florence,
about the year 1551: a work, in the opinion of Hannibal Caro, written with much
exactness and judgment; though Felibien, and others tax him with some mistakes,
and particularly with flattering the Masters then alive, and with partiality to
those of his own Country. Aet. 64.
He died Anno 1578.

ANTONIO MORE, born at Utrecht in the Low Countries, Anno 1519, 1519.
was a Disciple of John Schoorel, and in his younger days had seen Rome, and
some other parts of Italy. He was recommended by Cardinal Granville, to the
service of the Emperor Charles V. and having made a Portrait of his Son Philip
II. at Madrid, was sent upon the same accou^^t to the King, Queen, and Princess
of Portugal, and afterward into England, to draw the Picture of Queen Mary.
From Spain he retired into Flanders, where he became a mighty Favorite of the
Duke of Alva (then the Governor of the Low Countries.) And besides the noble
Presents and Applause which he gained in all places by his Pencil, was as much
admired for his extraordinary Address, being as great a Courtier as a Painter.
His Talent lay in Designing very justly, in finishing his Pieces with wonderful
care and neatness, and in a most natural imitation of Flesh and Blood, in his
Coloring. Yet after all, he could not reach that noble Strength and Spirit, so
visible in the Works of Titian, and to which Van Dy^^k has since arrived. He
made several Attempts also in History-pieces, but understood nothing of grand
Compositions, and his manner was tame, Aet. 56.
hard, and dry. He died at Antwerp, Anno 1575.

PAOLO FARINATO, born at Verona, Anno 1522; 1522.
was a Disciple of Antonio Badile, and an admirable Designer, but not so happy
in his Coloring: though there is a Piece of his in St. Georges Church at Verona,
so well performed in both parts, that it does not seem to be inferior to one of
Paulo Veronese, which is placed next to it. He was very considerable likewise
for his knowledge in Sculpture, and Architecture, especially that part of it
which relates to Fortifications, Aet. 84.
etc. Obiit Anno 1606.

ANDREA SCHIAVONE, so called from the Country where he was born, Anno 1522;
1522.
was so very meanly descended, that his Parents after they had brought him to
Venice, were not able to allow him a Master: and yet by great study and pains,
together with such helps as he received from the Prints of Parmegiano, and the
Paintings of Georgione and Titian, he arrived at last to a degree of Excellence
very surprising. It Is true indeed, that being obliged to work for his daily
Bread, he could not spare time sufficient for making himself thoroughly perfect
in Design: but however, that Defect was so well covered by the singular Beauty
and Sweetness of his Colors, that Tintoret used oft^^ntimes to say, no Painter
ought to be without one Piece (at least) of his Hand. His principal Works were
composed at Venice, some of them in concurrence with Tintoret himself, and
others by the directions of Titian, in the Library of St. Mark. But so
malicious was Fortune to poor Andrea, that his Pictures were but little valued
in his lifetime, and he never was paid any otherwise for them, than as an
ordinary Painter: though after his Decease, which happened Anno 1582, his Works
turned to a much better account, and were esteemed answerable to their Merits,
and but little inferior to those of his most famous Contemporaries. Aet. 60.


FREDERICO BAROCCI, born in the City of Urbin, Anno 1528, 1528.
was trained up in the Art of Designing by Baptista Venetiano, and having at
Rome acquired a competent Knowledge in Geometry, Perspective, and Architecture,
applied himself to the Works of his most eminent Predecessors: and in a
particular manner studied Raphael, and Correggio; one in the charming Ayrs, and
graceful Out-lines of his Figures, and the other in the admirable Union, and
agreeable Harmony of his Colors. He had not been long in Rome, before some
malicious Painters, his Competitors, found means by a Dose of Poison conveyed
into a Sallet, with which they had treated him, to send him back again into his
own Country, attended with an Infirmity so terribly grievous, that for above
fifty years together it seldom permitted him to take any Repose, and never
allowed him above two hours in a day to follow his Painting. So that expecting,
almost every Moment, to be removed into another World, he employed his Pencil
altogether in the Histories of the Bible, and other Religious Subjects, of
which he wrought a considerable number, in the short Intervals of his painful
Fits, Aet. 84.
and notwithstanding the Severity of them, lived till the year 1612.

TADDEO ZUCCHERO, born in the Duchy of Urbin, Anno 1529, 1529.
was initiated in the Art of Painting at home, by his Father, and at Rome
instructed by Gio. Pietro Calabro; but improved himself most by the Study of
Anatomy, and by copying the Works of Raphael. He excelled chiefly in a florid
Invention, a gentile Manner of Designing, and in the good Disposition and
Economy of his Pieces: but was not so much admired for his Coloring, which
was generally unpleasant, and rather resembled the Statues than the Life. He
lived for the most part in Rome and Urbin, where he left many things
unfinished, Aet. 37.
being taken away in his Prime, Anno 1566.

PAOLO CALIARI VERONESE, born Anno 1532, 1532.
was a Disciple of Antonio Badile, and not only esteemed the most excellent of
all the Lombard Painters, but for his copious and admirable Invention, for the
Grandeur and Majesty of his Composition, for the Beauty and Perfection of his
Draperies, together with his noble Ornaments of Architecture, etc. is styled by
the Italians, Il Pittore felice (the happy Painter.) He spent most of his time
at Venice; but the best of his Works were made after he returned thither from
Rome, and had studied the Antique. He could not be prevailed upon, by the great
Offers made him by the King of Spain, to leave his own Country; where his
Reputation was so well established, that most of the Princes of Europe sent to
their several Ambassadors, to procure them something of his Hand at any Rates.
He was a Person of an ingenuous and noble Spirit, used to go richly dressed, and
generally wore a gold Chain, which had been presented him by the Procurators of
St. Mark, as a Prize which he won from several Artists his Competitors. He was
highly in favor with all the principal Men in his time, and so much admired by
all the great Masters, as well his Contemporaries, as those who succeeded him,
that Titian himself used to call him the Ornament of his Profession: and Guido
Reni being asked, which of the Masters his Predecessors he would choose to be,
were it in his power; after a little pause, cried out Paulo, Paulo. He died at
Venice, Anno 1588, Aet. 56.
leaving great Wealth behind him to his two Sons

GABRIELLE and CARLO, who lived very happily together, joined in finishing
several Pieces left imperfect by their Father, and followed his manner so close
in other excellent things of their own, that they are not easily distinguished
from those of Paulos hand. Carlo would have performed wonders, had he not been
nipt in the Bud, Anno 1596, Aet. 26: after whose Decease Gabriel applied
himself to Merchandising; yet did not quite lay aside has Pencil, but made a
considerable number of Portraits, and some History-pieces of a very good Gusto.
Obiit Anno 1631, Aetat. 63.

BENEDETTO CALIARI lived and studied with his Brother Paulo, whom he loved
entirely; and frequently assisted him, and his Nephews, in finishing several of
their Compositions; but especially in Painting Architecture, in which he
chiefly delighted. He practiced for the most part in Fresco: and some of his
best Pieces are in Chiaro-Scuro, or two Colors only. He was besides, Master
of an indifferent good stock of Learning, was Poetically inclined, and had a
peculiar Talent in Satire. He died Anno 1598, Aet. 60. See more of Paulo page
219.

GIOSEPPE SALVIATI, a Venetian Painter, was born Anno 1535, 1535.
and exchanged the name of Porta, which belonged to his Family, for that of his
Master Francesco Salviati, with whom he was placed very young at Rome by his
Uncle. He spent the greatest part of his Life in Venice; where he applied
himself generally to Fresco: and was oftentimes employed in concurrence with
Paul Veronese and Tintoret. He was well esteemed for his great skill both in
Design and Coloring; was likewise well read in other Arts and Sciences, and
particularly so good a Mathematician, that he writ several Treatises very
judiciously on that Subject. He died Anno 1585. Aet. 50.


FREDERICO ZUCCHERO, born in the Duchy of Urbin, Anno 1543, 1543.
was a Disciple of his Brother Taddeo, from whom he differed but very little in
his Style and Manner of Painting, though in Sculpture and Architecture he was far
more excellent. He fled into France to avoid the Popes Displeasure, which he
had incurred by an Affront put upon some of his Officers: and from thence
passing through Flanders and Holland, came over into England, drew Queen
Elizabeth's Picture, went back to Italy, was pardoned by the Pope, and in a
little time sent for to Spain by the Philip II. and employed in the Escurial.
He labored very hard at his return to Rome, for establishing the Academy of
Painting, by virtue of a Brief obtained from Pope Gregory XIII. Of which being
chosen the first Prince himself, he built a noble Apartment for their Meeting,
went to Venice to print some Books which he had composed of that Art, and had
formed other Designs for its farther Advancement, which yet were all defeated
by his Death (at Ancona) Anno 1609. Aet. 66.


GIACOMO PALMA Junior, commonly called GIOVANE PALMA, born at Venice, Anno
1544, 1544.
was the Son of Antonio the Nephew of Palma Vecchio. He improved the
Instructions which his Father had given him, by copying the Works of the most
eminent Masters, both of the Roman and Lombard Schools; but in his own
Compositions chiefly followed the Manner of Titian and T^^toret. He spent some
years in Rome, and was employed in the Galleries and Lodgings of the Vatican:
but the greatest number of his Pieces is at Venice, where he studied night and
day, filled almost every place with something or other of his Hand; and (like
Tintoret) refused nothing that was offered him, upon the least Prospect of any
Gains. He died Anno 1628. Aet. 84.


DOMENICO FETI, a Roman, flourished in this time. He was a Disciple of Lodovico
Civoli, of Florence; and excelled in Figures and Historical Compositions, but
died young, Anno Aet. 35.

BARTHOLOMEW SPRANGHER, born at Antwerp, Anno 1546, 1546
was chief Painter to the Emperor Maximilian II. and so much respected by his
Successor Rodolphus, that he presented him with a Gold Chain and Medal, allowed
him a Pension, honored him and his Posterity with the Title of Nobility,
lodged him in his own Palace, and would suffer him to paint for nobody but
himself. He had spent some part of his Youth in Rome, where he was employed by
the Cardinal Farnese, and afterward preferred to the Service of Pope Pius V.
but for want of Judgment in the Conduct of his Studies, brought little with
him, besides a good Pencil from Italy. His Out-line was generally stiff and
very ungraceful, his Postures forced and extravagant; and in a word, there
appeared nothing of the Roman Gusto in his Designs. He obtained leave from the
Emperor (after many years continuance in his Court) to visit his own Country;
and accordingly went to Antwerp, Amsterdam, Haerlem, and several other places,
where he was honorably received: and having had the satisfaction of seeing his
own Works highly admired, and his manner almost universally followed in all
those parts, as well as in Germany, returned to Prague, and died Anno 1602, or
thereabout. In the same Form with Sprangher we may place his Contemporaries,
John van Ach, and Joseph Heints, both History Painter of note, Aet. 56.
and much admired in the Emperors Court.

MATTHEW BRIL was born at Antwerp, Anno 1550, 1550.
but studied for the most part at Rome; and was famous for his Performances in
History and Landtschape, in the Galleries of the Vatican, where he was employed
by Pope Gregory XIII. He died young, Anno 1584. Aet. 34.


PAUL BRIL, of Antwerp also, born Anno 1554, 1554.
followed his Brother Matthew to Rome, painted several things in conjunction
with him, and after his Decease, brought himself into Reputation by his
Landtschapes: but especially by those which he composed in his latter time
(after he had studied the manner o^^ Hannibal Carrach, and had copied some of
Titians Works, in the same kind) the Invention in them being more pleasant, the
Disposition more noble, all the parts more agreeable, and painted with a better
Gusto, than those in his former days. He died at Rome, Anno 1626. Aet. 72.


ANTONIO TEMPESTA, his Contemporary, a Native of Florence, was a Disciple of
John Strada, a Fleming. He had a particular Genius for Battles, Calvacades,
Huntings, and for designing all sorts of Animals: but did not so much regard
the Delicacy of Coloring, as the lively expression and Spirit of those things
which he represented. His ordinary Residence was at Rome; where, in his younger
days he had wrought several Pieces by order of Pope Gregory XIII. in the
Apartments of the Vatican. He was full of Thought and Invention, very quick and
ready in the Execution, and famous also for a multitude of Prints, etch'd by
himself. He died Anno 1630.

LODOVICO CARRACCI, the Uncle of Augustino and Hannibal, was born at Bologna,
Anno 1555, 1555.
and under his first Master Prospero Fontana, discovered but an indifferent
Genius for Painting: but however, Art supplied the defects of Nature, and by
constant and unwearied diligence in studying the Works of Parmegiano,
Correggio, Titian, and other great Men, he brought himself at last to a degree
of Perfection hardly inferior to any of them. He assisted his Nephews in
Founding and Settling the famous Academy of Design at Bologna, and afterward
in Painting the Palazzo Farnese at Rome; and having survived them both, died
Anno 1619, Aet. 64.
Vide page 222.

AGOSTINO CARRACCI, a Bolognese also, was born Anno 1557, 1557.
and by the care and instructions of Domenico Tebaldi, Alessandro Minganti and
others, became not only a very good Designer and Painter, but in the Art of
Graving surpassed all the Masters in his time. He had an insight likewise into
all the parts of the Mathematics, Natural Philosophy, Rhetoric, Music, and most
of the Liberal Arts and Sciences. He was besides, an admirable Poet, and in all
other particulars extremely well accomplished. From Bologna he went to Venice,
where he contracted an intimate Friendship with Paul Veronese, Tintoret, and
Bassan; and having engraved a considerable number of their Works, returned home,
and soon afterward followed his Brother Hannibal to Rome, and joined with him
in finishing several Stories in the Farnese Gallery: But some little difference
arising unluckily betwixt them, Augustino removed to the Court of the Duke of
Parma, and in his Service died Anno 1602, Vide page 223. His most celebrated
Piece of Painting, is that of the Communion of St. Ierom, in Bologna: a Picture
so complete in all its parts, that it was much to be lamented, that the
excellent Author of it should withdraw himself from the Practice of an Art in
which his Abilities were so very extraordinary, Aet. 45.
to follow the inferior Profession of a Graver.

ANNIBALE CARRACCI, born likewise at Bologna, Anno 1560, 1560.
was a Disciple of his Uncle Ludovico; and amongst his other admirable
qualities, had so prodigious a Memory, that whatever he had once seen, he never
failed to retain and make his own: so that at Parma, he acquired the Sweetness
and Purity of Correggio; at Venice the Strength and Distribution of Colors of
Titian; and at Rome, the Correctness of Design, and beautiful Forms of the
Antique: And by his wonderful Performances in the Palazzo Farnese, soon made it
appear, that all the several Perfections of the most eminent Masters his
Predecessors, were united in himself alone. In his Conversation he was
friendly, plain, honest, and open-hearted; very communicative to his Scholars,
and so extremely kind to them, that he generally kept his Money in the same box
with his Colors, where they might have recourse to either as they had
occasion. But the unhappiness of his Temper inclining him naturally to
Melancholy; the ill usage which he received from the Cardinal Farnese (who
through the Persuasions of an ignorant Spaniard his Domestic, gave him but a
little above 200l. Sterling. for his eight years study and labor) so confirmed
him in it, that he resolved never more to touch his Pencil: and had undoubtedly
kept his resolution, had not his Necessities compelled him to resume it. Yet
notwithstanding, so far did his Distemper by degrees gain upon him, that at
certain times it deprived him of the right use of his Senses; and at last made
him guilty of some Irregularities, which concealing from his Physicians, he met
with the same fate as Raphael (in the like case) had done before him, and
seemed to copy that great Master as well in the manner of his Death, as he had
imitated him all his Life long in his Works. Nay, such was the Veneration he
had for Raphael, that it was his Deathbed Request, to be buried in the very
same Tomb with him: which was accordingly done in the Pantheon, or Rotunda at
Rome, Anno 1609. Aet. 49.
See more page 222, and besides take notice, that there are extant several
Prints of the B. Virgin, and of other Subjects, etch'd by the hand of this
incomparable Artist.

ANTONIO CARRACCI, the natural Son of Augustino, was brought up under the Care
and Tuition of his Uncle Hannibal: after whose Decease, he applied himself so
successfully to the study of all the Capital Pieces in Rome, that he would have
surpassed even Hannibal himself, if Death had not prevented him, Anno 1618,
Aet. 35.

CAMILLO, GIULIO CESARE, and CARL' ANTONIO, the Sons and Disciples of ERCOLE
PROCACCINI, flourished in this time. They were Natives of Bologna, but upon
some misunderstanding between them and the Carraches, removed to Milan, where
they spent the greatest part of their Lives. Of these,

CAMILLO the Eldest, abounded in Invention and Spirit: but was a great
Mannerist, and rather studied the Beauty, than Correctness of his Designs.

GIULIO CESARE, was both a Sculptor and Painter, and famous in Genoua, as well
as Bologna and Milan, for several admirable things of his hand. He was the best
of all the Procaccini, and surpassed his Brother Camillo in the exactness and
purity of his Out-lines, and in the strength and boldness of his Figures.

CARL' ANTONIO was an excellent Musician, and as well skilled in the Harmony of
Colors as of Sounds: yet not being able to arrive to the Perfection of his
Brothers in Historical Compositions, he applied himself wholly to Landtschapes
and Flowers, and was much esteemed for his Performances that way.

ERCOLE the Son of Carl' Antonio, was a Disciple of his Uncle Iulio Cesare, and
so happy in imitating his manner, that he was sent for to the Court of the Duke
of Savoy, and highly honored, and nobly rewarded by that Prince for his
Services.

GIOSEPPED'ARPINO, commonly called Cavalier GIOSEPPINO, born in the Kingdom of
Naples, Anno 1560, 1560.
was carried very young to Rome, and put out to some Painters, then at work in
the Vatican, to grind their Colors: but the quickness of his Apprehension
having soon made him Master of the Elements of Design, he had the fortune to
grow very famous by degrees; and besides the respect shown him by Pope Gregory
XIII. and his Successors, was so well received by the French K. Lewis XIII.
that he made him a Knight of the Order of St. Michael. He has the character of
a florid Invention, a ready Hand, and a good Spirit in all his Works: but yet
having no sure Foundation, either in the Study of Nature, or the Rules of Art,
and building only upon those Chimeras and fantastical Ideas, which he had
formed in his own Head, he has run himself into a multitude of Errors, being
guilty of those many Extravagancies, necessarily attending such as have no
better Guide than their own capricious Fancy. Aet. 80.
He died at Rome, Anno 1640.

HANS ROTTENHAMER was born at Munc^^en, the Capital City of Bavaria, Anno 1564,
1564.
and after he had studied some time in Germany, went to Venice, and became a
Disciple of Tintoret. He painted both in Fresco and Oil, but his Talent lay
chiesly in the latter, and his peculiar excellence was in little Pieces. His
Invention was free and easy, his Design indifferently correct, his Postures
gentile, and his Coloring very agreeable. He was well esteemed both in Italy
and his own Country, and by his Profession might have acquired great Wealth;
but was so wonderfully extravagant in his way of living, that he consumed it
much faster than it came in, and at last died so poor, that his Friends were
forced to make a gathering to bury him, Anno 1604. Aet. 40.


Cavalier FRANCESCO VANNI, born at Siena in the Dukedom of Tuscany, Anno 1568,
1568.
was a Painters Son, but quitted the manner which he had learnt from his
Father, to follow that of Barocci; whom he imitated in his choice of Religious
Subjects, as well as in his Gusto of Painting. The most considerable Works of
this Master are in the several Churches of Siena, and are much commended both
for the Beauty of their Coloring, and Correctness of their Design. He died
Anno 1615. Aet. 47.


MICHELANGELO MERIGI born An. 1569, 1569.
at CARAVAGGIO, from whence he derived his Name, was at first (like his
Countryman Polidore) no better than a Day-labourer; till having seen some
Painters at work, upon a Brick-wall, which he had prepared for them, he was so
charmed with their Art, that he immediately addressed himself to the study of
it: and in a few years made so considerable a progress, that in Venice, Rome,
and several other parts of Italy, he was cried up, and admired by all the Young
men, as the Author of a new Style of Painting. Upon his first coming to Rome,
his Necessities compelled him to paint Flowers and Fruit, under Cavalier
Gioseppino: but being soon weary of that Subject, and returning to his former
practice of Histories, with Figures drawn to the middle only, he made use of a
Method, quite different from the conduct of Gioseppino, and running into the
contrary extreme, followed the Life as much too close, as the other went wide
from it. He affected a way particular to himself, of deep and dark shadows, to
give his Pieces the greater relievo, and despising all other help, but what he
received from Nature alone (whom he took with all her faults, and copied
without judgment or discretion) his Invention became so poor, that he could
never draw any thing without his Model before his eyes; and therefore
understood but little either of Design, or Decorum in his Compositions. He had
indeed an admirable Coloring, and great strength in all his Works: But those
Pictures which he made in imitation of the manner of Georgione, were his best,
because they have nothing of that blackness in them, in which he afterward
delighted. He died in his return from Malta, (where he had been Knighted by the
Grand Master, for some things which he had wrought for him) Anno 1609. Aet. 40.
His chief Disciples were Bartolomeo Manfredi of Mantoua, Carlo Saracino,
commonly called Venetiano, Valentino a Frenchman, and Gerard Hunthorst of
Utrecht.

FILIPPO d' ANGELI was a Roman born, but called NEAPOLITANO, because his Father
sent him to Naples, when he was very young. At his return to Rome, he applied
himself to the Antiquities; but unhappily left that study too soon, and
followed the manner of his Contemporary M. Angelo da Caravaggio. He practiced
for the most part in Landtschapes, and Battles, was every where well esteemed
for his Works, and employed by several Princes in many of the Churches and
Palaces of Rome, Naples and Venice; at the last of which places he died Anno
Aetat. 40.

IAN BRUEGHEL, the Son of old Peter, and the younger Brother of Helsen
Brueghel, was born in Brussels, Anno 1569, 1569.
and called FLUWEELEN because of the Velvet Garments which he generally
affected to wear. He began his Studies at home, under Peter Goe-kindt, and
continued them in Italy with such success, that of all the German, Dutch, or
Flemish Masters, Elsheimer only was superior to him in Landtschapes, and
Histories with small Figures. He painted both in Watercolors and Oil, but in
the latter chiefly excelled; and especially, in representing Wakes, Fairs, and
other frolicksom and merry meetings of Country People. His Invention was easy
and pleasant, his Out-lines firm and sure, his Pencil loose and free: and in
short, all his Compositions were so well managed, that Nature in her plain
Country Dress, was always to be seen in his Works. He died Anno 1625. Aet. 56.


ADAM ELSHEIMER born at Frankfort upon the Mayn, Anno 1574, 1574.
was at first a Disciple of Philip Uffenbach a German: but an ardent desire of
Improvement carrying him to Rome, he soon became a most excellent Artist in
Landtschapes, Histories, and Night-pieces, with little Figures. His Works are
very few; and for the incredible Pains and Labor which he bestowed upon them,
valued at such prodigious rates, that they are hardly any where to be found but
in the Cabinets of Princes. He was a Person by Nature inclined to Melancholy,
and through continued study and thoughtfulness, was so far settled in that
unhappy temper, that neglecting his own domestic concerns, Debts came thick
upon him, and Imprisonment followed: which struck such a damp upon his Spirits,
that though he was soon released, yet he did not long survive it, and died in
the year 1610, Aet. 36.
or thereabout.

GUIDO RENI was born at Bologna, An. 1575, 1575.
and having learnt the Rudiments of Painting, under a Flemish Master, was
refined and polished in the School of the Carraches: and to what degree of
Excellence he arrived, see page 223. He acquired great perfection in Music, by
the instructions of his Father, an eminent Professor of that Art. In his
behavior he was modest, gentile, and very obliging; lived in great splendour,
both at Bologna, and Rome, and was only unhappy in his immoderate love of
Gaming: to which, in his latter days, he had abandoned himself so entirely,
that all the Money which he could get by his Pencil, or borrow upon Interest,
being too little to supply his losses, he was at last reduced to so poor and
mean a condition, that the consideration of his present circumstances, together
with reflections on his former reputation, and high manner of living, brought a
languishing Distemper upon him, which occasioned his Death, Anno 1642. Aet. 67.
Note, that there are several Designs of this great Master, in print, etch'd by
himself.

GIO. BATTISTA VIOLA, a Bolognese, born Anno 1576, 1576.
was a Disciple of Hannibal Carrach, by whose assistance he arrived to an
excellent manner in Landtschape-painting, which he chiefly studied, and for
which he was well esteemed in Rome, and several other parts of Italy. But Pope
Gregory XV. having made him Keeper of his Palace, to reward him for the
Services which he had done for him, when he was Cardinal, he quitted his
Pencil, and died soon after, Anno 1622. Aet. 46.


Sir PETER PAUL RUBENS, born at Cologne, Anno 1577, 1577.
was the best accomplished of all the Flemish Masters; and would have rivaled
even the most celebrated Italians, if his Parents, instead of placing him under
the tuition of Adam van Noort, and Octavio Venus, had bred him up in the Roman
and Lombard Schools. Yet notwithstanding, he made so good use of that little
time which he spent in those places, that perhaps none of his Predecessors can
boast a more beautiful Coloring, a nobler Invention, or a more luxurious Fancy
in their Compositions, of which see a farther account page 225. B^^t besides
his talent in Painting, and his admirable skill in Architecture (very eminent
in the several Churches, and Palaces, built after his Designs, at Genoua.) He
was a Person possessed of all the Ornaments and Advantages, that can render a
man Valuable: was universally Learned, spoke seven Languages very perfectly,
was well read in History, and withal so excellent a Statesman, that he was
employed in several public Negotiations of great Importance; which he managed
with the most refined Prudence, and Conduct. And was particularly famous for
the Character with which he was sent into England, of Ambassador from the
Infanta Isabella, and Philip IV. of Spain, to K. Charles I. upon a Treaty of
Peace between the two Crowns, confirmed Anno 1630. His principal Performances
are in the Banqueting House at Whitehall, the Escurial in Spain, and the
Luxemburgh Galleries at Paris, where he was employed by Queen Mary of Medicis,
Dowager of Henry IV. and in each of those three Courts had the honor of
Knighthood conferred upon him, besides several magnificent Presents, in
testimony of his extraordinary Merits. His usual abode was at Antwerp, where he
built a spacious Apartment, in imitation of the Rotunda at Rome, for a noble
Collection of Pictures which he had purchased in Italy: some of which, together
with his Statues, Medals, and other Antiquities, he sold, not long after, to
the Duke of Buckingham, his intimate Friend, for ten thousand pounds. He lived
in the highest Esteem and Reputation imaginable, was as great a Patron, as
Master of his Art; and so much admired all over Europe, for his many singular
Endowments, that no Strangers of any Quality could pass through the
Low Countries, till they had first seen Rubens, of whose Fame they had heard so
much. He died Anno 1640, Aet. 63.
leaving vast Riches behind him to his Children, of whom Albert the Eldest,
succeeded him in the Office of Secretary of State, in Flanders.

ORATION GENTILESCHI, a Native of Pisa, a City in Tuscany, flourished in this
time: and after he had made himself known in Florence, Rome, Genoua, and other
parts of Italy, removed to Savoy, from thence went to France, and at last, upon
his arrival in England, was so well received by K. Charles I. that he appointed
him Lodgings in his Court, together with a considerable Salary, and employed
him in his Palace at Greenwich, and other public places. He made several
Attempts in Face-painting, but with little success, his Talent lying altogether
in Histories, with Figures as big as the Life: In which kind, some of his
Compositions have deservedly met with great Applause. He was much in favor
with the Duke of Buckingham, and many others of the Nobility: and after twelve
years continuance in this Kingdom, died Anno Aetat. 84. and was buried in the
Queens Chapel in Somerset House.

ARTEMISIA GENTILESCHI his Daughter, excelled her Father in Portraits, and was
but little inferior to him in Histories. She lived for the most part at Naples,
in great splendour: and was as famous all over Europe for her Amors, and
Love-Intrigues, as for her talent in Painting.

FRANCESCO ALBANI a Bolognese, born Anno 1578, 1578.
was a Disciple of the Carraches^^ well versed in polite Learning, and
excellent in all the parts of Painting; but principally admired for his
performances in little. He had a particular Genius for naked Figures: and the
better to accomplish himself in that Study, married a beautiful Lady of
Bologna, with little or no fortune; by whom (upon all occasions) he used to
design naked Venus's, the Graces, Nymphs, and other Goddesses: and by her
Children little Cupids, playing, and dancing, in all the variety of Postures
imaginable. He spent some time at Rome, was employed also by the Grand Duke of
Tuscany, but composed most of his Works in his own Country; where he died, Anno
1660. Aet. 82.
His most famous Disciples were Pier Francesco Mola, and Gio. Battista his
Brother, both excellent Masters in Figures and Landtschapes.

FRANCIS SNYDERS, born at Antwerp, Anno 1579, 1579.
was bred up under Henry van Balen his Countryman; but owed the most
considerable part of his Improvement, to his Studies in Italy. He painted all
sorts of Wild Beasts, and other Animals, Huntings, Fish, Fruit, etc. in great
Perfection: was often employed by the King of Spain, and several other Princes,
and everywhere much commended for his Works.

DOMENICO ZAMPIERI, commonly called DOMENICHINO, born in the City of Bologna
An. 1581, 1581.
was at first a Disciple of a Flemish Master, but soon quitted his School, for
a much better of the Carraches; being instructed at Bologna by Ludovico, and at
Rome by Hannibal, who had so great a Value for him, that he took him to his
assistance in the Farnese Gallery. He was extremely laborious and slow in his
Productions, applying himself always to his work with much study and
thoughtfulness, and never offering to touch his Pencil till he found a kind of
Enthusiasm, or Inspiration upon him. His talent lay principally in the
correctness of his Style, and in expressing the Passions and Affections of the
Mind. In both which he was so admirably judicious, that Nicolo Poussin, and
Andrea Sacchi used to say, his Communion of St. Jerome, in the Church of the
Charity, and Raphaels celebrated Piece of the Transfiguration, were the two
best Pictures in Rome. He was made the chief Architect of the Apostolical
Palace, by Pope Gregory XV. for his great skill in that Art. He was likewise
well versed in the Theory of Music, but in the Practice of it had little
success. He had the misfortune to find Enemies in all places where^^ever he
came; and particularly at Naples was so ill treated by those of his own
Profession, that having agreed among themselves to disparage all his Works,
they would hardly allow him to be a tolerable Master: And were not content with
having frighted him, for some time, from that City, but afterward, upon his
return thither, never left persecuting him, till by their tricks and
contrivances they had quite wearied him out of his Life, Anno 1641. Aet. 60.
Vide page 223. His Contemporary, and most malicious Enemy

GIOSEPPE RIBERA, a Native of Valencia, in Spain, commonly known by the name of
SPAGNOLETTO, was an Artist perfect in Design, and famous for the excellent
manner of Coloring which he had learnt from Michael Angelo da Caravaggio. His
way, was very often in Half-Figures only, and (like his Master) he was
wonderfully strict in following the Life; but as Ill-natured in the choice of
his Subjects, as in his Behavior to poor Domenichino, affecting generally
something very terrible and frightful in his Pieces, such as Prometheus with
the Vulture feeding upon his Liver, Cato Uticensis weltering in his own Blood,
St. Bartholomew with the Skin flayed off from his Body, etc. But however in all
his Compositions, Nature was imitated with so much Art and Judgment, that a
certain Lady big with Child, having accidentally cast her Eyes upon an Ixion,
whom he had represented in Torture upon the Wheel, received such an Impression
from it, that she brought forth an Infant with Fingers distorted just like
those in his Picture. His usual abode was at Naples, where he lived very
splendidly, being much in favor with the Viceroy his Countryman, and in great
Reputation for his Works in Painting, and for several Prints etch'd by his own
hand.

GIOVANNI LANFRANCO, born at Parma, Anno 1581, 1581.
was a Disciple of the Carraches, and besides a zealous Imitator of the Works
of Raphael and Correggio. His character see page 224. He was highly applauded
at Naples for several excellent Pieces which he wrought there, and was so much
esteemed in Rome, that for his Performances in the Vatican he was Knighted by
Pope Urban VIII. He died Anno 1647. Aet. 66.


SISTO BADALOCCHI his Fellow-disciple, was of Parma also, and by the
Instructions of the Carraches at Rome, became one of the best Designers of that
School. He had also many other commendable Qualities, and particularly
Facility, but wanted Diligence. He joined with his Countryman Lanfranco in
etching the Histories of the Bible, after the Paintings of Raphael, in the
Vatican, which they dedicated to Hannibal their Master. He practiced mostly at
Bologna, where he died Young.

SIMON VOUET, born at Paris, Anno 1582, 1582.
was bred up to Painting under his Father, and carried very young to
Constantinople by the French Ambassador, to draw the Picture of the Grand
Signior, which he did by strength of Memory only. From thence he went to
Venice, and afterward settling himself at Rome, made so considerable a
Progress in his Art, that besides the Favors which he received from Pope Urban
VIII. and the Cardinal his Nephew, he was chosen Prince of the Roman Academy of
St. Luke. He was sent for home Anno 1627, by the order of Lewis XIII. whom he
served in the quality of his chief Painter. He practiced both in Portraits and
Histories, and furnished some of the Apartments of the Louvre, the Palaces of
Luxemburgh and St. Germains, the Galleries of Cardinal Richlieu and other
public places with his Works. His greatest Perfection was in his agreeable
Coloring, and his brisk and lively Pencil, being otherwise but very
indifferently qualified; he had no Genius for grand Compositions, was unhappy
in his Invention, unacquainted with the Rules of Perspective, and understood
but little of the Union of Colors, or the Doctrine of Lights and Shadows: yet
nevertheless he brought up several eminent Scholars, amongst whom, was CHARLES
ALFONSE du FRESNOY, Author of the preceding Poem. But his chief Disciple was
the KING himself, whom he had the Honor to instruct in the Art of Designing.
He died An. 1641. Aet. 59.


PIETER van LAER, commonly called BAMBO^^CIO, or the Beggar-painter, was born
in the City of Haerlem, Anno 1584: 1584.
and after he had laid a good Foundation in Drawing and Perspective at home,
went to France, and from thence to Rome; where by his earnest application to
Study, for sixteen years together, he arrived to great Perfection in Histories,
Landtschapes, Grottos, Huntings, etc. with little Figures and Animals. He had
an admirable Gusto in Coloring, was very judicious in the ordering of his
Pieces, nicely just in his Proportions, and only to be blamed, for that he
generally affected to represent Nature in her worst Dress, and followed the
Life too close, in most of his Compositions. He returned to Amsterdam, Anno
1639, and after a short stay there, spent the Remainder of his days with his
Brother, a noted Schoolmaster in Haerlem. He was a Person very serious and
contemplative in his humor, took Pleasure in nothing but Painting and Music:
and by indulging himself too much in a melancholy Retirement, is said to have
shortened his Life, Anno 1644. Aet. 60.


CORNELIUS POELENBURCH, born at Utrecht, Anno 1590, 1590.
was a Disciple of Abraham Blomaert, and afterward for a long time, a Student
in Rome and Florence. His Talent lay altogether in small Figures, naked Boys,
Landtschapes, Ruins, etc. which he expressed with a Pencil agreeable enough, as
to the Coloring part, but generally attended with a little stiffness, the
(almost) inseparable Companion of much Labor and Neatness. He came over into
England, Anno 1637; and after he had continued here four years, and had been
handsomely rewarded by K. Charles I. for several Pieces which he wrought for
him, retired into his own Country, and died Anno 1667. Aet. 77.


Cavalier GIO. FRANCESCO BARBIERI da CENTO, commonly called GUERCINO, (because
of a Cast which he had with his Eyes) was born near Bologna, Anno 1590, 1590.
and bred up under Benedetto Gennari his Countryman: by whose Instructions,
and the Dictates of his own excellent Genius, he soon learnt to design
gracefully and with Correctness; and by conversing afterward with the Works of
Michael Angelo da Caravaggio, became an admirable Colourist, and besides, very
famous for his happy Invention and Freedom of Pencil, and for the Strength,
Relievo, and becoming Boldness of his Figures. He began, in the Declension of
his Age, to alter his Style in Painting: and (to please the unthinking
Multitude) took up another manner more gay, neat and pleasant, but by no means
so great and noble as his former Gusto. He composed several considerable Pieces
in Rome: but the greatest number of his Performances is in, and about Bologna,
where he died, Anno 1666, Aet. 76.
very rich, and highly commended for his extraordinary Piety, Prudence and
Morality.

NICOLO PUSSINO, the French Raphael, was the Descendent of a noble Family in
Picardy, but born at Andely, a Town in Normandy, Anno 1594. 1594.
He was seasoned in Literature at home, instructed in the Rudiments of Design
at Paris, learnt the Principles of Geometry, Perspective and Anatomy at Rome,
practiced after the Life in the Academy of Domenichino, and studied the
Antiquities in company with the famous Sculptor Francesco Fiammingo, who was
born in the same year, and lodged in the same house with him. His way, for the
most part, was in Histories, with Figures about two or three feet high; and his
Coloring inclined rather to the Antique than to Nature: but in all the other
parts of Painting, he was profoundly excellent; and particularly the Beauty of
his Genius appeared in his nice and judicious Observation of the Decorum in his
Compositions, and in expressing the Passions and Affections with such
incomparable skill, that all his Pieces seem to have the very Spirit of the
Action, and the Life and Soul of the Persons whom they represent. He had not
been in Rome above sixteen years, before his Name became so universally
celebrated, that Cardinal Richlieu resolving to advance the noble Arts in
France, prevailed upon him (by means of an obliging Letter, written to him by
Lewis XIII. himself, Anno 1639) to return to his own Country: where he was
received with all possible demonstrations of Esteem, was declared First Painter
to the King, had a considerable Pension appointed him, was employed in several
public Works, and at last undertook to paint the Grand Gallery of the Louvre.
But the King and Cardinal both dying in the time that he went back to settle
his affairs in Italy, and bring his Family from thence; he quite laid aside the
Thoughts of returning any more to France, and ended his days in Rome, Anno
1665: Aet. 71.
having for some years before his Decease, been so much subject to the Palsy,
that the effects of his unsteddy Hand are visible in several of his Designs.

PIETRO TESTA, his Contemporary, was a Native of Lucca, a City in the Dukedom
of Florence, and so miserably poor upon his first arrival at Rome, that he was
forced to make the public Streets his School, and the Statues, Buildings,
Ruins, etc. the Lessons which he studied. He was a Man of a quick Head, a ready
Hand, and a lively Spirit in most of his Performances: but yet for want of
Science, and good Rules to cultivate and strengthen his Genius, all those
hopeful Qualities soon ran to Weeds, and produced little else but Monsters,
Chimeras, and such like wild and extravagant Fancies: Vid. page 102. He
attempted very often to make himself perfect in the Art of Coloring, but never
had any Success that way; and indeed was only tolerable in his Drawings, and
the Prints which he etch'd. He was drowned (as it is generally reported) in the
Tyber, having accidentally fallen off from the Bank, as he was endeavoring to
regain his Hat, which the Wind had blown into the Water.

Sir ANTHONY VAN DYCK, was born at Antwerp, Anno 1599, 1599.
and gave such early proofs of his most excellent Endowments, that Rubens his
Master, fearing he would become as Universal as himself, to divert him from
Histories, used to commend his Talent in Painting after the Life, and took such
care to keep him continually employed in business of that Nature, that he
resolved at last to make it his principal study; and for his Improvement went
to Venice, where he attained the beautiful Coloring of Titian, Paulo Veronese,
etc. And after a few years spent in Rome, Genoua and Sicily, returned home to
Flanders with a manner of Painting, so noble, natural, and easy, that Titian
himself was hardly his Superior, and no other Master in the world equal to him
for Portraits. He came over into England soon after Rubens had left it, and was
entertained in the Service of King Charles I. who conceived a mavelous esteem
for his Works, honored him with Knight hood, presented him with his own
Picture set round with Diamonds, assigned him a considerable Pension, sat very
often to him for his Portrait, and was followed by most of the Nobility and
principal Gentry of the Kingdom. He was a person low of stature, but
well-proportion'd; very handsome, modest, and extremely obliging; a great
Encourager of all such as excelled in any Art or Science, and Generous to the
very last degree. He married one of the fairest Ladies of the English Court,
Daughter of the Lord Ruthen Earl of Gowry, and lived in State and Grandeur
answerable to her Birth: His own Garb was generally very rich, his Coaches and
Equippage magnificent, his Retinue numerous and gallant, his Table very
splendid, and so much frequented by People of the best Quality of both Sexes,
that his Apartments seemed rather to be the Court of some Prince, than the
Lodgings of a Painter. He grew weary, toward the latter end of his Life, of
the continued trouble that attended Face-Painting; and being desirous of
immortalizing his Name by some more glorious Undertaking, went to Paris in
hopes of being employed in the Grand Gallery of the Louvre; but not succeeding
there, he returned hither, and proposed to the King (by his Friend Sir Kenelm
Digby) to make Cartoons for the Banqueting house at White Hall: the subject of
which was to have been the Institution of the Order of the Garter, the
Procession of the Knights in their Habits, with the Ceremony of their
Installment, and St. Georges Feast. But his Demands of fourscore thousand
pounds, being thought unreasonable, whilst the King was upon treating with him
for a less Sum, the Gout and other Distempers put an end to that Affair and
his Life, Anno 1641; Aet. 42.
and his Body was interred in St. Paul's Church. See farther, page 226. And
note, that amongst the Portraits of Illustrious Persons, etc. printed and
published by the particular directions of this Master, some were etch'd in
Aquafortis by Van Dyck himself.

BENEDETTO CASTIGLIONE, a Genouese, was at first a Disciple of Battista Paggi
and Ferrari his Countrymen; improved himself afterward by the instructions of
Van Dyck (as long as he continued in Genoua) and at last became an Imitator of
the Manner of Nicolo Poussin. He was commended for several very good Prints of
his own etching: but in Painting his Inclinations led him to Figures, with
Landtschapes and Animals; which he touched up with a great deal of Life and
Spirit, and was particularly remarkable for a brisk Pencil, and a free handling
in all his Compositions. He was a Person very unsettled in his Temper, and
never loved to stay long in one place: but being continually upon the ramble,
his Works lie scattered up and down in Genoua, Rome, Naples, Venice, Parma, and
Mantoua, where he died.

VIVIANO CODAZZO, generally called VIVIANO delle PROSPETTIVE, was born at
Bergamo in the Venetian Territories, Anno 1599: 1599.
and by the Instructions of Augustino Tasso his Master, arrived to a most
excellent manner of painting Buildings, Ruins, etc. His ordinary Residence was
at Rome, where he died, Anno 1674, Aet. 75.
and was buried in the Church of S. Lorenzo in Lucina. He had a Son called
Nicolo, who pursued his Fathers steps, and died at Genoua, in great Reputation
for his Performances in Perspective.

MARIO NUZZI, 1599.
commonly called MARIO de' FIORI, born at Orta in the Terra di Sabina, was a
Disciple of his Uncle Tomaso Salini, and one of the most famous Masters in his
time for painting Flowers. He died in Rome, (where he had spent great part of
his Life) and was also buried in S. Lorenzos Church, Anno 1672. Aet. 73.


MICHELANGELO CERQUOZZI, was born in Rome, Anno 1600, 1600.
and bred up in the School* of Antonio Salvatti, a Bolognese. He was called
delle BATTAGLIE, from his excellent Talent in Battles; but besides his great
skill in that particular Subject, he was very Successful in all sorts of
Figures, and painted Fruit incomparably beyond any Master in Europe. He was
buried in the Choire of S. Mary's Church in Rome, Anno 1660. Aet. 60.


CLAUDIO GILLE of LORAIN, born Anno 1600, 1600.
was by his Parents sent very young to Rome; and after he had been grounded in
the Elements of Design, and the Rules of Perspective, under Augustino Tasso, he
removed his Study to the Banks of the Tyber, and into the open Fields, took all
his Lessons from Nature her self, and by many years diligent Imitation of that
excellent Mistress, climbed up to the highest step of Perfection in Landtschape
painting: and was universally admired for his pleasant and most agreeable
Invention; for the delicacy of his Coloring, and the charming variety and
tenderness of his Tints; for his artful Distribution of the Lights and Shadows;
and for his wonderful Conduct, in disposing his Figures for the advantage and
Harmony of his Compositions. He was much commended for several of his
Performances in Fresco as well as Oil, was employed by Pope Urban VIII. and
many of the Italian Princes in adorning their Palaces: and having by his Pencil
made his Name famous throughout Europe, died An. 1682, Aet. 82.
and was interred in the Church of Trinita de Monti, in Rome.

GASPARO DUGHET, was of French Extraction, but born in Rome, Anno 1600. 1600.
He took to himself the name of POUSSIN, in gratitude for many Favors, and
particularly that of his Education, which he received from Nicolo Poussin, who
married his Sister. His first Employment under his Brother-in-Law, was in
looking after his Colors, Pencil, etc. but his excellent Genius for Painting
soon discovering it self, by his own Industry and his Brothers Instructions was
so well improved, that in Landtschapes (which he principally studied) he became
one of the greatest Masters in his Age; and was much in request, for his easy
Invention, solid Judgment, regular Disposition, and true Resemblance of Nature
in all his Works. He died in his great Climacterical year 1663, and was buried
in his Parish Church of S. Susanna, Aet. 63.
in Rome.

In his time, lived and flourished ANDREA SACCHI, a celebrated Roman Master,
highly extolled for his general Accomplishments in all the parts of Painting;
but more particularly eminent for his extraordinary skill in the Elegance of
Design, the Harmony of Order, and the Beauty of Coloring.

His Competitor PIETRO BERETTINI da CORTONA, was also of great consideration in
this time; and much applauded for his magnificent Works in several of the
Churches and Palaces of Rome and Florence. He excelled both in Fresco and Oil,
was profoundly read in the Antiquities, had a noble and rich Imagination, and a
Genius far beyond any of his Contemporaries, for Ornaments and grand Historical
Compositions. He was very well esteemed by Pope Urban VIII. Innocent X. and
most of the Persons of the first Rank in Italy.

GEERART DOV, born at Leyden, about the year 1607, 1607.
was a Disciple of Rembrandt, but much pleasanter in his Style of Painting, and
superior to him in little Figures. He was esteemed in Holland the best Master
in his way: and though we must not expect to find in his works that Elevation of
Thought, that Correctness of Design, or that noble Spirit, and grand Gusto, in
which the Italians have distinguished themselves from the rest of Mankind; yet
it must be acknowledged, that in the Management of his Pencil, and the Choice
and Beauty of his Colors, he has been curious to the last degree; and in
finishing his Pieces, laborious and patient beyond example. He died circa Annum
1674, Aet. 67.
leaving behind him many Scholars, of whom MIERIS the chief, was in several
respects equal to his Master. But for the rest of his Imitators, generally
speaking, we may place them in the same Form with the cunning Fools, mentioned
page 133.

ADRIAEN BROUWER was born in the City of Haerlem, Anno 1608; 1608.
and besides his great Obligations to Nature, was very much beholden to Frans
Hals, who took him from begging in the Streets, and instructed him in the
Rudiments of Painting; And to make him amends for his kindness, Brouwer, when
he found himself sufficiently qualified to get a Livelihood, ran away from his
Master into France, and after a short stay there, returned, and settled at
Antwerp. Humor was his proper Sphere, and it was in little Pieces that he used
to represent Boors, and others his Pot^^ companions, drinking, smoking Tobacco,
gaming, fighting, etc. with a Pencil so tender and free, so much of Nature in
his Expression, such excellent Drawing in all the particular parts, and good
Keeping in the whole together, that none of his Countrymen have ever been
comparable to him in that Subject. He was extremely facetious and pleasant over
his Cups, scorned to work as long as he had any Money in his Pockets, declared
for a short Life and a merry one: and resolving to ride Post to his Grave, by
the help of Wine and Brandy, got to his Iourneys end, Anno 1638; so very poor,
that Contributions were raised to lay him privately in the Ground, from whence
he was soon after taken up, and (as it is commonly said) very handsomely
interred by Rubens, Aet. 30.
who was a great Admirer of his happy Genius for Painting.

SAMUEL COOPER, born in London, Anno 1609, 1609.
was bred up (together with his elder Brother Alexander) under the Care and
Discipline of Mr. Hoskins his Uncle: but derived the most considerable
advantages, from the Observations which he made on the Works of Van Dyck. His
Pencil was generally confined to a Head only; and indeed below that part he
was not always so successful as could be wished: but for a Face, and all the
dependencies of it (Viz.) the graceful and becoming Air, the Strength, Relievo
and noble Spirit, the Softness and tender liveliness of Flesh and Blood, and
the loose and gentile management of the Hair, his Talent was so extraordinary,
that for the Honor of our Nation, it may without Vanity be affirmed, he was
(at least) equal to the most famous Italians; and that hardly any of his
Predecessors has ever been able to show so much Perfection in so narrow a
Compass. Answerable to his Abilities in this Art was his skill in Music: and he
was reckoned one of the best Lutenists, as well as the most excellent Limner in
his time. He spent several years of his Life abroad, was personally acquainted
with the greatest Men of France, Holland, and his own Country, and by his Works
more universally known in all the pars of Christendom. He died Anno 1672, Aet.
63.
and lies buried in Pancras Church, in the Fields.

WILLIAM DOBSON, 1610.
a Gentleman descended of a Family very eminent (at that time) in St. Albans,
was born in St. Andrews Parish, in Holbourn, Anno 1610. Who first instructed
him in the use of his Pencil is uncertain: of this we are well assured, that he
was put out very early an Apprentice to one Mr. Peake, a Stationer and Trader
in Pictures; and that Nature, his best Mistress, inclined him so powerfully to
the practice of Painting after the Life, that had his Education been but
answerable to his Genius, England might justly have been as proud of her
Dobson, as Venice of her Titian, or Flanders of her Van Dyck. How much he was
beholden to the latter of those great Men, may easily be seen in all his Works;
no Painter having ever come up so near to the Perfection of that excellent
Master, as this his happy Imitator. He was also farther indebted to the
Generosity of Van Dyck, in presenting him to King Charles I. who took him into
his immediate Protection, kept him in Oxford all the while his Majesty
continued in that City; sat several times to him for his Picture, and obliged
the Prince of Wales, Prince Rupert, and most of the Lords of his Court to do
the like. He was a fair, middle^^ sized Man. of a ready Wit, and pleasing
Conversation; was somewhat loose and irregular in his way of Living, and
notwithstanding the many Opportunities which he had of making his Fortunes,
died very poor, Aet. 37.
at his house in St. Martins-lane, Anno 1647.

MICHAELANGELO PACE, born Anno 1610, 1610.
and called di CAMPIDOGLIO (because of an Office which he had in the Capitol)
was a Disciple of Fioravanti, and very much esteemed all over Italy, for his
admirable Talent in painting Fruit and the still Life. He died in Rome, Anno
1670, leaving behind him two Sons; of whom Gio. Battista the eldest, was
brought up to History painting under Francesco Mola, and is now in the Service
of the King of Spain: But the other called Pietro, died in his Prime, and only
lived just long enough to show that a few years more would have made him one of
the greatest Masters in the World. Aet. 60.


SALVATOR ROSA, a Neapolitan, born An. 1614, 1614.
in both the Sister-Arts of Poesy and Painting, was esteemed one of the most
excellent Masters that Italy has produced in this Century. In the first, his
Province was Satire; in the latter, Landtschapes, Battles, Havens, etc. with
little Figures. He was a Disciple of Daniele Falconi his Countryman, and Artist
of good repute; whose instructions he very much improved by his Study after the
Antiquities, and the Works of the most eminent Painters who went before him. He
was famed for his copious and florid Invention, for his profound Judgment in
the ordering of his Pieces, for the gentile and uncommon Management of his
Figures, and his general Knowledge in all the parts of Painting: But that which
gave a more particular stamp to his Compositions, was his inimitable Liberty of
Pencil, and the noble Spirit with which he animated all his Works. Rome was the
place where he spent the greatest part of his Life; highly courted and admired
by all the Men of Note and Quality, and where he died Anno 1673; Aet. 59.
having etch'd abundance of valuable Prints with his own hand.

GIACOMO CORTESI, the famous Battel-painter, commonly called The BORGOGNONE,
from the Country where he was born, was the Contemporary of Salvator Rosa, and
equally applauded for his admirable Gusto, and grand Manner of Painting. He had
for several years been conversant in Military Affairs, was a considerable
Officer in the Army, made the Camp his School, and formed all his excellent
Ideas from what he had seen performed in the Field. His Style was roughly
noble, and ( Soldier like) full of Fire and Spirit. He retired, toward the
latter end of his Life, into the Convent of the Jesuits in Rome: where he was
forced to take Sanctuary (as they say) to rid his hands of an ill Bargain,
which he had unhappily got in a Wife.

Sir PETER LELY was born Anno 1617, 1617.
in Westphalia, where his Father, being a Captain, happened to be then in
Garrison. He was bred up for some time in the Hague, and afterward committed
to the care of one de Grebber of Haerlem. He came over into England, Anno 1641,
and pursued the natural bent of his Genius in Landtschapes with small Figures,
and Historical Compositions: but finding the practice of Painting after the
Life generally more encouraged, he applied himself to Portraits with such
success, as in a little time to surpass all his Contemporaries in Europe. He
was very earnest in his younger days, to have finished the course of his
Studies in Italy: but the great business in which he was perpetually engaged,
not allowing him so much time; to make himself amends, he resolved at last, in
an excellent and well chosen Collection of the Drawings, Prints, and Paintings,
of the most celebrated Masters, to bring the Roman and Lombard Schools home to
him. And what benefit he reaped from this Expedient, was sufficiently apparent
in that admirable Style of Painting, which he formed to himself by daily
conversing with the Works of those great Men: In the correctness of his
Drawing, and the beauty of his Coloring; but especially in the graceful Airs
of his Figures, the pleasing Variety of his Postures, and his gentile
negligence and loose manner of Draperies: in which particular as few of his
Predecessors were equal to him, so all succeeding Artists must stand obliged to
his happy Invention, for the noble Pattern which he has left them for
Imitation. He was recommended to the favor of King Charles I. by Philip Earl
of Pembroke, then Lord Chamberlain; and drew his Majesty's Picture, when he was
Prisoner in Hampton Court. He was also much in esteem with his Son Charles II.
who made him his Painter, conferred the honor of Knighthood upon him, and
would oftentimes take great pleasure in his Conversation, which he found to be
as agreeable as his Pencil. He was likewise highly respected by all the People
of Eminence in the Kingdom; and indeed so extraordinary were his natural Parts,
and so great his acquired Knowledge, that it would be hard to determine whether
he was a better Painter, or a more accomplished Gentleman: or whether the
Honors which he has done his Profession, or the Advantages which he derived
from it were the most considerable. But as to his Art, certain it is, that his
last Pieces were his best, and that he gained ground, and improved himself
every day, even to the very Moment in which Death snatched his Pencil out of
his hand in an Apoplectic Fit, Aet. 63.
Anno1680.

SEBASTIAN BOURDON, a Frenchman, born at Mompellier, Anno 1619, 1619.
studied seven years in Rome, and acquired so much Reputation by his Works both
in History and Landtschape, that upon his return to France, he had the honor
of being the first who was made Rector of the Royal Academy of Painting and
Sculpture at Paris. He spent two years also in Sweden, where he was very well
esteemed, and nobly presented by that great Patroness of Arts and Sciences,
Aet. 54.
Queen Christina. He died, Anno. 1673.

LUCA IORDANO, was born in Naples, Anno 1626, 1626.
and by his Studies under Pietro da Cortona at Rome, joined with his continued
Application to all the noble Remains of Antiquity, became one of the best
accomplished, and most universal Masters in his time. He was wonderfully
skilled in the practical part of Designing, and from his incredible Facility,
and prodigious Dispatch, was called by his Fellow-Painters, Luca fa Presto. He
was besides very happy in imitating the different Styles of other great Men,
and particularly followed the manner of Titian, Bassan, Tintoret, Guido, etc.
so close in several of his Pieces, that it is not the talent of every Pretender
to Painting, to distinguish them from Originals of those Hands. He was famous
for his many excellent Performances in Rome and Florence: And being continually
employed in working for Princes, and People of the first Quality all over
Europe, grew so vastly rich, that at his return to Naples, he purchased a
Duchy in that Kingdom, married and lived splendidly, kept a noble Palace, and
a numerous Retinue, with Coaches, Litters, and all other imaginable State.
Being grown Old, he was earnestly pressed by the Viceroy to go over into Spain,
and serve the King his Master: He had no fancy for the Voyage, and therefore
raised his Terms very high: was not content with twenty thousand Crowns paid
him down, and the Golden Key given him, as Groom of the Bed-chember; but
besides, having heard, that by the Statutes of St. Iago, and the other Military
Orders of Spain, it was expressly provided, that no Painter should be admitted
into any of them, because their Profession was generally looked upon as
Mechanic; he resolved, for the Honor of his Art, not to stir a foot, till he
himself was first made a Knight of St. Iago, and his two Sons Knights of
Alcantara and Calatrava. All which being granted, he set out for Madrid, where
he was received very kindly by the King, and having adorned the grand
Staircase of the Escurial, with the Story of the Battle of St. Quintin, (which
is perhaps one of the best things in its kind, that has been any where
performed in this Age) he fell to work upon the great Church belonging to that
Palace; but the Climate being too severe for his Constitution of Body, and his
Mind not so well satisfied as at Naples, Aet. 68.
he sickned and died in the Winter of the year 1694.

In the same year died FILIPPO LAURO, a Master equal to him in all respects,
excepting only that by confining himself to small Figures, and Histories in
little, he contracted his admirable Talent into a narrower Compass. He lived
for the most part in Rome; and was highly valued for the Riches of his Fancy,
and the Accuracy of his Judgment; for the Elegance of his Out-lines, and the
Propriety of his Coloring; and for the graceful Freedom of his Pencil, in all
his Compositions.

JOHN RILEY, born in the City of London, Anno 1646, 1646.
was instructed in the first Rudiments of Painting by Mr. Zoust and Mr. Fuller,
but left them whilst he was very Young, and began to practice after the Life:
yet acquired no great Reputation, till upon the death of Sir Peter Lely, his
Friends being desirous that he should succeed that excellent Master in the
favor of King Charles II. engaged Mr. Chiffinch to sit to him for his Picture;
which he performed so well, that the King, upon sight of it, sent for him, and
having employed him in drawing the Duke of Graftons Portrait, and soon after
his own, took him into his Service, honored him with several obliging
Testimonies of his Esteem, and withal gave this Character of his Works, that he
painted both Inside and Outside. Upon the Accession of K. William and Q. Mary
to the Crown, he was sworn their Majesty's Principal Painter; which place he
had not enjoyed in the preceding Reign, though K. James and his Queen were both
pleased to be drawn by his Hand. He was very diligent in the Imitation of
Nature; and by studying the Life, rather than following any particular manner,
attained a pleasant and most agreeable Style of Painting. But that which
eminently distinguished him from all his Contemporaries, was his peculiar
Excellence in a Head, and especially in the Coloring part; wherein some of his
Pieces were so very extraordinary, that Mr. Riley himself was the only Person
who was not charmed with them. He was a Gentleman extremely courteous in his
Behavior, obliging in his Conversation, and prudent in all his Actions. He was
a dutiful Son, an affectionate Brother, a kind Master, and a faithful Friend.
He never was guilty of a piece of Vanity (too common amongst Artists) of saying
mighty things on his own behalf, but contented himself with letting his Works
speak for him; which being plentifully dispersed over other Nations as well as
our own, were indeed everywhere very Eloquent in his Commendation. He had for
several years been violently persecuted by the Gout; which after many terrible
Assaults, flying up at last into his Head, brought him to his Grave, Anno 1691,
exceedingly lamented by all such as had the happiness of being acquainted
either with his Person or his Works. Aet. 45.


FINIS.
Ancient Masters Contained in the preceding ACCOUNT.
A.
ACtius Priscus. page 250 Amphion. 245 Antidotus. 246 Apelles. 242 Apollodorus.
237 Ardices. 233 Arellius. 250 Aristides. 245 Asclepiodorus. ib. Athenion. 247
B.
Bularchus. 235
C.
Charmas. 234 Cimon. 234 Cleanthes. 233 Cleophantus. 234 Cornelius Pinus. 250
Crato. 233 Cydias. 242
D.
Dinias. 234
E.
Euchir. 233 Eumarus. 234 Euphranor. 241 Eupompus. 240
F.
Fabius Pictor. 248
H.
Hygiemon. 234
L.
Ludius. 250
M.
Marcus Pacuvius. 249 Melanthius. 244 Metrodorus. 249 Myron. 237
N.
Nealces. 248 Nicias. 247 Nicomachus. 246 Nicophanes. ib.
P.
Pamphilus. 240 Panaenus. 235 Parrhasius. 239 Pausias. 241 Phidias. 235
Philocles. 233 Polignotus Atheniensis 233 Thasius. 237 Polycletus. 236
Praxiteles. 242 Protogenes. 243 Pyre^^cus. 246
S.
Saurias. 233 Scopas. 237
T.
Telephanes. 233 Theomnestus. 246 Timanthes. 240 Timomachus. 249 Turpilius. 250
Z.
Zeuxis. 238
Modern Masters.
A.
ALbani. page 320 Albert Durer. 263 Andrea Mantegna. 258 Sacchi. 336 del Sarto.
270 Schiavone. 296 Ta^^i. 255 Verrocchio. 259
Annibale Carracci. 308 Antonello da Messina 256 Antonio Carracci. 309 da
Correggio. 264 More. 295 Tempesta. 305
Artemisia Gentileschi. 320 Agostino Carracci. 306
B.
Badalocchi (Sisto.) 324 Bandinelli (Baccio.) 273 Bamboccio. 326 Barocci
(Frederico.) 297 Bartolomeo (Fra.) 263 Bassano Francesco. 291 Giacomo. 289 Gio.
Battista. 291 Girolamo. ib. Leandro. ib.
Battaglie (M. Angelo.) 334 Battista Franco. 277 Bellino Gentile. 357 Giovanni.
ib.
Benedetto Caliari. 301 Castiglione. 332
Bordone (Paris.) 294 Borgognone. 342 Bourdon (Sebastian.) 345 Brueghel
(Fluweelen.) 315 Bril Matthew. 305 Paul. ib.
Brouwer. 337 Buonaroti (M. Angelo.) 265
C.
Caliari Benedetto. 301 Carlo. 300 Gabrielle. ib. Paolo. 299
Camillo Procaccini. 310 Campidoglio (M. Angelo.) 341 Carl^^ Antonio
Procaccini. 310 Carracci Annibale. 308 Antonio. 309 Agostino. 306 Lodovico. ib.
Caravaggio (M. Angelo.) 313 Castiglione (Benedetto.) 332 Cimabue. 253 Claudio
Gille (Lorain.) 334 Cooper (Samuel.) 338 Correggio. 264
D.
Daniele da Volterra. 288 Dobson. 339 Domenichino. 321 Domenico Feti. 303
Ghirlandaio. 262 Tintoretto. 293
Dou. 337 Durer (Albert.) 263
E.
Elsheimer. 315 Ercole Procaccini. 311
F.
Feti (Domenico.) 303 Farinato (Paolo.) 296 Filippo Lauro. 347 Neapolitano. 314
Francesco Albani. 320 Barbieri. 327 Bassano. 291 Francia. 262 Mazzuoli. 286
Primaticcio. 282 Salviati. 288 Vanni. 312 Vecellio. 269
Franco (Battista.) 277 Frederico Barocci. 297 Zucchero. 302
Fresnoy (C. Alphonse.) 325
G.
Gaddi Gaddo. 255 Taddeo. ib.
Gasparo Poussin. 335 Gentileschi Artemisia. 320 Oration. 319
Giorgione. 266 Giorgio Vasari. 294 Ghirlandaio (Domenico) 262 Giacomo Bassano.
289 Cortesi. 342 da Puntormo. 275 Tintoretto. 292
Gio. Battista Bassano. 291 Gioseppe Ribera. 323 Salviati. 301
Gioseppino. 311 Giottino. 256 Giotto. 254 Girolamo Bassano. 291 Giulio Cesare
Procaccini. 310 Giulio Clovio. 282 Romano. 274
Guercino da Cento. 327 Guido Reni. 316
H.
Hans Holbein. 283
I.
John of Bruges. 256 Iordano (Luca.) 345
L.
Lanfranco. 324 Lauro (Filippo.) 347 Leandro Bassano. 291 Lely (Sir Peter.) 343
Leonardo da Vinci. 260 Lodovico Carracci. 306 Luca Iordano. 345 Signorelli. 259
Lucas van Leyden. 277
M.
Mantegna (Andrea.) 258 Margaritone. 255 Marietta Tintoretta. 293 Mario di
Fiori. 334 Masaccio. 257 Matthew Bril. 305 Michel-angelo delle Battaglie. 334
Buonoroti. 265 di Campidoglio. 341 da Caravaggio. 313
More (Antonio.) 295
N.
Neapolitano (Filippo.) 314 Nicolo dell' Abbate. 282 Pussino. 328

O.
Oration Gentileschi. 319 Vecellio. 269

P.
Palma Giovane. 303 Vecchio. 287
Paris Bordone. 294 Parmegiano. 286 Paolo Farinato. 296 Veronese. 299
Paul Bril. 305 Pierino del Vaga. 285 Pieter van Laer. 326 Pietro da Cortona.
336 di Cosimo. 260 Perugino. 261 Testa. 329
Pirro Ligorio. 289 Po^^lenburch. 326 Polidoro. 279 Pordenone. 271 Primaticcia.
282 Procaccini Camillo. 310 Carl' Antonio. ib. Ercole. 311 Giulio Cesare. 310
Puntormo (Giacomo.) 275 Pussino Gasparo. 335 Nicolo. 328

Q.
Quintin Matsys. 278
R.
Rafaelle da Vrbino. 270 Ricciarelli (Daniele.) 288 Riley (John.) 247
Rotenhamer. 312 Rosso. 280 Rubens. 317
S.
Sacchi (Andrea.) 336 Salvator Rosa. 341 Salviati Francesco. 288 Gioseppe. 301
Sarto ( Andrea del.) 270 Schiavone (Andrea.) 296 Sebastian Bourdon 345
Sebastiano del Piombo. 272 Singnorelli (Luca.) 259 Simone Memmi. 255 Sisto
Badalocchi. 324 Snyders. 321 Spagnoletto (Ribera.) 323 Sprangher. 303
T.
Taddeo Zucchero. 298 Taffi (Andera.) 255 Tempesta (Antonio.) 305 Testa
(Pietro.) 329 Tintoretta (Marietta.) 293 Tintoretto Domenico. ib. Giacomo. 292
Titiano. 267
V.
Van Dyck. 330 Vanni (Francesco.) 312 Vasari (Giorgio.) 294 Vdine (Giovanni
da.) 276 Vecellio Francesco. 269 Oration. ib.
Veronese (Paolo.) 299 Verrocchio (Andrea.) 259 Vinci (Leonardo da.) 260 Viola.
317 Viviano. 333 Volterra (Daniele da.) 288 Vouet (Simon.) 324
Z.
Zampieri (Domenico.) 321 Zucchero Frederico. 302 Taddeo. 298

ERRATA.
Page Line Instead of Read. vij 21 Bambovio. Bamboccio. 17 7 liberataque
librataque 21 Marg positurorum. positurarum. 41 18 transluent. translucent. 98
17 51st. rule. 60th. Rule. 110 21 Neglecting the Copiers. The Copiers
neglecting. ib. 25 reltaion. relation. 120 14 43d. Precept. 13th. Precept. 128
19 indishabile. en dishabillee. 136 11 4th. Precept. 41st. Precept. 161 2 it
comprehends. comprehends. 219 12 his Brothers. his Sons. 221 21 gentleness.
gentileness. 237 14 great. general. 254 12 Benedict IX. Benedict XI. 325 15
Richlieu. Richelieu. 329 5


