ADVERTISEMENT.

THat the First, Second, and Third Volumes of the Great English ATLAS are now
finished (the Fourth Volume being in the Press).

A View of the late Troubles in England, from the year 1637 to 1660. By Sir
William Dugdale Knt. Garter Principal King of Arms.

Bibles, Testaments, and Common Prayers, in all Volumes: Also all Books Printed
at the Theater: Are sold by M. Pit at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard
London.

THE ANCIENT USAGE In Bearing of such Ensigns of Honor As are commonly called
ARMS. WITH A Catalogue of the present NOBILITY of ENGLAND. By Sir WILLIAM
DUGDALE Knt. Garter Principal King of Arms. To which is added, A Catalogue of
the present NOBILITY of SCOTLAND and IRELAND, etc.

OXFORD: Printed at the Theater, for Moses Pit at the Angel in St. Paul's
Churchyard, London, 1682.

To the right Honorable ROBERT Earl of AYLESBURY, Deputy, with his Majesty's
approbation, to the most Noble HENRY Duke of NORFOLK Earl-Marshal of ENGLAND.
My Lord

SUch have been the extravagant Actings of Paynters, and other Mechanics in
this licentious Age; that, to satisfy those, who are open handed to them, they
have not stuck to depict Arms only for diverse younger branches of Families with
undue distinctions, if any at all; but to allow them to such as do bear the
same appellation, though of no alliance to that stock: the permission whereof
has given such encouragement to those, who are guilty of this boldness, that
there are not a few who do already begin to prescribe, as of right thereto: so
that these Marks of Honor, called Arms, are now by most people grown of little
esteem: for apparent it is, that they make the Crescent, which is the known
filial distinction for the second Son, to be also the only proper difference of
the Grandson and heir of that second Son, and of his heirs male; and a Mullet
upon a Crescent, and a Martlet upon the same Mullet to be the distinction for a
fourth Son of a third Brother, whose Father was the second Son of the chief
stock: and according to that rule do, for the most part, frame their
Differences for others.

Against this absurd usage therefore, I have thought it requisite, not only to
offer to your Lordship the light of reason, which ought to be the principal
guide; but the irrfragable Authority of several persons of great Learning and
high estimation for their knowledge in points of Honor and Arms: and likewise
to give instance by sundry important presidents, as to the usage of ancient
times, when order and regularity were held in repute: not doubting but that
your Lordship will in this point be so far satisfied, as that for the future
some restraint may be put to those undue practices. Resting

Your Lordships most obedient Servant

WILLIAM DUGDALE

Garter principal King of Arms.

10. Junij 1681.

ADDENDA page 148. l. 20.
An. 1681. Car. 2. xxxiii.

865 Nov. 17 Sir George Jefferys of Bulstrode Knight one of his Majesty's
Sergeants at Law, and chief Justice of Chester created Baronet and to the
heirs male of his body by Ann his now wife, and for default of such Issue, to
the heirs male of his body. Buck.

866 Dec. 6 Hugh Middleton of Hackney Esquire Midd.

ERRATA.
P. 17. l. 5. r. petite y. Ib. l. 13. r. Henoursi p. 21. l. 8. r. retained. p.
23. l. 11. r. Eleury. p. 24. l. 7. r. Hook. p. 26. l. 7. r. grateful. p. 37.
l. 5. r. tres. p. 47. l. 5. r. flos. p. 51. l. penul. r. Aspilogia. p. 52. l.
28. r. conspectioribus. p. 54. l. 2. r. Ercaloue. p. 57. l. 27 r. Ercaleue. p.
59. l. 4. r. Estoille. p. 60. l. 6. r. augmenteront. p. 64. l. 3. from the
bottom r. round. p. 81. l. 17. r. Gosfeild. p. 82. l. 11. after E. of Down add
Extinct. p. 100. l. 19. r. Ferrers. p. 113. l. 18. r. of the household to K.
Charles the second. p. 126. l. 27. r. Wakeman. The Patent was in grossed but
never sealed. p. 146. l. 18. r. Kent.

P. 149. l. 7. from the bottom r. Agmondesham. p. 151. betwixt l. 24. and 25.
add W. shire Carnarvon P. M. 2. Burg. 1. and Knight 1. p. 154. l. 28. r. P. M.
18. Barens of the Cinq. P. 8. p. 155. l. 15. r. Lestuthiel. p. 159. l. ult. add
P. M. 28. Barons of the Cinq. P. 8. p. 160. l. 19. after Great-Wendlock strike
out Burg. 2. p. 161. l. 5. r. Burg. 2. l. 9. r. North-Yarmouth v. Great.
Yarmouth. p. 162.. 19. after Rumney add Sandwich.

THE ANCIENT USAGE In Bearing of ARMS.
THat these Ensigns of Honor, as are commonly called Arms, which of later
times have been chiefly used for distinction of families, had their original
from the practice of great Commanders in War, is not unknown to the learned:
for certain it is, that the faces of all great military Officers, being
obscured by such Hoods and Helmets as were anciently worn in times of Battle;
it was expedient, that by some other means their persons should be notifyed to
their friends and followers. Necessity therefore requiring it, they, depicted
upon their Sheilds (which were borne for the defense of their Bodies) as also
upon their Surcotes of silk, Banners, Penons etc. certain Badges, that might
make them known at a distance from each other. Of which sort those that were
most conspicuous; viz Crosses, Bends, Fesses, Cheverons, Saltiers etc. all
single chardges being ever held the best.

In bearing whereof (as appears by diverse old Rolls of Arms) such order was
observed that none might assume another mark; but that there should be a
plain and apparent difference in each man's Shield, Surcote, Banner, Penon,
etc. to the end, that upon any disorder the common Soldier might know his
leader, and the better repair to his succor in case of danger.

But these later times having devised other sorts of Armor and weapons, both
for offense and defense then of old were used; those marks and Badges in
Sheilds, Surcotes etc. have been for diverse past ages, as to any such military
purpose, totally laid aside; and since merely retained as honourary Ensigns
by the Nobility and Gentry; especially to difference themselves and their
families from the vulgar, and one from another: as also to distinguish the
collateralls from those of the principal stock; for if they do not so, what do
they signify; or of what use are they? In all which the Kings of Arms, in
their respective provinces were to see due order observed.

Nevertheless such has been the inadvertencie of sundry Gentlemen, in not
regarding the ill consequence which the breach of order herein does produce; as
that, going to common Paynters to depict and marshall their Arms, seldom any
regular Differences have been assigned by them for the descendents of younger
Brothers! Which extravagant practice has occasioned such confusion therein;
that this laudable and ancient usage in bearing of Arms, on which our
forefathers did set an high esteem, is now overmuch slighted and almost grown
contemptible.

It cannot be denied, but that in the best times good order was not by every
one exactly observed: for I find, that in the reign of Q. Elizabeth there were
some unjustifiable practices in this kind: But, in this last age, through the
liberty taken by diverse mechanics since the commencement of the late
unparalled Rebellion, the disorder herein is so far spread, as if greater
care be not speedily taken, such a confusion must inevitably follow, that the
true use of Arms will be utterly forgot; most people, though of never so mean
extraction; if they obtain a little wealth, intruding themselves into these
Marks of Honor, and usurping what does justly belong to others, especially if
their name does sound any thing like that of a Gentleman.

Seeing therefore these things relating to Honor to be thus out of square, I
have here thought fit to add to what I have already briefly said, the
Authorities and opinions of the most learned men in Herauldry and Antiquities
that this last age has produced: from whose writings I have selected some
particulars, which will amply corroborate what is here asserted.

Beginning with what was published in print by Mr. William Wyrley (a
Staffordshire Gentleman) an. 1592 (34 Eliz:) and entitled The true use of
Arms, but written by Sampson Erdswike then of Sandon, in that county Esquire
(whose deserved fame for his great knowledge in these commendable Studies is
still fresh and flourishing in all those parts.) I was assured by Mr. William
Burton of Lindley in Leicestershire that Mr. Erdswike did to him acknowledge,
he was the Author of that Discourse, though he gave leave to Mr. Wyrley (who
had been bred up under him) to publish it in his own name. This Mr. Erdswike
from pulick Records and ancient Evidences compiled a brief, but elaborate work,
of the Antiquities of Staffordshire, as yet not made public by the press,
which is now in the hands of an eminent and learned Gentleman of that County,
Walter Chetwind Esquire


Next proceeding with what I have observed from an excellent but short
discourse in elegant Latin De Origin et Antiquitate Armorum, written likewise
in the same Q. Eliz. time (but never printed) by Robert Glover Esquire then
Somerset-Herauld, whose great abilities in this kind of learning I cannot
sufficiently extol; his most elaborate and judicious work, entitled The
Catalogue of Honor, published after his death by Mr. Thomas Mills his Executor
in an. 1610 and the voluminous Collections from our public Records, and sundry
choice old Manuscripts, as also from original Charters and Evidences of note
(which I my self have seen, but which are now dispersed into sundry hands)
sufficiently setting forth his great abilities therein.

From which discourse; viz. De Origin et Antiquitate Armorum etc. I have
selected certain observations, and added them to this work; whereby his great
judgment as to this point of Differences in Arms is clearly showed.

So likewise from what the learned Camden, Sir Henry Spelman and others have
expressed upon this subject; and given most evident instances of the laudable
practice of ancient times herein.

I shall begin with what I find so published by Mr. Wyrley (but penned by Mr.
Erdswike)

To the Right Honorable the LORDS and others the Professors of Martial
Discipline.
NObles and Gentlemen, I will salute you with a sentence of mine Author Sir
John Froysard, The adventures of Arms (says he) are so diverse, and so far
oftentimes beyond expectation, as that their effects causes great admiration:
which saying of his, caused me with the more attention to read over his works,
and finding the same most truly prosecuted through the whole course of his
History, but espacially in the actions and adventures of two famous Captains
Sage and Imaginative, the one Sir John Chandos, and the other Sir See more of
him in the Institution of the Garter of El. Ashmole Esquire.
John Grayllie by name (commonly called the Captall de Buz) it delighted me (as
a lover of Honor and chevalry) to note This was done in a Poem then published
in print by the said Mr. Wyrley an. 1592. of these two persons, but writ by
Mr. Erdswike.
down their several fortunes with some reasons of their falls.

I have been careful to set down (as my manner is) the Standards, Pennons,
Cote-armours; and other marks of Honor, to the end it may publicly be known
of what necessity the use of them is, (as being for that cause first ordained:)
how and in what manner they are to be used, and to whom they do of right most
chiefly and properly appertain and belong. And these matters being well
conceived (as indeed without such Tokens no martial discipline can be
exercised, no Army ranged, no attempt of any company achieved; and so (by
cnnsequence) no conquest made, nor so much as any Commonwealth (whatsoever)
defended, neither ftom outward enemies, civil discord, nor the rebellion of any
plebeian rout.

Be the same never so simple, rude, or of small esteem it will (I hope) reduce
into estimation a matter both of Honor, order, and Necessity, which now
(through the abuse thereof) is so far run into contempt, as that (of many men)
it is holden for a thing of no price, but thought to be a very mockery, and a
matter of no other sequence, then to set up vain and fantastical glorious
fellows into a pride, and to draw from them some small sums to certain
persons into an office instituted, which no doubt was by the wisest and best
governed states at the first devised, and generally by all of any policy
received, to a most necessary end: yet think they (as it is now in use) it
serves but only for that purpose. And indeed I must by the way complain, that
certain of the said officers (or others pertaining to them) either for want of
skill or maintenance, or otherwise for their gain, have committed faults not
justifiable, whereby they have brought a matter of great Honor into defame,
and injured thereby the Commonwealth, and brought both others that have managed
those affairs with more discretion, and themselves into obloquy.

But these faults and errors, and some others also (spoken of in this
dedication instituted to that purpose) will in the handling of this matter more
easily appear; and the thing be (I hope) reformed, either by the good endeavors
which the officers (understanding thereof) will use, or else by the magistrate,
when he shall have knowledge of such the abuses as he may be informed of.

And first that Guydhomes, Ensigns, and marks of Armory be of necessity, let
it be but considered whether wars be sometimes of necessity to be taken in hand
or not; and surely I think there is none of so very mean capacity, but will
yield unto it that they be: especially defensive, and in some cases also
offensive: which as a thing granted I will overpass.

And when I say further, that wars being lawful and of necessity, it must also
be granted, that the same must be made by companies and bands of men, over
which some must command, and the rest obey, and then will it follow, that for
the ordering and dividing of those to the best advantage, Standards and Banners
must be allotted to every company, to the end they may draw together in their
strength, and perform such actions as they shall be commanded; thus may you see
the necessity.

And for the use, it does also appear, that sithence some must be commanders,
it is of importance that they be known, both by the persons over whom they
command, and generally by all; and that so perspicuously that upon every sudden
occurrent, the meanest and simplest common soldier may thereby know every
particular officer, and captain that has charge: for which purpose our
Ancestors device was, that such men should wear some such coat of mark over his
Armor, as whereby they might be easily discerned, to be the same persons which
indeed they were: and where sometimes (when occasion so offered itself) they
were forced to use Pavishes for their defense, whereby a great part of the mark
which was upon their vesture, was shadowed from sight, it was thought necessary
that their marks should be also laid upon their shields: the commanders of
Horsemen (their faces being for the most part covered) they added to the
crests of their Helmets some further distinction to be the better also known
by: Thus much for the ordinance and use of Armory.

And hereby also may it appear to whom they do properly belong and appertain,
namely, to Kings, Princes, Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Lords of
provinces and fees; Knights; officers in the Army, Navy or piece, and generally
to all that have charge over Bands and companies of soldiers.

And now sithence from henceforth many of my speeches will tend to the
discovery of such things as I take to be abused, erroneous, or faulty, wherein
I may peradventure not square in opinion with some others; and being myself no
officer or of any authority, whereby I should have cause to deal in these
affairs, I will therefore first beseech your Honors, and all others to whom it
may appertain, that if any thing shall pass my pen which shall be offensive,
that they will conceive no worse of it then I mean, which is but to bring these
matters of Armory into question; to the end that if any thing be amiss (as I
for my part think that many things are) that then the same may be reformed: but
if happily I mistake, that then it would please such as be of judgment or
skill, to justify the same as well done, and I shall most willingly yield to
authority and reasons.

And so not speaking but under correction, I say that, first I find (as I
conceive) some blame to be imputed in your selves which be professed soldiers,
that where your ancestors and all others generally did in their Standards,
Banners, and Pennons show forth to the view and face of the enemy, certain
fair, ancient, and known marks, which their elders for the most part had
usually before time carried, or at least themselves had then taken (if they but
then were in their rising age) whereby their own people were in a goodly decent
order conducted and led, and their enemies very much terrified, when they
should see those marks showed forth; the owners whereof had in their memories
by plain feat of Arms overthrown their parents, or happily themselves, beaten
them out of the field, razed down their castles and fortresses, sacked their
towns and cities, wasted and spoiled their countries, ransomed their people,
and generally so daunted and amazed them, that it, was sometimes found to be
true, that very bare names of some valiant persons overcame whole Armies: I can
but blame you of all sorts, which shall make choice of Banners (which you call
colors) so curtein-like and so far from all due order of Ancient bearing as may
be; and for your parts which are descended from Ancestors of mark, I would be
glad to hear any reason from you, to what end you should lay the same aside,
and make choice of a curtein in the place thereof.

And you others (whose wisdom and valor have gained you the reputation of a
charge) I would gladly also hear from you what should move you to be of that
mind, as not to take some convenient mark, such a one as may be thought meet by
authority for you, whereby you may gain an honor, both to your selves and your
posterity, and by your good usage thereof much enlarge the reputation, you have
by your valors obtained.

An other thing that is amiss, as I take it, and has great need to be
reformed, is the quartering of many Marks in one shield, coat, or Banner; for
sithence it is true, that such Marks serve to no other use but for a commander
to lead by, or to be known by, it is of necessity that the same be apparent,
fair, and easy to be discerned; so that the quartering of many of them
together, does hinder the use for which they are provided. As how is it
possible for a plain unlearned man (who may be as good a soldier in some
respects as the best) to discern and know a sunder, six or eight, (what speak I
of six or eight?) sometimes thirty or forty several marks clustered all
together in one shield or Banner, nay though he had as good skill as Robert
Glover late Somerset that dead is, and the eyes of an Eagle, amongst such a
confusion o^ things, yet should he never be able to decipher the errors that
are daily committed in this one point, nor discern or know one Banner or
Standard from another, be the same never so large?

So that except it be to be made in a pedigree or descent to lock up in an
evidence chest, thereby to show men's titles to their lands or the Alliences and
kindreds of their houses; otherwise (as I say) I see not to any use in the
world they serve, specially so many together to be made upon a man's vesture,
Target or Banner; and therefore I could wish that every man would content
himself with his own peculiar coat of name, and not to use above one quartered
therewith at the most: which one yet does not so much trouble the capacity of a
man, but that he may both know and discern a Banner or shield well enough. And
this one do I the rather esteem well of to be born, for that a Prince or Noble
man making challenge or title to any Country (for which he is forced to make
wars before he can obtain it) it will be a goodly thing for him to show forth
his Standard of the Arms of that Country quartered with his own amongst those
people which in reason and conscience owe him duty and obedience, to the end
that they may thereby be the sooner induced to submit themselves to their true
and lawful Soverain, as his subjects.

And for that cause (as I take it) King Edward the third and his valiant sons
devised and showed forth the Arms of France and England quartered together, and
although my Author says that Jaques This Jaques d'Arvell was a wealthy
Citizen of Gant, and had great interest and authority in Flanders under K. Edw.
3. in opposition to the French, as the Hist, of that time do amply show.
Dartvell, was the first deviser thereof, yet will I not believe otherwise, but
that the principal reasons that led the King thereto, was to make known the
justness of his title to that kingdom where he then intended to make wars.

But now it may be objected, sithence a Prince or great Lord may have title to
several Countries, that therefore it is necessary for him to bear all such
tokens or marks as he has title too: To this I answer, that although I could
yield to them (but that it will bring the eonfusion aforesaid) yet is it of no
such necessity, for that a man needs to show his title but only to them whom
he means to subdue: and if it should fortune that he had title to diverse and
several countries, and that he would make wars to them all at once, yet should
it not be needful to him to show forth any more marks quartered in one
Standard, but only unto every several Country the Arms of that nation
quartered with his own.

But this being the case of Kings and Princes, wherein (amongst others) our
most famous, noble and worthy Kings and princes of this land, have showed
themselves most prudent and wise; to what purpose is it, that others bring out
commanders under their prince, and which of themselves have neither title to
country nor are able to maintain wars, should in their princes service pester
their Banners and shields with such an infinite number as many do?

And in this point I cannot enough commend the Baron of Stafford, who herein
shows his great skill and temperance; for although his Ancestors have had
title to quarter the marks of that valiant Thomas of Woodstock (youngest son of
King Edward the third) Earl of Buckingham and Duke of Gloucester; of Bohune
Earl. of Hereford and Northamton and high Cunstable of England: and also of
that great house of Somerset, which by their ancestors John Earl of Somerset,
(younger son to John of Gaunt) descended from the same king Edward the third,
(I omit to speak of diverse Barons and others of great estate, whose heirs both
with revenue and honor enlarged greatly his family) yet the said Baron contents
himself with the paternal mark of his house.

It were to be wished that this matter of Quartering should be reformed, as
well for untruths therein oftentimes committed, as for the titles that may be
brought in question thereby to lands and Heritages: And as being one of the
chiefest things that brings honor of Armory into disgrace: for not long ago
heard I one speak in this manner, Did I not (quoth he) know the grandfather of
this man (speaking of the owner of a Scuchion wherein were quartered many
marks) to purchase by plain patent (although he never were man at Arms) both
his coat and crest within these forty years, and how comes it now to pass that
I see his nephew invested in all this Armory? (numbering many and diverse several
devices, all in one shield, by way of quartering) this being a very mockery to
see a man of no valor or estimation in warlike affairs, and the paternal
Ancestors of whom (for ought that can be proved) were not in any late age
welders of Arms, to entrude themselves into so many Badges of Armory, is not
the least matter to bring into contempt an order so honorable and necessary as
the bearing of Arms is.

Differences in Arms to younger children, and their Descendents.

Another matter that to my understanding is also to be reformed, is the manner
of differings, which are by the younger Brothers and their posterities laid
upon their marks, being cressants, mollets, etc. and that such little ones, as
that a man cannot discern them a very small distance from him, which
differences are in reason to be made fair, plain, and large, that they may be
also as easy to be discovered as any other Devise that is in the Coat, Shield,
or Banner, otherwise they serve not to the purpose for which marks were first
ordained.

And the inconvenience which ensues of this error will the more easily appear,
if I but set you down the words of mine Author (treating of an accident that
happened in such a case) which be these: Et feist Mr. Robert Baileul alter sa
Banniere tout devant en escriant Moriannes les Henuiers qui ia estoint
esthauses Aperceurent la Banniere de Moriannes qui encore estoit tout Droicte,
si cuiderent que ce feust la leur ou ilz se deuoient radresser, car mult
petitey auoit de difference de lune a l'autre; car les Arms Moriennes sount
Bars contre Bars d' Argent and d' Azure a deux Cheverons de Gueules, Et le
cheveron de Mr. Robert auoit vne petite crosete d'or, si ne l'adviserent mye
bien les Hennuiers ainsi vindrent bouter de fait dessubs la Banniere de Mr.
Robert, si furent moult fierement reboutes et tous discomfis.

For these Honors being led by Sir William Baileul thought in the stir and
business to have come to his Banner hearing the surname of Moriens called upon;
and seeing as they supposed, their captains ensign, and the difference of Sir
Robert, being the younger Brother, but a little cross upon the upper cheuron,
they could not appercieve; so that the most of them were either slain or taken,
and the elder Brother (the Knight their leader) was glad to save himself as
well as he might: The Lord of Cowcie son in law to King Edward the third,
suffered also reproach through the hard dealings of the Lord of Chine, who
raised his Banner against certain Englishmen of Sir Hugh Caveleys company,
being either the same that Cowcies: was, or the difference so small as might
not be discerned, whereby the said Lord Cowcy though he were abs^nt as far as
Austrich, had dishonor spoken of him, as in the discourse Viz in the Poem
mentioned in the margent of page 1.
of the Capital I have touched.

Thus then having showed, by example, the harm and inconvenience, that cannot
but many times happen, through the littleness and niceness of such differences,
I have thought it not amiss to lay before you the differings that antiquity
used; that by comparing them together, you may discern the great wisdom of our
ancestors, and our own imperfections in this point, for want of due
consideration: which was done at the first by changing of the device born into
other colors only; but when that would not suffice for the number of leaders
(many times all of one house) then were they forced to vary their marks by
adding of either Bars, Bends, cheurons, cheefes, quarters, Borders, labels,
losinges, or such like, and very seldom should you see in those times
cressant, mollet, or such like small thing born for a difference; and if any
did, yet was the same so large and fair that it might be seen as well as any
other device which should be in the Shield or Banner. And for the proof, I will
give you the example but of one house only for your better information (though
I could do the like of many others) namely, that of the Bassets, who indeed (in
my judgment) varied their marks of honor very finely and that upon good
respect:

For Ralph Basset, (the son of Thurstine who came in with the Conqueror) which
Ralph (as it is said) devised the Law of Frank pledge, and many other good
laws, being Justiciarius Angliae; having four sons, to wit, Thurstine, Thomas,
Richard, and Nicholas; the first and last both failing; the issue of the one
being extinct, and the other overthrown by standing against King Henry the
second with King Steven; The son of Thomas went away with his ancestors mark
without distinction (being undie gold and red)

But the sons of Richard Basset being advanced by their mother Mauld, the
daughter and heir of Sr. Geffrey Rydell Knight, varied the marks of the said
Geffrey in this manner: first, Geffrey Lord of Witering the eldest son of
Richard Basset and the said Mauld, (surnaming himself Rydell) the progeny of
him bare gold three piles red, with a scarff or Bend of blew over all.

Ralph Basset the eldest son of Richard, (which Richard was the second son of
Richard and Mauld Rydell, and to whom his mother gave the Barony of Weldon)
bare gold three piles red, a Border of steel studded with gold compassing the
same about.

Also Ralph Basset, the son of Ralph, third son of Richard Basset and Mauld, to
whom the said Richard gave the Barony of Drayton in Staffordshire, bare gold
three piles red, with a quarter of Britain.

And Roger Basset of Warwickshire varied from Drayton, changing the piles into
black.

But Ralph Basset (descended from William Basset Baron of Sapcote in
Leicestershire (which William was Justice in Itenere, and youngest son of
Richard Basset and Mauld Rydell his wife) having no advancement by the house of
Rydell) detained undie the device of the Bassets, and only changed the colors
thereof into silver and black:

And Sir Ralph Basset of Chedle Knight (a younger son of Sapcote) varied from
that house, by adding to his device of waves, a red Labell, whereunto he was
forced by reason the progeny of Thomas Basset had many ways varied the said
undie, by changing the color thereof.

As John Basset of North-Luffenham in Rutlandshire bare it, varied into white
and red:

And Allen Basset Baron of Wicombe, differed this device of undie into white,
and blew; from whom the Sanfords descending, assumed the same mark, and now
Browning bears it as being descended from an heir of Sanford.

The house of Chedle yet after this dividing it self into two branches, John
Basset of New place (being the younger house) left the Labell, and charged the
black undie with many Besants dispersed all over them.

But after all this (about the time of King Edw. III.) the line of Ralph Basset
of Chedle, being extinguished; Simon Basset Baron of Sapcote (descended from
the forenamed William) and Sir John Basset of Blore Knight, (heir to the above
named John Basset of New place) both of them (I know not the cause why) at one
instant (as I think) relinquished their device of undie, and invested
themselves into Ridels: that is to say, Simon into the piles charged with a
quarter vary white and blew; and Sir John into the same, with a quarter silver,
and a black Griffon thereon.

And in Tamwoorth Church (near to Drayton) well and old, there stands gold
three piles red, a quarter silver, and a cross party black thereon.

A multitude more as my author has already hinted, (were it not for brevityes
sake) might be instanced from the practice of sundry branches of
Noble-families, whereof I shall only make mention of some few which are not
unknown to most pretenders to Herauldry.

Such are those of Gray of Codnore, and Gray of S^ndiacre in Derbyshire; Gray
of Barton in Ridale, in com. Ebor. Gray of Wilton in com. Hereford; Gray of
Ruthyn in com. Denbigh; Gray of Groby in com Leic. and Gray Vicount L'isle.

Of Beauchamp Earl of Warwick; Beauchamp of Holt; Beauchamp of Powick, and
Beauchamp of St. Amand.

Of Nevill Earl of Westmorland, Nevill Earl of Salisbury; Nevill Earl of
Warwick; Nevill Lord Latimer; Nevil Lord Abergaveny.

Of Stafford Duke of Buckingham; Stafford of Pipe; Stafford of Bromshull, (both
in Staffordshire;) Stafford of Graston in Worcestershire; Stafford of Haske in
com. Dorset; and Stafford of Blatherwick in com. Northampton.

Of Berkley Lord Berkley of Berkley-castle in com. Glouc. Berkly of Beverston
in the same County; Berkley of Bruton in com. Somerset; and Berkley of
Wymundham in com Leic.

Of Cobham Lord Cobham of Cobham in Kent; Cobham of Sterborough in Surrey;
Cobham of Black-burgh in com. Devon. and Cobham of Belmerle in com Cantii.

Of Radcliffe Earl of Sussex; Radcliffe of Smethels; Radcliffe of Drdsale, and
Radcliffe of Chaderton.

All retaining the original Arms, but distinguished by various eminent
differences.

Likewise of Noell Vicount Campden; Noell of Kirkby in Leicestershire; Noell of
Hilcote, and Noell of Pelshall (both in Stafforshire) and others of that
Ancient family.

Thus have I set down unto you (though something tediously) the use that
antiquity followed in a very glorious line, for Lords, Knights and Gentlemen,
which flourished diverse hundreds of years sithence: And you may see that these
men (though they were many of them great Barons) were not ashamed of their
Differences, but laid them forth largely to the view; neither do I esteem it a
shame whereby any man should covet to hide the same, to be descended as a
younger Brother, sithence that every Brother (having the like parents) is as
well descended as the eldest, and therefore as good a Gentleman (though not so
rich) as he. And the more is his honor, if without the help which by reason of
his patrimony the elder has, he can advance himself into place of office or
dignity, whereby he may raise an other flourishing family of the same surname:
and therefere you my masters that be younger Brothers, never hide your
Differences by putting forth a little cressant or a peeping mollet, but use
some fair large device, sithence in truth your estimation is by your rising to
be had in as good a regard as if you were the elder.

And now being in speech of younger Brothers and their differences, I have
observed two kinds of them which antiquity used, (besides the aforesaid) one
was, that such as were advanced by Kings, Princes, or other great Lords, did
many times bear some part of the device of him who advanced them, by way of
addition unto the mark of their own family, which served very aptly to
distinguish them from their elder house.

The other was, that diverse did add unto the mark of their own house, some part
of the device of that family from which their mothers descended; and both these
two kinds of differings are (in my mind) greatly to be commended, not only for
that they may be made large and apparent, and for that cause serve very
properly to the use for which Badges are ordained, but also that the one makes
manifest a greatful mind (in him that is advanced) to his prince or lord of
whom he received benefit, and by reason thereof linketh them together in a kind
of amity, which seldom or never is worn out, and by that means a great
strengthening it is unto both Houses.

The other not only serves to unite the families which have matched together
in the foresaid love and amity, and thereby works the like effect; but
besides it shows the certainty of the descending of the said younger Brother
out of both the said Houses, and also gives knowledge of the time thereof,
whereby if any title of inheritance be at any time cast upon the younger
Brother, either descending from ancestor of the fathers side, or mothers, it
gives him a testimony of his title, and witnesses unto the world the truth of
that descent by the continual bearing of that device, so that this kind may
(many times) work profit to the bearer, and avoid many troubles and suits: and
therefore into one of these kind of differing^ could I wish our younger
Brothers, which from henceforth shall be advanced, to invest themselves, as
being both honorable, fair, certain, and profitable.

But now it may be objected, that the order in use shows plainly enough the
diversity of Brothers, as the cressant a second, the mollet the third, that by
this means the matters are made certain. To this I answer, that first the time
is not (by this means) signified, neither can it be known which of the
Cressant-bearers was the Uncle or Nephew. And further, it is a very usual
matter for every new Riser at this day, if he can find that there is any of the
like Surname that bears mark, presently to usurp the same with a Cressant, or
some such difference, so that (for my own part) I do seldom credit such kind of
differings nor their bearers, unless it be by some other testimony or proof
made manifest, which cannot be counterfetted so well in the other device,
except the riser should be thoroughly acquainted with the descent of him whose
line he seeks to intrude himself into.

And besides, it may be the sooner espied by them of the true line and
forbidden; nor the other dare (for fear thereof) so soon venture the committing
of a falsity. But what a confusion is it when you shall see the second of a
second Brother, and sometimes an other second from him, to cluster one Cressant
upon an other; many times three or four, one on horseback upon an other; where
as by the aforesaid bearing of the difference from the Prince, Lord, or mothers
family, a man may better distinguish the Brothers and set down for a second, a
third, and fourth, etc.

And after from those again, in a fairer, larger, and more apparent manner: and
the more apt am I to speak against these ordinary Differences (as they are
called) knowing them to be but new inventions, and any of them as ordinaries
(in Fashion as now they are) never used before the time of King Henry the sixth;
before which time men were much more wary and discreet in bearing of their
marks, and in foreseeing that no intruders should enter into their families;
nor that any should lay away or remove their Differings without special warrant
or license of them that thereby might be prejudiced: for a Labell being much in
use for the heir apparent (to wear as his differeuce during his fathers life)
was seldom removed to the second Brother, but when the inheritance went unto
the daughters of the elder Brother; and then the second was permitted to bear
the same for his Difference, as being the heir male of his family and as one
that remained in expectancy; yet might not the second Brother use to intrude
himself into the absolute signs of his house (the inheritance being in his
neeces or kinswomen) as appeared in the case between Gray of Ruthine and
Hastings which was this:

John Lord Hastings married to his first wife Izabell one of the sisters and
heirs of Almery de Vallence Earl of Penbrooke, by whom he had issue John
Hastings, (after Earl of Penbrooke) Elizabeth, (married to Roger Lord Gray of
Ruthin) and some other children which needs not to be spoken of; for that, as I
take it, all the lines of them failed before the extinguishing of the line of
the said John Earl of Penbrooke. After (such issue being had) the said Izabel
Vallence died, and the said John Lord Hastings took to a second wife Izabel the
Daughter of Hugh Spenser, by whom he had issue Hugh Hastings, and Thomas, and
then died, and left as heir John his son by his first Wife (who was Earl of
Penbrooke, as I have said, erected by reason of his mothers inheritance) which
John Earl of Penbrooke married and had issue another Earl of Penbrooke, who
also married and had issue a third Earl of Penbrooke; but in the end all the
line of the said John Hastings (first Earl of Penbrooke of that family)
failing, there arose a question betwixt the Heirs of Roger Gray and Elizabeth
his wife being sister (of the whole blood) and the Heirs of Hugh Hastings
brother (of the half blood) to the said John Earl of Penbrooke, for the
inheritance of the Hastings.

But Gray recovering the same (by the law that says, Possessio fratris de
feodo simplici facit sororem esse haeredem) called the said Hastings also
(having removed the difference of his mark for that he was then heir male of
that house) into the Court of chevalry, and there having a judgment against
him, the said Hastings was compelled to use a Difference (which was a Label of
silver) upon his mark, a fair red sleeve of his Ladies upon his golden vesture:
since which the heirs of that younger family have used the said Labell even
until this our age.

So that you may see by this, that the law was then taken to be such, that such
an heir male as had not the inheritance of his Ancestors should not be suffered
to bear his mark without distinction; for it should seem (by this) that the
issue of them that had married the heir general of any family (being by reason
thereof possessed of the lands) had not only an interest in the Arms, but might
also forbid any man the bearing thereof.

There is also another matter out of square, which is, that every man that
obtains large possessions, (whether the same be acquired by his judgment in
law, traffic in merchandise, or any other mean) yea although never any of his
progenitors, (from whom he can derive himself) had the charge to lead men of
Arms, will yet at this day intrude themselves into the Badges and marks of
soldiers: for although such as be descended from men of martial discipline,
have an interest in their ancestors marks (amongst other their goods) and
therefore may show forth the same to their predecessors glory, and their own
(in respect of their descent) yet such men as rise by their sciences,
judgments, or skill in other arts, affairs, or trades (although they be to be
reverenced for their wisdom and praiseful actions, and had in honor answerable
to their virtues and dignities) have yet little to do with the marks or Badges
of soldiers.

For although a reverend Judge, that has ministered law and justice a long time
(and that so long as that thereby to his great glory) he has obtained
reputation, wealth, and revenue, is to be had in high estimation, and in
respect thereof to have allowed him some note or mark of Honor fit for his
calling, yot (to my simple judgment) the same should be disposed unto him after
the old Roman order, by signifying the manner of his rising, rather then to put
a corselet on his back, a Burgonet on his head, a Target on his Arm, and a
Sword by his side, being things that would cumber greatly the good old man to
use, either for his own defense, or but to show (by way of triumph) for his
glory, sithence, neither is it tolerable (by reason of his age) nor in his
youth did he exercise himself in welding thereof.

And as these things are unseeming for him to wear, no more can I see any
reason why he should deck up the moniments of his house with such signs or
tokens, except he can derive himself from an ancestor that has had the use of
such things, and then (to set them sorth as a glory to his deceased parent)
will greatly augment the regard of his rising, which rising yet (of it self) is
a sufficient Honor, the same being by any just, virtuous, or laudable means.
And these new risings I could wish to be of more reputation then they seem to
be esteemed of, either by others, or themselves that so rise; as is apparent by
many of their doings, who intrude themselves into marks of Antiquity, and
setting forth of descents, wherein they are yet fain many times either to
counterfeit, or else to derive themselves from some poor parents, which they
(either truly, or by surmize) allege to have descended from some ancient
family, and that have been by some accident or other in former time decayed:
wherein me thinks men do greatly mistake the matter, for that (in my opinion) a
man that is but of mean parentage and rises by commendable means, is
equivalent to him that rises from a decayed family, namely when his said
parent has been overthrown for offense, as many times they allege in plain
terms. And I could wish that every man that raises a House by his good
industry, should be honored with some such Badge or Mark, as should be
answerable to the quality of his rising; and not every man of what condition
soever they be, to entrude themselves into the signs and marks of soldiers,
and such as follow the field with martial exploits.

Some people also there are that be so precise, as that they do disallow
altogether the setting forth of any memory of well deserving men, which have
showed themselves valiant either in the act of Religion, their Princes service,
or defense of their Country; neither allowing their posterity to set forth any
memory of their praises, nor suffering any monuments or garnishments to remain
of their Burials; as tho it were a matter offensive to God to have good men
well spoken of, or their valorous doings by their obsequies either reverenced,
or by any records remembered.

To such men I have not thought it amiss to show them their error by directing
them to such places of Scripture as do not only tolerate and allow of such
actions, but also praise and commend the doing thereof, and in some sort charge
and command the same to be done, whereby both they may (if they be not
obstinate) reform their misconceived opinions, and others may be fortifyed in
their praiseful endeavors toward the honoring of virtuous and worthy men, to
the animating of posterity to imitate their laudable actions; sithence indeed
the chiefest matter that stirs up men to do well next their zeal to God, and
the love of virtue it self, is to think that not only their souls shall be
rewarded with the mercies of God, but also that their doings shall be had in a
reverent remembrance with the reports of all good men that shall speak of them.

And first, that the using, bearing and setting forth of Banners, Ensigns and
Marks of Armory are allowable by the sacred scriptures, it appears by the
holy Evangelist Saint Luke recording the peregrination of Saint Paul, and
speaking of Armory without reprehension (which he would not have done had the
use thereof been offensive) in this sort:

(Act. Apost. cap. 28. v. 11.) Post menses autem tres navigavimus in navi
Alexandrina, quae in insula Hyemaverat cui erat insigne Castorum. And after
three months we departed in a Ship of Alexandria, which had wintered in the
Isle, whose Signs was Castor and Pollux.

And in the book of Numeri, God by his prophet Moses commands his people of
Israel to devide and dispose themselves into companies by their Ensigns and
Banners speaking unto them in these words:

(Number. Cap. 2. v. 1. 2) Locutusque est Dominus ad Moysen and Aaron, dicens,
singuli, per turmas, Signa, atque vexilla, and domos cognationum suarum,
castra-metabuntur, filiorum Israel per Gyrum tabernaculi foederis. And the Lord
spoke unto Moses, and unto Aaron saying, Every man of the children of Israel
shall pitch by their own Standard, with the Ensign of their father's house, far
off about the Tabernacle of the Congregation shall they pitch.

So that by this you may see, that as these matters be no new inventions of
men, so they are also things allowable by the word of God.

Neither do Obsequies or monuments ensuing worthy acts want the authority of
Scriptures, for in the book of Numeri it is written thus:

(Number. cap. 31. v. 48.) Cumque accessissent principes exercitus ad Moysen, and
Tribuni, centurionesque dixerunt, nos serui tui recensuimus numerum pugnatorum,
quos habuimus sub manu nostra: and ne unus quidem defuit, ob hanc causam
offerimus in donarijs Domini singuli quod in praeda auri potui^us invenire,
Periscelides and Armillas, Annulos and Dextralia ac Murenulas, etc. Et
susceptum intulerunt in Tabernaculum testimonij in monimentum coram Domino. And
the officers which were over thousands of the Host, the Captains of thousands
and Captains of hundreds came near unto Moses and said thy servants have taken
the sum of the men of war, which are under the chardge, and there lacks no
one man of us: we have therefore brought an oblation for the Lord, what every
man has gotten, of Jewels of Gold, Chains, and Bracelets, Earrings, and
Tablets, etc. and brought it into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, for a
memorial for the children of Israel before the Lord.

And in another place of Numeri thus:

(Number. cap. 16. v. 36.) Locutusque est Dominus ad Moysen dicens, praecipe
Eliazaro filio Aaron sacerdoti, ut tollat Thuribula quae jacent in incendio,
and ignem huc illucque dispergat: etc. producatque ea in laminas, and affigat
altari: etc. ut cernant ea pro signo and monimento filij Israel. And the Lord
spoke unto Moses, saying; Speak unto Eleazer, the son of Aaron the Priest, that
he take up the Censers out of the burning, and scatter thou the fire yonder
etc. Let them make broad plates for a covering of the Altar etc. and they shall
be a sign unto the children Israel.

Also in the book of Joshua I find these words:

(Josuae cap. 4. v. 5.) Et ait Josue ad eos, ite ante arcam Domini Dei vestri
ad Jordanis medium and portate inde singuli singulos lapides in humeris
vestris, juxta numerum filiorum Israel, ut sit siguum inter vos: and quando
interrogaverint vos filij vestri cras, dicentes quid sibi volunt isti lapides?
Respondebitis, defecerunt aquae Jordanis ante arcam foederis Domini, cum
transiret eum, idcirco positi sunt lapides isti in monimentum filiorum Israel
usque aeternum. And Joshua said unto them, pass over before the ark of the Lord
your God into the midst of Jordan, and take you up every man of you a stone
upon his shoulder, according to the number of the Tribes of the children of
Israel, that this may be a sign among you, that when your children ask their
fathers in time to come, saying what mean you by these stones: Then ye shall
answer them that the waters of Jordan were cut off before the ark of the
covenant of the Lord when it passed over Jordan; the waters of Jordan were cut
off; and these stones shall be for a memorial unto the children of Israel for
ever.

(Number. cap. 27. v. 8) And for the disposing of heritages it is written thus.
Homo cum mortuus fuerit absque filio, ad filiam ejus transibit haereditas; si
filiam non habuerit, habebit successores fratrs suos; quod si and fratres non
fuerint, dabitis haereditatem fratribus patris ejus; sin autem nec patruos
habuerit, dabitur haereditas his qui ei proximi sunt. Eritque hoc filijs Israel
sanctum lege perpetua siout praecepit Dominus Moysi. If a man die and have no
son, then ye shall cause his inheritance to pass unto his daughters: And if he
have no daughter, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his Brethren: and if
he have no Brethren, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his fathers
Brethren: And if his father have no Brethren, then ye shall give his
inheritance unto his kinsman, that is next to him of his family, and he shall
possess it: and it shall be unto the children of Israel a statute of judgment
as the Lord commanded Moses.

(Number. cap. 26. v. 1. and v. 5.) And for the collection of Genealogies, thus
says God to Moses and Eleazar: Numerate omnem summam filiorum Israel a viginti
annis and supra, per domos and cognationes suas, cunctos qui possunt ad bella
procedere: etc. Reuben primogenitus Israel, hujus filius, Henoch, a quo familia
Henochitarum: and Phallu, a quo familia Phalluitarum; and Hezron a quo familia
Hezronitarum. Take the sum of the people from twenty years old and upwards,
as the Lord commanded Moses and the children of Israel (according to their
families and kindred, all that were able for war; Reuben the eldest son of
Israel: The children of Reuben, Hanoch, of whom comes the family of the
Hanochites: of Pallu, the family of Palluites: of Hesron the family of the
Hesronites.

And for a further proof of the recording of Genealogies, it is to be
considered how diligent the same has been observed through the whole course of
the Scriptures, as the descents from Adam to Noe, and from Noe to Abraham, etc.
do sufficiently testify. And more, that with the spirit of truth the Genealogy
of Christ our Savior and redeemer, as concerning his humanity, is also by the
writing of his holy Evangelists most plainly and sincerely remembered and set
down. All these things being therefore by the Scriptures of God (the decider of
all controversiies) proved and declared: Your Lordships may see that the
bearing of Arms, raising and advancing of Standards, Banners and Ensigns, using
of Obsequies, erecting of Monuments, Enroling and regestring of Pedegrees, and
Descents, have joined to the ancient customs and laws both of this Land and all
other nations; the authority of Gods word, being very well accompanied with
discretion, reason, and judgment; for God having by his sacred institution
ordained Kingdoms, Provinces, and Seignories, and that over them Kings, Princes
and Magistrates, shall command, rule, and govern his people, to the end chiefly
that his heavenly Kingdom may be replenished with the blessed souls of his
servants, for the instructing whereof he has also ordained his holy Church,
and the Bishops, pastors and ministers of the same, which Bishops and other
spiritual officers cannot so well enform his Christian people without the aid
of the said Kings and temporal Lords: neither can they govern their particular
Countries either from the invasion of outward tyrants or inward Rebels, but
through the use of their sword of justice, which sword cannot be exercised
against unruly persons being of strength, wanting men skilful in martial
Discipline, who cannot manage those affairs but by mean of the aforesaid Arms
and Ensigns, in manner as before I have more largely expressed.

And in like sort as Princes, great Lords, Judges, Magistrates and Governors,
do use to wear sacred Robes of gold, purple, scarler, and other ornaments and
apparel; not to take pride in, or for any vain ostentation or show; but only
that they may be distinguished from the inferior people, to the end that a
reverent regard may be had of them in respect of the high office which under
God here on earth they bear.

And as these things no man of any reason will gainsay, so I see not but
as-well may their just virtues and good government be remembered with Funerals,
Obsequies, and Monuments, after their decease, whereby such as succeed in
government may also be had in more high estimation, and a fair example is
thereby given them to imitate the regiment of their predecessors,

Likewise does the Registring of descents carry with it reason joined to
authority and custom; for as by Gods law there is commanded a privilege of
enheritance to the first begotten of Israel, and so for want of sons to the
females, and from them to others answerable to the proximity of their blood and
kindred, which with the laws of this land, and of most nations do concur and
agree; it does well stand with peaceful government for the avoiding of
contentions which may rise for want of records, to testify the truth of men's
titles to their enheritances, that Genealogies and Pedegrees, should be
enrolled and kept in remembrance.

I have my good Lords stood the longer upon this point, for that of late
traveling through some countries of this Land, and having a desire to see the
Moniments of antiquity which have remained in such places as I passed by, for
which cause as otherwise I many times resorted to Churches and other houses to
satisfy my affection, I found that many Moniments both of Burials and in glass
were so broken and defaced, that uneath may be had any knowledge what the
fragments remaining did signify: and enquiring of the inhabitants how it came
to pass that those things were so blemished, they made report that certain
persons, delighting as may seem in novelty, for they can abide no mark of
Antiquity, had defaced the same. These men that take upon them to be reformers,
whose desires are great through the singularity and pride they have in their
own wits and understandings, weening themselves to be very wise, where indeed
they are very simple, and only look but into the abuses of things, and do not
see into the grounds and depth of the reasons and causes for which good
ordinances were made, go about to find faults, where many times none are; but
if peradventure they hap to find an ordinance well made misused, then straight
never seek they to reform the abuse, but by their wills, down goes ordinance
and all, such is their insolency, rashness, and want of judgment.

It were well done therefore my good Lords, and I could wish that your Honors
having sometimes access to her Majesty, and oftentimes conference with my Lords
of her privy Council, should enform her Highness, and their Honors of the said
abuses committed, and to be thereby a mean that these simple fellows taking
upon them to be reformers, might be reformed themselves, and both kept from
destroying of good ordinances, and be punished for their offenses in that
behalf committed.

In the mean time yet shall I desire that Honorable personages will look
better to the Moniments of their ancestors, by correcting the destroyers
thereof, and therein to imitate the laudable actions of William Fleetwood,
Sergeant at the Law, and Recorder of the City of London, who being commissioner
amongst others for the visitation of causes Ecclesiastical, by the Princes
authority, by virtue thereof imprisoned certain wilful persons that had defaced
the Moniment of Queen Katherine Dowyger at Preterborough, until such time as
they had reformed the same, which thing was through his good endeavor
reedified and perfected again, and so remains to this day: for although some
hapily see standing those of their own parents, yet it were good they should
sorsee that no others be pulled down; for that there is not to be looked for
but that suffering such injuries to rest unpunished, the doers thereof will in
time grow more insolent, and have a cast to overthrow theirs also.

And now being in speech of Monuments, I cannot but remember their ignorance
who make small account of any ancestor except before the Conquest, weening that
all that lie cross-legged Such as lie Cross-legg'd are those who were in the
wars of the Holy Land, or vowed to go and were prevented by death. In the
Collegiate Church of Houden in Yorkshire lies a fair cross-leg'd figure of a
man in armor of male; on whose shield is the Arms of Metham of Metham a
worshipful family in those parts; as also another of his wife lying close by
him, with her legs also a cross; by which it may seem that she accompanied him
in one of these expeditions.
so were: and that all ancient evidence without date is the like: whereas the
one was not had in use until after the Palestine wars, and the other, such as
be sealed, be also since This must be understood of Subjects; for K. Edward the
Confessor did use a Seal.
the Conquest; for I could never see nor hear of any that had seen sealed deed,
but the same was made sithence the Conquest of this Land, when the use (as I
take it) of sealing with wax first began in England.

But these men will not stoop one jot under the Conquest, telling many fables
of their ancestors then preserving their Houses, Honors, and Armories,
forgetting quite that it is much more glorious and honorable to be descended
from a most famous nation conquering, then such people by plain feat of Arms
subjuged, for as the Poet says,

quis enim sua praelia victus
Commemorare velit? referam tamen ordine, nec tam
Turpe fuit vinci, quam contendisse decorum est,
Magnaque dat nobis tantus solatia victor.
So that if they have any thing praiseworthy left to brag of, it it that they
well contended with so puissant conquerors, which were then in their time as
wise, glorious, and famous a nation as were in the whole world to be found.

Another sort there be not much more skilful, who if they see any Armory,
straight enter into the comparison of the fairness thereof: and foul and false
is it, if metal lie upon metal alone, or color upon color: And yet I could
wish we should never have more dishonorable men nor worse soldiers then have
so born their Armory: for to omit that worthy Godfrey, and that Mack Morise
King of Lymster in Ireland, whose only daughter and heir was married to Richard
Strongbowe Earl of Penbrook, and bare in a black shield a red ramping Lion; of
our own Sir Richard Sanbach of Sanbach in Chesshire, Sir William Wakbirge of
Wakbirge in Darbishire, two valiant Knights, yet both bare color upon color.
Passing the number of examples, I will recite the words of mine Author speaking
of the adventures of a brave Knight in the company of Sir Robert Canole resting
by Paris.

This Knight having vowed to strike with his lance on the barriers of the
city, performed it, and then the words be these: Celluy cheualier ie ne sca
comment il auoit nom ne de quel pays il istoit mais s' armoit a gueulles a de
deux fouses noyeres et vne bordure noyre non endente. And although I grant they
be not so well to be discerned, as when metal and color be varied the one with
the other; yet sithence the number be great of most worthy men that have born
their Arms in such manner, I will esteem their marks as honorable as the rest,
and never impute any falsity to them.

And this kind of men also commonly discant upon the proportion, nature, and
quality of the device, as if the name of Ricbard were better then Robcrt; and
Ralph better then Roger; and in their conceits the Eagle or Faulcon are the
fairest birds to be born of all feathered fowls, and so of other the like: when
indeed except for the reverence due to the Bearers, who do honor their
bearings by their renown, virtue and valor, otherwise there is no difference
in the fairness of marks: but that those only are to be preferred which be
easiest to be perceived, discerned, and known to be the same things they be
marked out for: And therefore the Capitale of Beuf'z black Midas head with his
fair long Asse-ears, was as good a crest, as Sir John Chandos chiftains head
proper in a white scarffe goodly envellopped: And as fair a coat is Hopwells,
being three red Hares playing on Bagpipes in a silver shield, as Newinton which
bare d' Azure three Eglets d' Argent displaid.

And now me thinks I hear. some that esteem me to mend, and become more fine,
skillful, and Herauld-like in my emblazons, as using the French phrases of
d'azyer and d'argent, who think, I doubt not, but that I have committed a great
error for want of using the said French phrases in my emblazons;
notwithstanding I will join in opinion with such as esteem it to be more proper
to speak and use English terms and phrases in an English book dedicated to
Englishmen, then French or Latin, otherwise than cited authority leads.

Thus far from Mr. Erdswike published by Mr. Wyrley.

I come now to what that most expert Herald Robert Glover Somerset has said
upon this subject of Differences, in his Book De Origin and Antiquitate
Armorum, etc.

Apud nos in Anglia, longo and approbato usu, triplices observantur Armorum
Differentiae; scilicet Principales, Consanguineorum, and Extraneorum.

Differentiae principales sint Labellus, sive Lingula, eum pendulis, and
appendicibus imparibus: Simplex, and quandoque rebus onustis.

Bordura, sive fimbria simplex, componata, aut alio modo semmata, vel distincta
per endenturas, and crenelaturas, quae dicuntur principales differentiae; quia
in Armis nunquam cernuntur, nec ullo alio usui destinantur, nisi ad illorum
differentiam and discrepantiam.

Differentiae Consanguineorum sunt Crescens, Macula, Merulus, Annulus,
Fos-lilij and similia, quae dicuntur Consanguineorum differentiae, quia
serviunt and destinantur consanguineis, ab uno and eodem stipite
descendentibus: Ut filius junior, dum caelebs and innuptus remanserit gerens
Arma patris sui cum tali parva differentia dignoscatur. Et-inter multos
fratres, ut quilibet eorum possit been secerni and cognosci ab alio per sua
Arma in praelijs and expeditionibus bellicis; and priaecipue quo ad Nativitatis
and geniturae suae statum and praeeminentiam, portabunt Arma domus and familio
unde sunt praegnati, cum tali parva differentia. At postquam ductis uxoribus,
mutiplicatisque liberis, novam per se constituerint familiam, rejectis
prioribus minutis differentijs, Arma domus cum Labello, Bordura, Quarterio,
Benda, aut alia graviori distinctione, additione, vel commutatione portare
debent, quo dehinc and illorum familia, ab originali illa familia, unde
oriuntur, Armorum delatione facile precipi, distingui, and separari. Et tamque
est verus, naturalis, and genuinus Armorum usus, ut per easdem cognoscantur and
distinguantur familiae and agnationes, ob quam causam proculdubio in initio
inventa fuerant.

Differentiae Extraneorum sunt, Barrulae, Bendae, Fasces; Tigna, sive signa
capitalia, Palae, Quarteriae, and similia, quae extraneorum dicuntur notae:
Quia licet Extraneo Arma cujuscumque domus seu familiae portare and ostendere,
cum hujusmodi incrementis et additione sine quorumeumque praejudicio vel
offensione.

Harum Differentiarum vero usu neglecto, dum his dieb^ juniores filij minutulas
illas Crescentium, Macularum, Merulorum, Annulorum, atque Florum differentias
retinere solent, easque ad suos quoque posteros transmittant, famularum notitia
(quae per Armorum delationes cognosci, secerni, et distingui solebant) prorsus
obfuscatur, et deletur.

With us in E^gland, there has been a threefold Difference observed in Arms;
that is to say of the Chiefs, or Principals; for those of Consanguinity; and of
Strangers.

The principal Differences are a Labell, or string with points, or pendents
unlike: sometimes plain; and sometimes changed.

The Border, or plain fillet, componed, or distinguished by Endenting, or
Engrailing, which are called the Principal Differences; because they are never
seen in Arms, or designed, but for Differences.

The Differences for such as are of Consanguinity, are a Crescent, a Mullet, a
Martlet, an Annulet, a Flower de Lys, and the like; which are called
Differences of kinsmen; because they are designed and serve for those which are
descended from one and the same stock: as for example, a younger son, whilst he
continues a Batcheler and not married, he is known by bearing his Fathers Arms
with such a small distinction or difference. And amongst many Brothers, to the
end that each of them may be discerned and known from another by his Arms in
Battles, and warlike Expeditions, and specially as to their primogeniture and
pre-eminence, they bore the Arms of the House and Family, whence they sprung,
with such a small Distinction. But afterward, when married, and had children,
being Heads of new Families, they quitted those former minute and petty
Differences, they bore the Arms of their House with a Labell, Bordure, Quarter,
Bend, or some other greater distinction or addition, which thenceforth might
evidently distinguish them and their Family from the original House and Stock
from whence they were descended. Such being the true, natural, and genuine use
of Arms, that each Family and Kindred might be known and distinguished from one
another; that being doubtless the cause for which they were at first devised.

As to the Differences of Strangers, they were Barrulets, Bends, Fesses,
Cheverons, or capital marks; Pales, Quarters, and the like, which are said to
be the Badges and marks of Strangers; because it is lawful for a Stranger of
any House or Family to bear his Arms with these kind of distinctions and
differences, without doing injury or giving offense to any.

But these Differences being grown out of use; now adays younger Sons do not
only retain these petty Distinctions of Crescents, Mullets, Martlets, Annulets,
and Flowers, but transmit them to their posterity; whence it is, that the
Distinction and proper knowledge of several Families, which had wont to be
perspicuous by the bearings in their Arms, is now totally confounded and
obscured.

Hereunto I shall add what the most learned Camden, sometimes Clarencieux King
of Arms, has expressed as to this point:

Taken out of his papers in the Cottonian library.
No Gentlemen ought to bear their Differences in Armory, otherwise then the
Office of Armory requires: And when younger Brethren do marry, erect, and
establish new Houses, are accordingly to bear their Arms with such Distinctions
and Differences, that they may be known from their elder Families, out of which
they were descended; the King of Arms of the Province to be consulted withal,
and such Differences of Houses are to be assigned and established by his
privity and consent, that so he may advise them to the best, and keep record
thereof; otherwise Gentlemen may either hurt themselves, by taking such a
Difference as shall prejudice the chief House from whom they are descended.

Let us now see what Sir Henry Spelman (whose memory is not a little famous for
his knowledge i^ Antiquities, and Herauldry) has written as to thi^ matter.

De Discerniculis.

Henr. Spelmanni Aspilagia Impr. Land. 1654 page 140.
Pluribus idem Insigne defer, absque debita differentia sua, fas non est: Ne
ejusdem gentis familijs; ne ejusdom familiae fratribus. Familiae autem
coryphaeo Symbolum manet integrum et indiscretum; Junioribus omnibus suis
Discerniculis interstrictis; quae semper in editiori clypei part (cophalicae
regionis medio, juxta Leum) expetuntur quod Wriothsleus fecialis sub Edwardi
quarti aevo, a se inventum propagatumque fuisse, ne ulterius quaeras, tradidit.

Fratrem primogenitum Lemniscis, seu virgula lemniscata donant. Vivente patre
triplici, nondum extincto avo quintuplici; semper impari, si Lei fidem sequamur.

Corollae praefert similitudinem, Lemniscis ex ea dependentibus; quam ideo
primogenito assignatam dixeris, quia familiae decus, sic prae caeteris
exornandus videatur.

Antique autem idem hoc Signum, secundo, tertio, quinto conferebatur;
discrimine vel in color posito, vel in Lemniscorum numero.

Secundo fratri Lunulam, Crescentem vocant; Graeci (...), assignant; Tertio
Penticonum; Quarto Apodem; Quinto Anellum; Sexto Lilium.

Et hisce quidem Discerniculis internoscenda exhibentur Warwici in Fenestra
veteri, Ecclisiae S. Mariae, Arma, sex filiorum Thomae Beauchamp XIIII. Comitis
illius tractus, qui obijt 34. Edw. tertij, ut intelligas istiusmodi
Distinctionis ritum non a nuperis emanasse.

Alij qui aetate Henrici septimi scripserunt, Haeredem ipsum Crescenti lunula
distinxerunt, ut accessuro huic lumine, accessuram illi haereditatem
ostenderent.

Secundo vero fratrem, quem tertium familiae limen occupare aiunt (primum enim
patri, alterum Haeredi tribuunt) triplici Lemnisco consignarunt: Tertio fratri
quadruplicem: Quarto quintuplicem.

Sed nec haec, nec illa distinguendi ratio satis apud veteres invaluit, qui
apertissimis differentiis consusulentes, paternos colores saepe inverserunt:
Saepe rerum gestarum numerum auxerunt; saepe minuerunt; alicui gestamina,
praesertim materna, and haereditaria saepissime interseruerunt. Interdum
desertis integris Insignibus, novis gavisi sunt.

Sin vero Protogoni Clypeum, per omnes agnationes, familias, gentes retinuisse
placuerit; Lemniscis, quos diximus, Diagoniis, Limbis, Quadraturis, Angulis,
aliisque latis and conspecti; oribus differentiis usi sunt.

En in una gente omnium pene Exemplaria.

Extraneorum gens, vulgo le Strange, inter limitaneos proceres notissimae
virtutis, and triplici tum olim Baronia, amplissimisque familiis perquam potens
and splendida, Clypeo utebatur rubeo, duobus argenteis Leonibus graduarijs,
quam Johannes le Strange quartus Baro de Knockyn, ut familiarum coryphaeus,
purum protulit.

Fulco le Strange, Baro de Corsham and Blakmere, qui a Johanne, avo dicti
Johannis, per -- filium tertium descenderet, colores inversit, Argenteo clypeo
rubeos inducens.

Rogerus le Strange, Baro de Ellesmere (ab eodem avo, per filium quartum
prognatus) gentis clypeum, limbo imbricato aureo circundedit.

Ejus pater etiam Rogerus, cum Matildem filiam Willielmi de Bellocampo uxorem
duxisset, Bellocamporum Cruces Crucigeras (sed argenteos numeroque novenario)
argenteis suis Leonibus intercalavit.

Hamo le Strange a Johanne quarto, per quintum editus, clypeum fratris sui
Johannis, sexti Baronis de Knockyn, aurea diagonali virgula trajecit, eodemque
discrimine apud Hunstanton (Norfolcensi agro) quam a Barone fratre anno gratiae
1309 dono acceperat, consedens, celebri familiae (quae in hunc usque diem,
eadem sede, eademque discernicula, faeliciter claruit) initium dedit.

Sed ipse etiam Johannes le Strange sextus Baro de Knockyn, Leones suos Apodum
peribolo (ut e Sigillo cernimus) aliquando circumclusit,

Eadem tempestate Johannes le Strange (Glocestriensis puto) is, qui dominus de
Ercalene inscribebatur, clypeum Rogeri le Strange de Ellesmere, cerulea mitella
transegit.

Atque hunc quidem decernendi morem potiori laud multi efferunt, quod
militaria Symbola, ad distinctionem enata, distinctiora multo effecerat:

Minutulis enim illis recentiorum formulis, nec error defuit, nec periculum.

Sic elusi (apud Froisardum) Hannones illi, qui sub vexillo Willielmi Baileul,
argenteis cyaneisque repagulis transmutato, rubrique binis fastigijs inducto,
recipere se contendebant; ad vexillum Roberti Baileul, fratris sui minoris,
exigua cruce aurea (quam male animadverterent) discriminatam convolabant:
fusique and dissipati omnes gravissimas ernoris sui paenas persolverunt.

Rideo igitur and rejicio icunculas istas, quas tum praecipue in morem venisse
arbitramur, cum ipsa insignia, relictis jam nativis stationibus, clypeis,
vexillis, apparatuque militari, in aedium fenestris mollique supellectili (ubi
nec refert magnitudo) potissiimum residerent.

Touching small Differences, being the Latin before mentioned, put in English.

It is not at all lawful for several persons to bear one and the same Arms,
without a due Difference; no not to those of the same family though they be
Brothers thereof.

To the chief of the family, the entire Arms without any difference do belong,
but the younger branches are to have their respective Differences, and bear
them in the midst of the upper part of the Escocheon, according to Lee, which
Wriothesley (a Herald under K. Edw. 4th) affirms to be of his devising.

To the eldest son, in his fathers life time, was assigned a Labell of three
points; but if his grandfather was living, with five points, ever different, if
we give credit to Lee.

Which (like a Coronet) the Labells hanging at it, is therefore assigned to the
eldest son, that as he is the glory of the family he may seem to be adorned
above the rest.

Anciently this distinction was conferred on the second, third or fourth,
either by different color, or number of the Labells.

To the second Brother they assigned a Crescent: to the third a Mullet of five
points; to the fourth a Martlet; to the fifth an Annulet; to the sixth a Flower
de Lys.

And by these Differences the six sons of Thomas Beauchamp the XIIII Earl of
Warwick, (who died in the thirty fourth year of K. Edw. 3.) are showed forth in
an old window of the Church of St. Mary at Warwick; so that you may see that
this usage is ancient.

Some who have written in the time of K. Henry the seventh, have distinguished
the Heir himself by a Crescent, that by the accession of Light they might show
that the inheritance was coming to him.

And to the second Brother, whom they take to be the third boundary of the
family (attributing the first to the father, and the second to the heir) they
assign a Labell of three points: To the third a Labell of four points; and to
the fifth a Labell of five points.

But none of these kind of Distinctions were used amongst the Ancients; Who
studying apparent and perspicuous Differences, often inverted the paternal
color; sometimes augmented the particular chardge in the shield; sometimes
diminishing the same; and sometimes inserting another sort of bearing,
especially from the mother; but sometimes totally quitting their paternal Arms,
and assuming new.

But if the respective branches of the family did retain their Ancestors Arms,
then they did use apparent and conspicuous Differences either by Labells,
Bends, Borders, Quarters, Cantons or the like.

Examples whereof we have almost all in one family.

As in that of le Strange, sometimes famous for their valor in the marshes of
Wales; whereof there were three distinct Barons; who had a shield gules, with
two Lions passant Argent, which John le Strange the fourth Baron of Knockyn, as
the chief of that house, did bear.

But Fulke le Strange, Baron of Corfham and Blakmere, who descended from the
Grandfather of the said John, by a third son, inverted the colors, bearing in
a field Argent, two Lions passant gules.

Likewise Roger le Strange Baron of Ellesmere, who descended from the same
grandfather by a fourth son, bore the same Arms, with a Border engrayled Or.

Also Roger his father, after he had married Maud the daughter of William de
Beauchamp, bore nine Cross-croslets Argent betwixt his silver-lyons.

Moreover Hamon le Strange, who descended from the said John the fourth, by a
fifth son, bore the Arms of his Brother, John the sixth Baron of Knockyn, with
a Bendlet Or; and fixing himself at Hunstanton in Norfolk (which he obtained in
the year 1309 from John his Brother) was the original of that worthy family,
which does still remain there, bearing the same Difference.

But the said John le Strange the sixth Baron of Knockyn, did sometime environ
his Lions with an Orle of Martlets, as by his Seals are to be seen.

At the same time another John le Strange, who was Lord of Ercalene (in
Shropshire) bore the Arms of Roger le Strange of Ellesmere with a Bendlet Azure.

Which kind of Differences, as many do affirm, are most worthy of commendation,
because as military Badges, first used for distinction, they are much more
discernable.

For by these small and petty Differences, there is both error and danger, as
it is evident by those Hennovers of which Froisard speaks; who fighting under
the Standard of William de Baileul, with Bars Argent and Azure counterchanged,
and over them two Chevrons gules striving to repair thereto, came to the
Standard of Robert Baileul his younger Brother, distinguished but by a small
golden-cross, which occasioned a total rout to them all, whereby they paid dear
for their mistake.

I do therefore smile at, and despise these pettey Differences, which now a
days are used; whereas the Arms themselves, leaving their native stations, in
Shields, Banners, and habiliments of war, does now chiefly appear in
Glass-windows and slight household stuff, where the largeness of the
distinction is not at all regarded.

Having now done with these English writers, let us hear what the French say
thereto.

Mons. Charles Segoigne, Advocate of the Parliament, and of the Council of
Estate, and of the privy council of the King in his Tractate, called Tresor
Heraldique, printed at Paris 1657. Page 459. Pour celles des maisons
particularies, chascun on use comme il lui plaist, toutes fois les pieces, don't
se sert ordinairement pour Brisures, sont le Lambell, les Bordures, le Baton,
ou Cottice, le Franc Canton; la Molette; le Croissant; l' Estaille; le Besant
etc.

For Differences of particular Houses, each one uses as he pleases:
nevertheless the pieces that ordinarily are used, are the Labell; the Bordures;
the Baton, or Cotice; the Franc Canton (id est the Dexter Canton) the Mullet;
the Crescent; the Star, the Besant [the Besant in the French acceptance being
a roundell, either Or or Argent.]

Le Trophee d' Arms (whose author conceals himself) a book printed at Paris
an. 1650. Page 33. Les pleines Arms sont reservees aux aisnez par les loix
divines and humaines: Les Cadets and puisnez les portent aussi, mais avec
quelque differences d' inferiorite; ce que l' on appelles Brisures, don't le
nombre n' est point limite, puis qu' else dependent de la fantasy.

Les uns prennent Estoilles; Croissans; Soleils, animaux, oyseaux, fleurs, and
autres chooses posces d' ordenaire sur le flanc dextre de l' Escu, en chef ou
montantes d' icelui. Des autres brisent en diminuant les pieces: and d' autres
en changeant les esmail-de leur Arms.

Mais le plus souvent pour Brisure, on se sert du Lambeau; de la Bordure; de l'
Orle; Baston; Band ou Cottice, que ie range ici selon leur dignite. Car on
tient que s' il se trouvoit cinque puisnez en un maison, le Lambeau
appertiendroit au premier; le Bordure au second; and aussi des autres.

Si bien, que les puisnez: Du premier puisnes pour doubles Brisures, ou sou
brisures, augmente: ront les pendens du Lambeau; le premier d' un: le second de
deux autres; and les autres de mesme jusques a cinque.

Apres quoy, pour sou-brisures, on chargeroit de Lambeau, qui d' une figure qui
d' une autre.

Les sou-brisures de la Bordure, sont primierement de la fair Engreslee.

Secondement de la charger de Torteaux ou Besans: Troisiesmement de la
Componee. Et finalement de la charger de plusieurs figures, ou d' une soul.

Il en est de mesme des autres Brisures.

Which in English is thus.

The plain Arms are reserved to the eldest sons, both by divine and humane
laws: The Cadets (or younger) bear the same Arms, but with some Difference of
inferiority, which we call Brisures: of which the number is not limited, but
depends upon fancy.

Some take Stars, Cressents, Sunns, Beasts, Birds, Flowers, and other things,
put most commonly upon the dexter Flanc of the Escocheon; upon the chief part
of the same; or moving, or issuing thence. Others difference by diminishing the
pieces of the chardge, or changing the colors.

But most commonly for Brisures (or differences) we make use of the Labell; the
Bordure; the Orle; the Baton; the Bend, or Cottice, which I range here
according to their dignity: For we hold, that if there be five puisnes in a
house, the Labell belongs to the first; the Bordure to the second, and so of
the rest.

So that the puisnes of the first puisnes for double (or sub-brisures) shall
augment the pendents of the Labell: the first with one; the second with two:
the rest accordingly to the number of five.

After which, for Sub-brisures, or differences, we must chardge the Labell with
one figure or another.

The Sub-brisures of the Bordure, are first of all to make it Engrailed.

Secondly to chardge it with Torteaux, or Besants.

Thirdly to Compone (or Gobone) it. And finally to chardge it with various
sorts of figures or with one alone.

The same must be done with the other sort of Brisures or differences.

Note that the French Blazoners, do, by Torteauxes mean Roundles of colors: And
by Besants those of metal; viz. Silver, and Gold.

The book of St. Albans says, that Labells are excellent Differences; as with
three, four, five, or more points. It also speaks of Cross-croslets, Mullets,
or the like. Likewise of Bordures changed, in form, or in color.

We will conclude this chapter of Arms, and Blazons with acknowledging and
distinguishing the eldest sons from the younger and inferior.

The Theater of Honor etc. by Andrew Favine a French man, translated into
English, printed at London an. 1623. lib. 1. cap. 1. page 11.
The eldest are known and discerned from the other by the plain paternal Arms
without any Brisure (id est diminution) whatsoever, except the father gave the
same so.

It is ordinarily seen in illustrious and most noble Houses, that the second
son quartereth the fathers Arms, with them of his mother: but this occasioneth
confusion to their descent and lineage, if they have store of male children:

Others diversifye and vary in the chief, or else in the first quarter and
Canton of the chief, which is termed of Honor; or else Partissent Any kind of
partitions.
, Flanquent Flanching bearing upon Flanches.
, Intent Partitions in base of any sort.
, en poincte, ou mettent Placing something over all.
sur le tout:

But the most certain knowledge is made by Brisures, so far as to the seventh
generation, the end of all patronage [Brisures signifying any thing added
besides the original chardge.]

It is an assured rule, that among males, the eldest acknowledges himself, and
he ought to be acknowledged by his father's Arms, if he be no otherwise
stipuled by contracts of marriage, of donation, or of substitution, which do
extend so far as to the fourth heir. And if all the males would bear the
fathers Arms, they ought to be distinguished according to degree of Birth, or
primogeniture, by Brisures.

But the second son deit Porter le Lambeau de trois pieces; which is to be
understood of metal or color, and which also ought to be observed in all other
Brisures.

The third son une simple Bordure. The fourth le Orle; The fifth le Baston: And
the sixth le Band.

If there be any more, the Chief; the first or last Canton of the Chief, or
else le Ente en Poincte will serve to be remarked.

The assailants or challengers of all the younger thus born must be
acknowledged by doubles Brisures; in regard the eldest son issued of the
second, ought to retain and bear the Fathers Arms avecques leur Brisure le
Lambeau de trois pieces en chef.

The second le Larabeau de quatre pieces en chef.

The third pareil Lambeau monuant le chief.

And the fourth pareil Lambeau charge solon sa fantasy d'Aigles, Lions,
Croissants, Roses, Aleryons, Merlets, ou Diapre.

The second son issuing of the first third portera la Bordure engreslee.

The third chargee de Befans, ou Torteaux.

The fourth La Bordure Componee.

The next Endentee, or Endenchee. And the rest (if there be any more) Chargee
de Annulets, party del un ou l' autre, ou bien le simple, ou be double
essanier and trescheur; id est the diminitive of an Orle.

The second son issuing of the first fourth, l' Orle, which his descendents and
he may diversifye; d' Eschecquette, pale, counterpale, Lozange, Frelte,
Fusille, Faisses, conterfaisses, Paile, Viure A form of Dancetty.
, cheveronne contre-cheveronne; Verse, Turned and counterchanged.
contre-verse; or chardged with the forenamed Beasts with pannes All sorts of
Ermins and vairy.
, Marles, Molettes, Estoiles, ou de rustres Lozenges rarouranal pierced.
, or other varieties, which may be put into Arms.

The second son of the first fifth, and his descendents may change and vary le
Baston, as has been said before and the like.

Of the second son, and his assaylants of the first six a la Band With the Bend.
, which may be Coticee, jumelle double-cotized.
, Bretesscee, embatelled
Feuillee chardg'd with six leaves of any sort.
de six, componee, Endenctiee, ou chargee d' animaux, ou de pannes.

But it is to be held for a rule, and an infallible Maxim in Arms, and the
noble art of painting, and Blazon, that he which bears least is the best,
which will serve for question and inquiry.

A True and Perfect CATALOGUE OF THE Nobility OF ENGLAND.

A true and perfect Catalogue of all the Nobility, Great Officers of State and
Court, Lords Spiritual and Temporal of the Kingdom of ENGLAND, according to
their Respective Precedencies.
Dukes of the Royal Blood (II)
* JAMES Duke of York (and Albany in Scotland, Earl of Ulster in Ireland) *
Rupert Duke of Cumberland (Count Palatine of the Rhine)
Archbishops (II), and Great Officers (IV), who in respect of their Offices
precede all the Nobility except those of the Blood Royal.
Archbishop of Canterbury Primate of All England William Sancroft Dr. of
Divinity Lord High Chancellor of England Heneage Earl of Nottingham Archbishop
of York, Primate of England Richard Stern Dr. of Divinity Lord High Treasurer
of England This Office is now executed by Commissioners Lord President of the
Council John Earl of Radnor Lord Privy Seal Arthur Earl of Anglesey
Dukes (IX) and Dutchesses (II)
Henry Howard Duke of Norfolk (Earl Marshal) Charles Seymour Duke of Somerset
(under age) * George Villiers Duke of Buckingham * Christopher Monk Duke of
Albemarle * James Scot Duke of Monmouth (and Buccleugh in Scotland) * Henry
Cavendish Duke of New Castle Barbara Duchess of Cleveland (sole Daughter and
Heir to William Villiers Vicount Grandison in Ireland) for Life, with Remainder
to Charles Fitz-Roy, her eldest Son, and for want of Issue male to George
Fitz-Roy, her Younger Son. Lovisa de Querovalle Duchess of Portsmouth (for
Life) * Charles Lenos Duke of Richmond (and Lenox in Scotland) under age. *
Charles Fitz-Roy Duke of Southampton (under age) * Henry Fitz-Roy Duke of
Grafton (the Remainder, for want of Issue male, to George Fitz-Roy, his Younger
Brother) under Age
Marquesses (II)
Charles Paulet Marquess of Winchester * Henry Somerset Marquess of Worcester
Other Great Officers (V) (Who take place in respect of their Offices)
Lord High Chamberlain of England Robert Earl of Lindsey Earl Marshal of
England Henry Duke of Norfolk, with His Majesty's approbation at present
executes the Office by his Deputy who now is Robert Earl of Aylesbury Lord High
Admiral of England This Office is now executed by Commissioners Lord Steward of
the King's Household James Earl of Brecknock (Duke of Ormond in Ireland) Lord
Chamberlain of the King's Household Henry Earl of Arlington
Earls (LXIX) and (I) Countess
* Auberie de Vere Earl of Oxford Charles Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury (Waterford
and Wexford in Ireland) Anthony Gray Earl of Kent Willlam Stanly Earl of Derby
John Manners Earl of Rutland Theophilus Hastings Earl of Huntington * William
Russel Earl of Bedford Philip Herbert Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery Edward
Clinton Earl of Lincoln James Howard Earl of Suffolk Charles Sackvill Earl of
Dorset and Middlesex * James Cecil Earl of Salisbury John Cecil Earl of Exeter
John Egerton Earl of Bridgwater Philip Sidney Earl of Leicester James Compton
Earl of Northampton Edward Rich Earl of Warwick and Holland (under Age) William
Cavendish Earl of Devonshire William Feilding Earl of Denbigh (and Desmond in
Ireland) John Digby Earl of Bristol Gilbert Holles Earl of Clare Oliver St.
John's Earl of Bolinbroke Charles Fane Earl of Westmorland Robert Mountagu Earl
of Manchester Thomas Howard Earl of Berkeshire * John Sheffield Earl of
Mulgrave Thomas Savage Earl of Rivers Robert Bertie Earl of Lindsey (Lord Great
Chamberlain of England) Henry Mordant Earl of Peterborough Thomas Gray Earl of
Stamford Hencage Finch Earl of Winchelsey Robert Pierrepont Earl of Kingston
upon Hull Charles Dormer Earl of Carnarvon Philip Stanhope Earl of Chesterfield
Richard Tufton Earl of Thanet Thomas Weston Earl of Portland * William
Wentworth Earl of Strafford Robert Spencer Earl of Sunderland Robert Leke Earl
of Scarsdale Charles Wilmot Earl of Rochester (and Vicount Wilmot of Athlon in
Ireland) under Age * Henry Jermin Earl of St. Albans Edward Mountagu Earl of
Sandwich * James Butler Earl of Brecknock (Lord Steward of the King's Household,
and Duke of Ormond in Ireland) Henry Hyde Earl of Clarendon Arthur Capel Earl
of Essex Robert Brudnel Earl of Cardigan Arthur Annesly Earl of Anglesey (Lord
Privy Seal, and Vicount Valentia in Ireland) John Greneville Earl of Bath
Charles Howard Earl of Carlisle William Craven Earl of Craven Robert Bruce Earl
of Aylesbury (and Elgin in Scotland) Richard Boil Earl of Burlington (and Cork
in Ireland) * Henry Bennet Earl of Arlington (Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's
Household) Anthony-Ashley Cooper Earl of Shastsbury William Herbert Earl of
Powis Edward-Henry Lee Earl of Lichfield * John Maitland Earl of Guilford (and
Duke of Lauderdale in Scotland) * Thomas Osborne Earl of Danby Thomas Lennard
Earl of Sussex George Fitz-Roy Earl of Northumberland (under Age) Lewis Duras
Earl of Feversham Charles Beauclair Earl of Burford (under Age) George Savile
Earl of Hallifax Charles Gerard Earl of Macclesfield John Roberts Earl of
Radnor (Lord President of the Council) Robert Paston Earl of Yarmouth George
Berkeley Earl of Berkeley Edward Conway Earl of Conway (and Vicount Killutagh
in Ireland Elizabeth (Lady Dacres) Countess of Shepey (Daughter of Paul Vicount
Banyng, Relict of Francis Lennard Lord Dacres, and Mother to Thomas Earl of
Sussex) for Life Heneage Finch Earl of Nottingham (Lord High Chancellor of
England)
Uicounts (VIII) and (I) Uicountess
Leceister Devereux Vicount Hereford (under Age) Francis Brown Vicount
Mountague William Fiennes Vicount Say and Sele Baptist Noel Vicount Campden
Thomas Bellassyse Vicount Fauconberg Charles Mordant Vicount Mordant Francis
Newport Vicount Newport Sarah (Lady Corbet) Vicountess Corbet (Daughter and
Coheir of Sir Robert Munson of Carleton in Com. Linc. Knight Relict of Sir
Vincent Corbet of Morton Corbet in Com. Salop. Baronet) for Life Laurence Hyde
Vicount Hyde
Bishops (XXIV)
Dr. Henry Compton L. B. of London Dr. Nathaniel Crew L. B. of Durham Dr.
George Morley L. B. of Winchester Dr. Herbert Crofts L. B. of Hereford Dr. Seth
Ward L. B. of Salisbury Dr. Edward Rainbow L. B. of Carlisle Dr. John Dolben L.
B. of Rochester Dr. Antony Sparrow L. B. of Norwich Dr. Peter Gunning L. B. of
Ely Dr. Thomas Wood L. B. of Coventry and Lichfield Dr. Guy Carleton L. B. of
Chichester Dr. Peter Mew L. B. of Bath and Wells Dr. John Pearson L. B. of
Chester Dr. Humphry Lloyd L. B. of Bangor Dr. William Lloyd L. B. of
Peterborough Dr. Thomas Barlow L. B. of Lincoln Dr. James Fleetwood L. B. of
Worcester Dr. John Fell L. B. of Oxford Dr. Thomas Lamplough L. B. of Exeter
Dr. William Thomas L. B. of St. David's Dr. William Gulston L. B. of Bristol Dr.
William Beaw L. B. of Landaff Dr. William Lloyd L. B. of St. Asaph Dr. Robert
Frampton L. B. of Gloucester (The Bishops of London, Durham, and Winchester do
constantly precede the residue of the Bishops who take their places according
to the seniority of their Consecrations)
Barons (LXV) and Baronesses (III)
Henry Howard Lord Moubray (bears the Title of Earl of Arundel) George Nevill
Lord Abergavenny (under Age) James Touchet Lord Audley (and Earl of
Castle-Haven in Ireland) Charles West Lord La War Thomas Parker Lord Morley
and Lord Montegle Robert Shirley Lord Ferrers Conyers Darcie Lord Darcie and
Lord Meinel. Charles Mildmay Lord Fitz-Walter (under Age) Henry Yelverton Lord
Gray (under Age) Frances (Lady Ward) Baroness Dudley (Granddaughter and sole
Heir to Edward Sutton Lord Dudley, Relict of Humble Lord Ward, and Mother of
Edward Lord Ward) William Stourton Lord Stourton Conyers Darcie Lord Conyers
Henry Sandys Lord Sandys Thomas-Windsor Windsor alias Hickman Lord Windsor
Thomas Cromwell Lord Cromwell (and Earl of Arglas in Ireland) Ralph Eure Lord
Eure Philip Wharton Lord Wharton Thomas Willoughby Lord Willough by of Parham
William Paget Lord Paget Francis Howard Lord Howard of Effingh^m Charles North
Lord North and Lord Gray of Rolleston James Brugges Lord Chandos Robert Carey
Lord Hunsdon James Bertie Lord Norris William Petre Lord Petre Digby Gerard
Lord Gerard of Bromley (under age) Henry Arundell Lord Arundell of Wardour (and
Count of the Empire) The Lady Catherine (O Brien) Baroness Clifton (Daughter of
the Lord George Stuart called Lord D'Aubignie; Sister and sole Heir to Charles
late Duke of Richmond and Lenox, and thereby sole Heir to the Lady Catharine
her Grandmother, Daughter and Heir to Gervaise Lord Clifton) first married to
Henry Lord O Brien (Son and Heir to Henry Earl of Thomond in Ireland) and since
his death to Sir Joseph Williamson Knight Christopher Roper Lord Tenham Fulke
Grevill Lord Brook Edward Mountagu Lord Mountagu of Boughton Forde Gray Lord
Gray of Work John Lovelace Lord Lovelace John Paulet Lord Paulet William
Maynard Lord Maynard (and Baron Maynard of Wickelow in Ireland) John Coventrie
Lord Coventrie William Howard Lord Howard of Escrick Charles Mohun Lord Mohun
(under Age) Henry Herbert Lord Herbert of Chirbury (and Baron Herbert of
Castle-Island in Ireland) Thomas Leigh Lord Leigh Christopher Hatton Lord
Hatton William Byron Lord Byron Richard Vaughan Lord Vaughan (and Earl of
Carbery in Ireland) Francis Smith Lord Carington (and Vicount Carington of
Barrefore in Ireland) William Widdrington Lord Widdrington Edward Ward Lord
Ward Thomas Colepeper Lord Colepeper Jacob Astley Lord Astley Charles Lucas
Lord Lucas John Bellassyse Lord Bellassyse Edward Watson Lord Rockingham Robert
Sutton Lord Lexinton (under Age) Charles-Henry Kirckhoven Lord Wotton (and Earl
of Bellomont in Ireland) Marmaduke Langdale Lord Langdale Charles Berkeley Lord
Berkeley of Stratton (under Age) Francis Holles Lord Holles Charles Cornwallis
Lord Cornwallis George Boothe Lord De la Mer Horatio Townsend Lord Townsend
Thomas Crew Lord Crew John Frescheville Lord Frescheville Richard Arundell Lord
Arundell of Treryse James Butler Lord Butler of Moore-Parke (bears the Title
of Earl of Ossory in Ireland) under Age Hugh Clifford Lord Clifford of Chudley
(under Age) Richard Butler Lord Butler of Weston (and Earl of Arran in Ireland)
Susan (Lady Bellassyse) Baroness Bellassyse of Osgodby (Daughter and Coheir to
Sir WilliamAirmine of Osgodby in Com. Linc. Baronet, Relict of Sir Henry
Bellassyse Knight of the Bathe son and heir to John Lord Bellassyse) for Life
Edward Noel Lord Noel Richard Lumley Lord Lumley (and Vicount Lumley of
Waterford in Ireland) George Carteret Lord Carteret (under Age)
All those before, whose names an Asterisc (*) is prefixed, are Knights of the
Garter.

A true and exact LIST of all the KNIGHTS of the CARTER infer SCHEME of the
Stalls of the SOVE^ and the KNIGHTS COMPANIONS MOST NOBLE Order as they no^ in
St. GEORGES CHAPEL in WI^ CASTLE this tenth of SEPTEMBER
Christian the 5th. King of Denmark The Sovereign Charles the 2d. King of
England etc Charles the XI th. King of Sweden James York Prince Rupert Count
Palatine of the Rhine William-Henry Prince of Or Frederick William Prince
Elector Marquess of Brandenburgh Charles the 2d. Prince Ele of the Rhine James
Duke of Ormond George Duke of Buckinghan Auberie Earl of Oxford William Earl of
Strafford James Duke of Monmouth Christopher Duke of Albemar(...) James Duke of
Monmouth Christopher Duke of Albemarle John Duke of Lauderdale Henry Marquess
of Worcester Henry Earl of St. Albans William Earl of Bedford Henry Earl of
Arlington Charles Duke of Southampton John Earl of Mulgrave Henry Duke of
Newcastle ^homas Earl of Danby Henry Duke of Grafton James Earl of Salisbury
Charles Duke of Richmund

^lace this after page 78.

A CATALOGUE OF THE BARONETS OF THIS KINGDOM OF England; From the first
Erection of that Dignity until the 4th of July 1681 inclusive.

AN Advertisement TO THE READER.
WHen the Copy, from which this subsequent Catalogue of the English Nobility
is printed, was sent to the Press, the name and Title of Francis Lord Howard of
Effingham was omitted, (tho in the second Volume of the Baronage of England
published in anno 1676 upon the best information I could then obtain, I had
there taken notice of that person, as heir expectant to the said Honor, after
the death of Charles Earl of Nottingham, who was then very aged and issuless)
doubting to fix him therein before he had regularly made his claim thereto,
might give offense to the rest of the Nobility: but upon view of my Copy: by
some intelligent persons, who nevertheless thought it proper to be inserted I
submitted thereto: whereat if any take offense I humbly crave pardon: it being
my clear opinion, that such of a collateral line, as have right by descent to
any Title of Honor, accruing to them by virtue of an entail thereof made long
since; they should openly exhibit their claim unto the King, with due proof of
their right thereto (as has heretofore in like cases been done) and thereupon,
with his Majesty's allowance thereof, have the same, by the direction of the
Earl Marshal, orderly registered.

Whereas in the Catalogue of the Vicounts, I have inserted Leicester Devereux
Vicount Hereford, now in minority; I'have hereby thought fit to advertise the
Reader; that, upon certain exceptions taken in Parliament in anno 1677 to his
right for that Title, by reason of the attainder of Robert Earl of Essex and
Vicount Hereford in 43 Eliz. and restoration of that Honor being only limited
to Robert his Son and the two Sisters of the said Robert: the decision ^hereof
was then, by order of the House of Lords, re^^ited till the said Leicester
Devereux shall come of full Age.

It is likewise to be noted; whereas in this ensuing Catalogue Page 71. Charles
Wilmot Earl of Rochester is inserted; that since the printing thereof he dyed,
whereby that Title of Honor is totally extinct: and therefore, that the number
of Earls mentioned in page 69. lin. penult. is to be no more then 68. And that
James Compton Earl of Northampton mentioned p. 70. is since dead but succeeded
by George his Son who is under Age.

I have likewise thought fit, farther to advertise the Reader, that the
Bookseller being desirous to publish Catalogues of the Scottish and Irish
Nobility: such has been the unexspected delay, in obtaining perfect Copies
from Scotland and Ireland that the publication of my papers (which have been
printed more then four months since) has by reason thereof, been so long
retarded, that it has necessitated some alterations and emendations now added.

Also, that as to the following Catalogue of the Scottish Nobility, Sir George
Mackenzie, the worthy Lord Advocat of Scotland in his letter to me bearing the
30th of December 1681 does signify, that he did review it and gave his
assistance for the better completing thereof and does certify that it is very
perfect and exact. But the said Sir George Mackenzie in a learned Treatise of
Precedence (published at Edinburgh 1680 together with another of Heraldry both
written by himself being a person eminently renow'd for his several other
excellent works) having at large discoursed of the Precedence due to the
Archbishops of Scotland, to the end that no injury be done to them by
concealing their just right therein, I shall here transcribe what he says as
to that point.

I find by a letter in An. 1625, that before King James his going into England,
the Marquesses of Scotland, did take place from the Archbishops: And by a
letter in An. 1626, renewed in An. 1664. The Archbishop of St. Andrews is to
take place before all subjects. Yet I think, this will not give him place from
the Kings Sons, Uncles, and Nephews, though they be likewise subjects; since
the word subjects must be here interpreted according to the custom of Nations,
by which these near relations of Princes are preferred to all other subjects.
Yet defacto since the letter the Archbishops of St. Andrews ceds to the Lord
Chancellor.

These Advertisements to the Reader, are to be prefixed before page 67.

THE Preface.
WHereas in the year 1667 a Catalogue of the Baronets of England was by
authority published; to the end that such as had obtained Patents for that
Honor, which were not enrolled, should, by discerning an omission of their
names therein, take care to supply that defect, so that, upon a second
Impression thereof they might be inserted: Now, whereas, after twelve years and
more, no Enrollments are yet to be found for sundry persons which have assumed
this Title, which causes some to doubt whether they can make any justifiable
claim thereto.

Whereas therefore no person whatsoever ought to take upon them this Title of
dignity, but such as have been really advanced thereto by Letters Patents under
the great Seal of England; it is thought fit by the right Honorable Robert
Earl of Aylesbury, who now exercises the Office of Earl Marshall of England,
that this present Catalogue of such, touching whom the Docquet-books remaining
with the-Clerk of the Crown in Chancery do take notice, shall be published; to
the end that those of whom no memorial upon Record is to be found, to justify
their right to this Title, may be known; and care henceforth taken in
Commissions of the peace, and otherwise, that it be not given unto them until
they shall manifest the same unto the Lord Chancellor of England, and have
special order from his Lordship to enroll such Patents, whereby they pretend
Title to that dignity.

As also, that regard be had of giving credit to any other Catalogues of the
Baronets which are already published, or that shall be published, than what is
taken from the authority of those Docquet-books above mentioned, or the
Enrollment of their Patents.

BARONETS Created by King James.
Anno Dom. 1611. May 22 and Anno Regis Jac. 9.
1 SIR Nicholas Bacon of Redgrave Knight. Suff. 2 Sir Richard Molineux of
Sefton Knight (Irish Visc. viz. Viscount Molineux.) Lanc. 3 Sir Thomas Maunsell
of Morgan Knight. Glam. 4 George Shirley of Staunton Esquire (English Baron viz.
Lord Ferrers.) Leic. 5 Sir John Stradling of St. Donats Knight. Glam. 6 Sir Francis
Leke of Sutton Knight (English Earl viz. Earl of Scaresdale). Darb. 7 Thomas
Pelham of Lawghton Esquire Suss. 8 Sir Richard Houghton of Houghton-Tower Knight.
Lanc. 9 Sir Henry Hobart of Intwood Knight (Attorney General to the King
afterward Lord chief justice of the Common Pleas.) Norff. 10 Sir George Boothe
of Dunham-Massey Knight (English Baron viz. Ld. de La Mer.) Chesh. 11 Sir John
Peyton of Iselham Knight Cambr. 12 Lionel Talmach of Helmingham Esquire From whom
the present chief Lineal descendant has a just expectancy to be a Scotch Earl
viz. Earl of Dysert and now bears the title of Lord Huntingtower as being
eldest son to the Countess of Dysert Daughter of William Murray Earl of Dysert
and the relict of the late Sr. Lionel Talmach, but since married to the Duke of
Lauderdale. Suff. 13 Sir Gervase Clifton of Clifton Knight of the Bath. Not.
14 Sir Thomas Gerard of Bryn Knight. Lanc. 15 Sir Walter Aston of Tixhall
Knight of the Bath. Ambassador in Spain from King James (Scotch Baron viz. Lord
Aston.) Staff. 16 Philip Knevet of Buckenham Esquire (Extinct.) Norff. 17 Sir John
St. John of Lidiard-Tregoz Knight. Wiltf. 18 John Shelly of Michelgrove Esquire
Suss. 19 Junij 29 Sir John Savage of Rock-Savage Knight. (English Earl viz. E.
Rivers) Chesh. 20 Sir Francis Barington of Barington-hall Knight. Essex. 21
Henry Berkely of Wimundham Esquire (Extinct). Leic. 22 Will. Wentworth of Wentworth
Woodhouse Esquire (English Earl viz. E. of Strafford) Ebor. 23 Sir Richard Musgrave
of Hartley Castle Knight. Westmerl. 24 Edward Seymour of Bury-Pomeray Esquire
Devon. 25 Sir Moyle Finch of Eastwell Knight. (English Earl viz. E. of
Winchelsey) Rent 26 Sir Antony Cope of Hanwell Knight. Oxon. 27 Sir Thomas
Mounson of Carleton Knight. Linc. (Vide Charles Vavasor Junij 22. 1631). 28
George Gresely of Drakedow Esquire Derb. 29 Paul Tracy of Stanway Esquire Glouc. 30 Sir
John Wentworth of Goffield Knight. (Extinct) Essex. 31 Sir Henry Belasyse of
Newborough Knight. (English Visc. viz. Vicount Fauconberge) Ebor. 32 William
Constable of Flamborough Esquire (Extinct.) Ebor. 33 Sir Thomas Leigh of Stoncley
Knight. (Eng. Baron viz. Lord Leigh) Warw. 34 Sir Edward Noell of Brook Knight.
(Eng. Visc. viz. Vicount Campden) Rutl. 35 Sir Robert Cotton of Connington Knight.
Hunt. 36 Robert Cholmondeleigh of Cholmondeleigh Esquire Irish Earl viz. E. of
Lemester as also Engl. Baron viz. L. Cholmondeleigh of Wiche-malbank, alias
Nant-wiche Extinct). Chesh. 37 John Molineux of Teversal Esquire Not. 38 Sir
Francis Wortley of Wortley Knight. (Extinct) Ebor. 39 Sir George Savile senior
of Thornehill Knight (English Earl viz. Earl of Hallifax). Ebor. 40 William
Kniveton of Mircaston Esquire Derb. 41 Sir Philip Woodhouse of Wilberhall Knight.
Norff. 42 Sir William Pope of Wilcot Knight. (Irish Earl viz. Earl of Down).
Oxon. 43 Sir James Harrington of Ridlington Knight. Rutl. 44 Sir Henry Savile of
Methley Knight. (Extinct). Ebor. 45 Henry Willoughby of Risley Esquire (Extinct).
Darb. 46 Jews Tresham of Rushton Esquire (Extinct). Northamp. 47 Thomas Brudenell
of Deene Esquire (English Earl viz Earl of Cardigan). Norrhamp. 48 Sir George St.
Paul of Snarsford Knight. (Extinct). Linc. 49 Sir Philip Tirwhit of Stainefield
Knight. Linc. 50 Sir Roger Dallison of Loughton Knight (Extinct). Linc. 51 Sir
Edward Carre of Sleford Knight. Linc. 52 Sir Edward Hussy of Hennington Knight.
Linc. 53 L'Estrange Mordant of Massingham Esquire Norff. 54 Thomas Bendish of
Steeple Bamsted Esquire Essex 55 Sir John Win of Gwedyr Knight. Caernarv. 56 Sir
William Throckmorton of Tortworth Knight. Glouc. 57 Sir Richard Worseley of
Appledore-combe Knight. Hants. 58 Richard Fleetwood of Calwiche Esquire Staff. 59
Thomas Spenser of Yarnton Esquire Oxon. 60 Sir John Tufton of Hothfield Knight.
(English Earl viz. E. of Thanet). Kent. 61 Sir Samuel Peyton of Knowlton Knight
Kent. 62 Sir Charles Morrison of Cashio-Bury Knight (Extinct). Hertf. 63 Sir
Henry Baker of Sillinghurst Knight (Extinct). Kent. 64 Roger Appleton of
South-Bemsted Esquire Essex. 65 Sir William Sidley of Ailesford Knight. Kent 66 Sir
William Twisden of East-Peckham Knight. Kent 67 Sir Edward Hales of Wood-Church
Knight. Kent 68 William Monys of Walwarsher Esquire Rent 69 Thomas Mildmay of
Mulsham Esquire (English Baron, viz. Lord Fitz-walter.) Essex 70 Sir William
Maynard of Eastanes-parva Knight. (Irish and English Baron) viz. Lord Maynard.
Essex 71 Henry Lee of Quarendon Esquire Buck.
Anno Dom. 1612. Nov. 25. and Regis Jac. 10
72 Sir John Portman of Orchard Knight. Summers. 73 Sir Nicholas Saunderson of
Saxby Knight (Irish Visc. viz. Vicount Castleton) Linc. 74 Sir Miles Sands of
Wilberton Knight. (Extinct) Cambr. 75 William Gostwick of Willington Esquire Bedf.
76 Thomas Puckering of Weston Esquire (Extinct). Hartf. 77 Sir William Wray of
Glentworth Knight. Linc. 78 Sir William Ailoffe of Braxted-magna Knight. Essex 79
Sir Marmaduke Wivel of Constable-Burton Knight. Ebor. 80 John Pershall of
Horsley Esquire Staff. 81 Francis Englefield of Wotton-Basset Esquire UUilts. 82 Sir
Thomas Ridgway of Torre Knight (Irish Earl viz. E. of Londonderry). Devon. 83
William Essex of Bewcot Esquire Berks. 84 Sir Edward Georges of Langford Knight
(Irish Baron). viz. Lord Georges UUilts. 85 Edward Devereux of Castle-Bromwich
Esquire (Eng. Visc. viz. Vicount Hereford) UUarw. 86 Reginald Mohun of Boconnok Esquire
(English Baron Viz. Lord Mohun) Cornub. 87 Sir Harbottle Grimston of Bradfield
Knight. Essex 88 Sir Thomas Holt of Aston juxta Bermingham Knight. UUarm. 89 Sir
Robert Naper, alias Sandy, of Lewton-How Knight (vid. John Napier Martij 4.
1660). Bedf. 90 Paul Banning of Bentley-Parva Esquire (English Vic. viz. Vicount
Banning Extinct). Essex 91 Sir Thomas Temple of Stow Knight. Buck. 92 Thomas
Penyston of Leigh Esquire Suss.
Anno Dom. 1615. and Regis Jac. 13.
93 Maij 27 Thomas Blackston of Blackston Esquire (Extinct) Durh. 94 Junij 10 Sir
Robert Dormer of Wing Knight. (English Earl) viz. E. of Caernarvon. Buck.
Anno Dom. 1617. and Regis Jac. 15.
95 Aprilis 5 Sir Rowland Egerton of Egerton Knight. Cestr. 96 Apr. 16 Roger
Towneshend of Rainham Esquire (English Baron viz. Lord Towneshend). Norf. 97 Maij 1
Simon Clark of Salford Esquire UUarm. 98 Oct. 2 Edward Fitton of Gawsworth Esquire
(Extinct). Cestr. 99 Martij 11 Sir Richard Lucy of Broxburn Knight. (Extinct).
Hartf.
Anno Dom. 1618. and Regis Jac. 16.
100 Maij 25 Sir Matthew Boynton of Bramston Knight. Ebor. 101 Julij 25 Thomas
Littleton of Frankley Esquire UUigorn. 102 Dec. 24. Sir Francis Leigh of Newnham
Knight (English Earl viz. Earl of Chichester Extinct) UUarm. 103 Febr. 25
Thomas Burdet of Bramcote Esquire UUarm. 104 Martij 1 George Morton of St.
Andrews-Milborn Esquire Dors.
Anno Dom. 1619. and Regis Jac. 17.
105 Maij 31 Sir William Hervey of Kidbrook Knight with remainder to William
Hervey his son, and to the Heirs males of the body of the said William. (Irish
and English Baron; viz. Lord Hervey Extinct). Kent 106 Junij 4 Thomas Mackworth
of Normanton Esquire Rutl. 107 Junij 15 William Gray Esquire son and Heir of Sir Ralph
Gray of Chillingham Knight (English Baron viz. Lord Gray of Warke) Northumv 108
Julij 19 William Villers of Brookesby Esquire The eldest Brother by a former Venture
to George Villers, then Marquess, after Duke of Buckingham. Leic. 109 Julij 20
Sir James Ley of Westbury Knight, Sergeant at law, Lord Chief Justice of the
King's Bench and afterward Lord High Treasurer of England (English Earl viz.
E. of Marlborough Extinct) UUilts. 110 Julij 21 William Hicks of Beverston Esquire
Glouc. 111 Sept. 17 Sir Thomas Beaumont of Cole-Orton Knight. (Irish Vic. viz.
Vicount Beaumont) Lric. 112 Nov. 10 Henry Salisbury of Lleweny Esquire Denb. 113
Nov. 16 Erasmus Driden of Canons-Ashby Esquire Northamp. 114 Nov. 28 William Armine
Esquire son and heir to Sir William Armine of Osgodby Knight. (Extinct) Linc. 115
Dec. 1. Sir William Bamburgh of Howton Knight (Extinct). Ebor. 116 Dec. 3
Edward Hartop of Freathby, Esquire Leic. 117 Dec. 31 John Mill of Camoys-Court Esquire
Suss. 118 Jan. 31 Francis Radcliffe of Darwentwater Esquire Cumber. 119 Febr. 6 Sir
David Foulis of Ingleby Knight. Ebor. 120 Febr. 16 Thomas Philips of Barrington Esquire
Summers. 121 Martij 7 Sir Claudius Forster of Bambrough Castle Knight (Extinct)
Northumb. 122 Martij 23 Anthony Chester of Chichley Esquire Buck.
Anno Dom. 1620. and Regis Jac. 18.
123 Martij 28 Sir Samuel Tryon of Layre-Marney Knight. Essex 124 Apr. 2 Adam
Newton of Charleton Esquire Kent 125 Apr. 12 Sir John Boteler of Hatfield-woodhall
Knight. (English Baron viz. Lord Boteler of Bramfield Extinct) Hertf. 126 Apr.
13 Gilbert Gerard of Harrow on the Hill Esquire Midd. 127 Maij 3 Humphrey Lee of
Langley Esquire Salo^ 128 Maij 5 Richard Berney of Parkhall in Redham Esquire Norff.
129 Maij 20 Humphrey Forster of Alder-Marston Esquire Berks. 130 Maij 26 Thomas
Biggs of Lenchwike Esquire (Extinct) UUigorn. 131 Maij 30 Henry Bellingham of
Helsington Esquire (Extinct) UUestm^^^. 132 Maij 31 William Yelverton of Rougham
Esquire (Extinct) Norff. 133 Junij 1 John Scudamore of Home-Lacy Esquire (Irish Vic.
viz. Vicount Scudamore) Heref. 134 Junij 2 Sir Thomas Gore of Stitnam Knight.
Ebor. 135 Junij 22 John Pakington of Alesbury Esquire Buck. 136 Junij 28 Ralph
Ashton of Lever Esquire Lanc. 137 Julij 1 Sir Baptist Hicks of Camden Knight.
(English Visc. viz. Vicount Camden Extinct) Glouc. 138 Julij 3 Sir Thomas
Roberts of Glassenbury Knight. Kent 139 Julij 8 John Hanmer of Hanmer Esquire
Flint. 140 Edward Friar of Water-Eaton Esquire (Extinct). Oxon. 141 Julij 13 Edward
Osborne of Keeton Esquire Vice President of King Charles the first his Council in
the North (English Earl viz. E. of Danby) Ebor. 142 Julij 20 Henry Felton of
Playford Esquire Suss. 143 Julij 20 William Chaloner of Gisborough Esquire (Extinct)
Ebor. 144 Julij 24 Sir Thomas Bishop of Parham Knight. Suss. 145 Julij 26 Sir
Francis Vincent of Stoke Dabernon Knight. Surr. 146 Febr 27 Henry Clear of
Ormesby Esquire (Extinct) Norff. 147 Martij 8 Sir Benjamin Tichburne of Tichburne
Knight. Hantsh.
Anno Dom. 1621. and Regis Jac. 19.
148 Maij 5 Sir Richard Wilbraham of Woodhey Knight. Cestr. 149 Maij 8 Sir
Thomas Delves of Dodington Knight. Cestr. 150 Junij 23 Sir Jews Watson of
Rockingham Castle Knight (English Baron viz. Lord Rockingham) Northamp. 151
Junij 29 Sir Thomas Palmer of Wingham Knight. Kent 152 Julij 3 Sir Richard
Roberts of Truro Knight (English Earl viz. Earl of Radnor) Cornub. 153 Julij 19
John Rivers of Chafford Esquire Kent 154 Sept. 6 Thomas Darnell of Heyling Esquire
Linc. 155 Sept. 14 Sir Isaac Sidley of Great Chart Knight. Kent 156 Sept. 21
Robert Brown of Walcot Esquire (Extinct) Northamp. 157 Oct. 11 John Hewet of
Headley-Hall Esquire Ebor. 158 Oct. 16 Henry Jernegan of Cossey alias Cossese Esquire
Norf. 159 Nov. 8 Sir Nicolas Hide of Albury Knight (Extinct). Hartf. 160 Nov. 9
John Philips of Picton Esquire Pembr. 161 Nov. 24 Sir John Stepney of Prendergast
Knight. Pemb. 162 Dec. 5 Baldwin Wake of Clevedon Esquire Summers. 163 Dec. 20
William Mashom of High-Laver Esquire Essex 164 Dec. 21 John Colbrond of Borham Esquire
Suss. 165 Jan. 4 Sir John Hotham of Scarborough Knight Governor of Hull. Ebor.
166 Jan. 14 Francis Mansell of Mudlescombe Esquire Caermarth. 167 Jan. 18 Edward
Powell of Penkelley (one of the Masters of the Requests) (Extinct) Heref. 168
Febr. 16 Sir John Garrard of Lamer Knight. Hartf. 169 Febr. 23 Sir Richard
Grosvenour of Eaton Knight. Cestr. 170 Martij 11 Sir Henry Moody of Garesdon
Knight (Extinct). Wilts. 171 Martij 17 John Barker of Grimston-Hall in Trimley
Esquire Suff. 172 Martij 18 Sir William Button of Alton Knight. Wilts.
Anno Dom. 1622. and Regis Jac. 20.
173 Martij 26 John Gage of Ferle Esquire Suss. 174 Maij 14 William Goring Esquire son
and heir of Sir Henry Goring of Burton Knight. Su^^. 175 Maij 18 Peter Courtene
of Aldington alias Aunton Esquire (Extinct). Wigorn. 176 Maij 23 Sir Richard Norton
of Rotherfild Knight. Ha^^s. 177 Maij 30 Sir John Leventhorpe of Shingley-Hall
Knight. Hartt. 178 Junij 3 Capell Bedell of Hamerton Esquire (Extinct). Hunt. 179
Junij 13 John Darell of West-Woodhey Esquire (Extinct). Berks. 180 Junij 15 William
Williams of Veynol Esquire Caernarv. 181 Junij 18 Sir Francis Ashbey of Harfield
Knight. Midd 182 Julij 3 Sir Anthony Ashley of St. Giles-Winburne Knight
(Extinct). Dorf. 183 Julij 4 John Cooper of Rockbourne Fsque (English Earl viz.
E. of Shaftesbury) Hants. 184 Julij 17 Edmund Prideaux of Netherton Esquire Devon.
185 Julij 21 Sir Thomas Haslerigge of Nosely Knight. Leic. 186 Julij 22 Sir
Thomas Burton of Stockerston Knight. Leic. 187 Julij 24 Francis Folejambe of
Walton Esquire (Extinct). Derb. 188 Julij 30 Edward Yate of Buckland Esquire Berks. 189
Aug. 1 Geo. Chudleigh of Ashton Esquire Devon. 190 Aug. 2 Francis Drake of Buckland
Esquire Devon. 191 Aug. 13 William Meredith of Stansly Esquire Denb. 192 Oct. 22 Hugh
Middleton of Ruthin Esquire Denb. 193 Nov. 12 Gifford Thornehurst of Agnes-Court
Esquire Kent. 194 Nov. 16 Percy Herbert, son and Heir of Sir William Herbert of
Red-Castle Knight. (English Earl) viz. Earl of Powis. Montgom. 195 Dec. 7 Sir
Robert Fisher of Packington Knight. Warw. 196 Dec. 18 Hardolph Wastneys of
Headon Esquire Not. 197 Dec. 20 Sir Henry Skipwith of Prestwould Knight. Leic. 198
Dec. 22 Thomas Harris of Boreatton Esquire Salop. 199 Dec. 23 Nicholas Tempest of
Stella Esquire Durh. 200 Febr. 16 Francis Cottington Esquire Secretary to King Charles
the I. when Prince of Wales, afterward passing through several eminent
employments and great Offices he was advanced to be Lord High Treasurer of
England (English Baron ziz. Lord Cottington Extinct).
Anno Dom. 1623 and Regis Jac. 21
201 Apr 12 Thomas Harris of Tong-castle Sergeant at Law (Extinct). Salop. 202
Junij 28 Edward Barkham of South-Acre Esquire (Lord Mayor of London). Norff. 203
Julij 4 John Corbet of Sprowston Esquire (Extinct). Norff. 204 Aug. 13 Sir Thomas
Playters of Sotterly Esquire Suff.
BARONETS Created by K. Charles I.
Anno Dom. 1626. and Regis Car. primi 2.
205 Julij 27 SIR John Ashfield of Netherhall Knight (Extinct). Suff. 206 Sept
8 Henry Harpur of Calke Esquire Derb 207 Dec. 20 Edward Seabright of Besford Esquire
Wigorn. 208 Jan. 29 John Beaumont of Gracedieu Esquire Leic. 209 Febr. 1 Sir Edward
Dering of Surrenden-Dering Knight. Kent 210 Febr. 5 George Kempe of Pentlone
Esquire (Extinct) Essex 211 Martij 10 William Brereton of Hanford Fsque (Extinct).
Cestr. 212 Martij 12 Patricius Curwen of Workinton Esquire (Extinct). Cumbr. 213
Martij 12 William Russel of Witley Esquire Wigorn. 214 Martij 4 John Spenser of
Offley Esquire Hartf. 215 Matij 17 Sir Giles Estcourt of Newton Knight. Wilts.
Anno Dom. 1627 and Regis Car. I. tertio.
216 Apr. 19 Thomas Aylesbury Esquire (one of the Masters of the Requests),
(Extinct). 217 Apr. 21 Thomas Style of Wateringbury Esquire Kent 218 Maij 4
Frederick Cornwallis of Brom Esquire Treasurer of the Household to King Charles the
2d (English Baron viz. Lord Cornwallis) Suff. 219 Maij 7 Drue Drury of
Ridlesworth Esquire Norff. 220 Maij 8 William Skeffington of Fisherwick Esquire (Irish
Vic. viz. Vicount Massereene) Staff. 221 Maij 11 Sir Robert Crane of Chilton
Knight (Extinct). Suff. 222 Maij 17 Anthony Wingfield of Goodwins Esquire Suff. 223
Maij 17 William Culpeper of Preston-Hall Esquire Kent. 224 Maij 17 Giles Bridges of
Wilton Esquire (Engl. Baron) viz. Lord Chandos. Heref. 225 Maij 17 John Kirle of
Much-Marcle Esquire Heref. 226 Maij 20 Sir Humphrey Styles of Beckham Knight
(Extinct). Kent. 227 Maij 21 Henry Moor of Falley Esquire Berks. 228 Maij 28 Thomas
Heal of Fleet Esquire Devon. 229 Maij 28 John Carleton of Holcum Esquire (Extinct).
Oxon. 230 Maij 30 Thomas Maples of Stow Fsque (Extinct). Hunt. 231 Maij 30 Sir
John Isham of Lamport Knight. Northamp. 232 Maij 30 Hervey Bagot of Blithfield
Esquire Staff. 233 Maij 31 Jews Pollard of King's Nymph Esquire (Extinct). Devon. 234
Junij 1 Francis Mannock of Gifford's-Hall in Stoke juxta Neyland Esquire Suff. 235
Junij 7 Henry Griffith of Agnes-Burton Esquire (Extinct). Ebor. 236 Junij 8
Lodowicke Dyer of Staughton Esquire Hunt. 237 Junij 9 Sir Hugh Stukely of Hinton
Knight. Hants. 238 Junij 26 Edward Stanly of Bickerstaffe Esquire Lanc. 239 Junij
28 Edward Littleton of Pillaton-Hall Esquire Staff. 240 Julij 7 Ambrose Brown of
Betsworth-Castle Esquire Surr. 241 Julij 8 Sackvile Crow of Llanherne Esquire for
several years Ambassador to the Grand Seignior. Caerm. 242 Julij 11 Michael
Livesey of East-Church in the Isle of Shepey (Extinct). Kent 243 Julij 17 Simon
Bennet of Benhampton Esquire (Extinct). Buck. 244 Julij 19 Sir Thomas Fisher of the
Parish of St. Giles Knight (Extinct). Midd. 245 Julij 23 Thomas Bowyer of
Leighthorn Esquire (vid. Sir James Bowyer May 18 1678). Suff. 246 Julij 29 Buts
Bacon of Mildenhall Esquire Suff. 247 Sept. 19 John Corbet of Stoke in Com. Salop.
Esquire Salop. 248 Oct. 31 Sir Edward Tirrell of Thorneton Knight. (vid. Sir Ed.
Tirrell Feb. 19. 1638) Buck. 249 Febr. 18 Basil Dixwell of Terlingham, alias
Gerelingham Esquire (Extinct). Kent 250 Martij 10 Sir Richard Young Knight one of
the Gentlemen of His Majesty's Privy Chamber (Extinct).
Anno Dom. 1628. and Regis Car. I. quarto.
251 Maij 6 William Pennyman the younger of Mask, alias Marske Esquire A Collonell
in the late Kings Army and sometime Governor of Oxford (Extinct). Ebor. 252
Maij 7 William Stonehouse of Radley Esquire (v. Sir George Stonehouse May 5. 16^^)
Berks. 253 Maij 21 Sir Thomas Fouler of Islington Knight (Extinct). Midd. 254
Junij 9 Sir John Fenwick of Fen wick Knight. Northumb. 255 Junij 30 Sir William
Wray of Trebitch Knight. Cornub. 256 Julij 1 John Trelawney of Trelawney Esquire
Cornub. 257 Julij 14 John Conyers of Horden Gent. Durh. 258 Julij 24 John
Bolles of Scampton Esquire Linc. 259 Julij 25 Thomas Aston of Aston Esquire Cestr. 260
Julij 30 Kenelme Jenoure of Much-Dunmore Esquire Essex 261 Aug. 15 Sir John Price
of Newtown Knight. Montgom. 262 Aug. 19 Sir Richard Beaumont of Whitley Knight
(Extinct). Ebor. 263 Aug. 29 William Wiseman of Canfield-Hall Esquire Essex 264
Sept. 1 Thomas Nightingale of Newport-Pond Esquire Essex 265 Sept. 2 John Jacques
of Esquire one of His Majesty's Gent. Pensioners (Extinct). Midd. 266 Sept. 6
Robert Dillington of in the Isle of Wight Esquire Hants. 267 Sept. 12 Francis Pile
of Compton Esquire Berks. 268 Sept. 12 John Pole of Shur Esquire Devon. 269 Sept. 14
William Jews of Langors Esquire (Extinct). Brecknock. 270 Sept. 20 William
Culpeper of Wakehurst Esquire Suff. 271 Oct. 3 Peter Van-Loor of Tylehurst Esquire
(Extinct). Berks. 272 Oct. 9 Sir John Lawrence of Iver Knight. Buck. 273 Oct.
23 Anthony Slingesby of Screvin Esquire Ebor. 274 Oct. 24 Thomas Vavasour of
Haselwood Esquire Ebor. 275 Nov. 24 Robert Wolseley of Wolseley Esquire Staff. 276 Dec.
8 Rice Rudd of Aberghaney Esquire Cnerm. 277 Dec. 18 Richard Wiseman of
Thurndersley Esquire Essex 278 Dec. 19 Henry Forrers of Skellingthorpe Esquire Linc.
279 Jan. 3 John Anderson of St. Ives Esquire Hunt. 280 Jan. 19 Sir William Russel
of Chippenham Knight. Cambr. 281 Jan. 29 Richard Everard of Much-Waltham Esquire
Essex 282 Jan. 21 Thomas Powell of Berkinhead Esquire Cestr. 283 Martij 2 William
Luckin of Waltham Esquire Essex
Anno Dom. 1629. and Regis Car. I. quinto.
284 Martij 29 Richard Graham of Eske Esquire (Scottish Vicount viz. Vic. Preston).
Cumber. 285 Apr. 2 George Twisleton of Barley Esquire (Extinct). Ebor. 286 Maij 30
William Acton of the City of London Esquire (Extinct). Land. 287 Junij 1 Nicholas
L'Estrange of Hunstanton Esquire Norff. 288 Junij 15 John Holland of Quiddenham Esquire
Norff. 289 Junij 24 Edward Aleyn of Hatfield Esquire (Extinct). Essex. 290 Julij 2
Richard Earl, of Craglethorp Esquire Linc. 291 Nov. 28 Robert Ducy Lord Mayor of
London Land.
Anno Dom. 1630. and Regis Car. I. sexto.
292 Apr. 9 Sir Richard Grenevile Knight, (younger brother to Sir Bevill
Grenevile) of Kilkhampton, in Com. Cornw. (Extinct). Cornub.
Anno Dom. 1631. and Regis Car. I. septimo.
293 Junij 22 Charles Vavasour of Killingthorpe Esquire with an especial clause of
precedence, viz. to take place next below Sir Thomas Mounson of Carleton, in
Comm. Linc. Bart. and next above Sir George Gresely of Drakelow, in Comm. Derb.
Baronet created 29 Junij 1611. Linc.
Anno Dom. 1638. and Regis Car. I. xiv.
294 Febr. 19 Sir Edward Tirrell of Thorn^^^ Knight, with remainder to the
heirs male of Toby Tirrell one of the sons of the said Sir Edward Tirrell; and
for default of such Issue, on Francis Tirrell another of the sons of the said
Sir Edward, and the heirs male of the body of him the said Francis. And to have
precedence from the 31 of Oct. Anno tertio Car. Reg. according to a Patent then
granted to him the said Sir Edward Tirrell, which was surrendered upon the
sealing of this present Patent. Buck.
Anno Dom. 1640. and Regis Car. I. xvj.
295 Julij 20 Edward Moseley of Rowlston Esquire (Extinct). Staff. 296 Jan. 8
Martin Lumley of Bradfield Esquire Essex 297 Febr. 15 William Dalston of Dalston
Esquire Cumber. 298 Febr. 19 Henry Fletcher of Hutton in the Forest Esquire Cumber.
299 Martij 4 Nicholas Cole of Brancepeth Esquire Durh.
Anno Dom. 1641. and Regis Car. I. xvij.
300 Apr. 23 Edmund Pie of Leekhamsted Esquire (Extinct). Buck. 301 Maij 26 Simon
Every of Egginton Esquire Derb. 302 Maij 29 William Langley of Higham-Gobion Esquire
Bedf. 303 Junij 8 William Paston of Oxnead Esquire (English Earl viz. Earl of
Yarmouth). Norff. 304 Junij 11 James Stonehouse of Amerden-Hall Esquire Essex 305
Junij 24 John Palgrave of Norwood-Barningham Esquire Norff. 306 Junij 25 Gerard
Napper of Middle-Merthall Esquire Dors. 307 Junij 28 Tho. Whitmore of Apley Esquire.
Salop. 308 Junij 29 John Maney of Linton Esquire Kent 309 Junij 30 Sir Thomas Cave
jun. of Stanford Knight. Northamp. 310 Junij 30 Sir Christopher Yelverton of
Easton-Mauduit Knight (Engl. Baron viz. Lord Gray). Northamp. 311 Julij 3
William Boteler of Teston Esquire Kent 312 Julij 5 Sir Thomas Hatton of
Long-Stanton Knight. Cambr. 313 Julij 7 Thomas Abdy of Felx-Hall Esquire Essex 314
Julij 14 Thomas Bampfield of Poltmore Esquire Devon. 315 Julij 14 Sir John Cotton
of Landwade Knight. Cambr. 316 Julij 15 Sir Simonds D'Ewes of Stow-Hall Knight.
Suff. 317 Julij 15 Henry Frederick Thin of Cause-Castle Esquire Salop. 318 Julij
15 John Burgoyne of Sutton Esquire Bedf. 319 Julij 16 John Northcote of Haine Esquire
Devon. 320 Julij 17 Sir William Drake of Sherdelow Knight. Buck. 321 Julij 23
Thomas Rous of Rouse-Lench Esquire Wigorn. 322 Julij 23 Raphe Hare of Stow-Bardo^e
Esquire Norff. 323 Julij 24 Sir John Norwich of Brampton Knight. Northamp. 324
Julij 26 John Brownlow of Belton prope Grantham Esquire (Extinct). Linc. 325 Julij
27 William Brownlow of Humby Esquire Linc. 326 Julij 28 John Sidenham of Brimpton
Esquire Summers. 327 Julij 28 Henry Prat of Coleshall Esquire (Extinct). Berks. 328
Julij 28 Francis Nichols of Hardwick Esquire Northamp. 329 Julij 30 Sir William
Strickland of Boynton Knight. Ebor. 330 Aug. 4 Sir Thomas Wolriche of Dudmaston
Knight. Salop. 331 Aug. 4 Thomas Mauleverer of Allerton Mauleverer Esquire Ebor.
332 Aug. 4 William Boughton of Lawford Esquire UUarw. 333 Aug. 4 John Chichester of
Raleigh Esquire Devon. 334 Aug. 4 Norton Knatchbull of Mersham-Hatch Esquire Kent 335
Aug. 4 Hugh Windham of Pilsden-Court Esquire (Extinct). Dors. 336 Aug. 9 Rich.
Carew of Antony Esquire Cornub. 337 Aug. 9 William Castleton of Saint Edmonds-Bury
Esquire Suff. 338 Aug. 9 Ric. Price of Gogarthan Esquire Cardigan. 339 Aug. 10 Hugh
Cholmley of Whitby Esquire Ebor. 340 Aug. 11 William Spring of Pakenham Esquire Suff.
341 Aug. 11 Thomas Trevor of Enfield Esquire (Extinct). Midd. 342 Aug. 11 Sir John
Curson of Kedleston (Baronet of Scotland). Derb. 343 Aug. 11 Hugh Owen of
Orrelton Esquire Pembr. 344 Aug. 12 Morton Briggs of Haughton Esquire Salop. 345 Aug.
12 Henry Heyman of Somerfield Esquire Kent 346 Aug. 12 Thomas Sandford of
Howgill-Castle Esquire Westmerl. 347 Aug. 14 Sir Francis Rhodes of Barlbrough
Knight. Derb. 348 Aug. 14 Richard Sprignell of Coppenthorpe Esquire Ebor. 349 Aug.
14 Sir John Potts of Mannington Knight. Norff. 350 Aug. 14 Sir John Goodrick of
Ribstan Knight. Ebor. 351 Aug. 16 Robert Bindlosse of Borwicke Esquire Lanc. 352
Aug. 16 Will. Walter of Saresden Esquire Dron. 353 Aug. 16 Thomas Lawley of
Spoonhill Esquire Salop. 354 Sept. 6 William Farmer of Eston-Neston Esquire Northamp.
355 Sept. 9 John Davye of Creedy Esquire Devon. 356 Sept. 23 Thomas Pettus of
Rackheath Esquire Norf. 357 Dec. 11 William Andrews of Denton (alias Dodington) Esquire
Northamp. 358 Dec. 11 John Meaux of in the Isle of Wight Esquire Hants. 359 Dec. 14
Sir Richard Gurney, Knight. The signally Loyal Lord Mayor of London (Extinct).
Land. 360 Dec. 15 Thomas Willys of Fen-Ditton Fsque Cambr. 361 Dec. 15 Francis
Armitage of Kirklees Esquire Ebor. 362 Dec. 18 Rich. Halford of Wistow Esquire Leic.
363 Dec. 24 Sir Humphrey Tufton of the Mote, juxta Maidston Knight. Kent 364
Dec. 30 Edward Coke of Langford Esquire Derb. 365 Jan. 21 Isaac Astley of
Melton-Constable Esquire (Extinct). Norff. 366 Jan. 21 Sir David Cunningham Baronet
of Scotland (Extinct). Land. 367 Jan. 22 Sir John Rayney of Wrotham, Baronet of
Scotland. Kent 368 Jan. 29 Revet Eldred of Saxham magna Esquire (Extinct). Suff.
369 Jan. 29 John Gell of Hopton Esquire Derb. 370 Jan. 29 Sir Vincent Corbet of
Morton-Corbet Knight. Salop. 371 Febr. 4 Sir John Kay of Woodsome Knight. Ebor. 372
Febr. 5 Thomas Trollop of Casewick Esquire Linc. 373 Martij 3 Edward Thomas of
Michaells-Towne Esquire Glam. 374 Martij 4 Sir William Cowper of Ratling-Court,
Baronet of Scotland. Kent 375 Martij 5 Denner Strut of Little Worley Hall Esquire
Essex 376 Martij 8 William St. Quintin of Harpham Esquire Ebor. 377 Martij 14 Sir
Robert Kempe of Gissing Knight. Norff. 378 Martij 16 John Read of Brocket-Hall
Esquire Hartf.
Anno Dom. 1642. and Regis Car. 1. xviij.
379 Apr. 9 James Enyan of Flower Esquire (Extinct). Northamp. 380 Apr. 19 Sir
Edmund Williams of Marnehull Knight (Extinct). Dors. 381 Apr. 22 John Williams
of Minster in the Isle of Thanet. Kent 382 Apr. 29 George Wintour of Huddington
Esquire UUigorn. 383 Maij 4 John Borlase of Bockmer Esquire Buck. 384 Maij 6 Henry
Knollys of Groveplace Esquire (Extinct). Hants. 385 Maij 11 John Hamilton of London
Esquire Land. 386 Maij 12 Edward Morgan of Llanternam Esquire Monm. 387 Maij 13 Sir
Nicholas Kemeys of Keven-Mabley Knight. Glam. 388 Maij 14 Trevor Williams of
Llangibbye Esquire Monm. 389 Maij 16 John Reresby of Thribergh Esquire Ebor. 390 Maij
17 Will. Ingilby of Ripley Esquire Ebor. 391 Maij 18 Poynings Moore of Loseley Esquire
Surr. 392 Maij 19 Christopher Dawney of Cowick Esquire Ebor. 393 Junij 3 Thomas
Hampson of Taplow Esquire Buck. 394 Junij 3 Thomas Williamson of East-Markham Esquire
Not. 395 Junij 3 William Denney of Gillingham Esquire (Extinct). Norff. 396 Junij
3 Sir Richard Hardres of Hardres Kent 397 Junij 11 Christopher Lowther of
Whit-Haven Esquire Cumber. 398 Junij 13 Sir Tho. Alston of Odell Knight. Bedf. 399
Junij 20 Edward Corbet of Leighton Esquire Montgom. 400 Junij 24 George Middleton
of Leighton Esquire (Extinct). Lanc. 401 Junij 28 Edward Payler of Thoraldby Esquire
Ebor. 402 Julij 9 Sir William Widdrington of Widdrington Knight (English Baron
viz. Lord Widdrington). Northumv. 403 Julij 20 Matthew Valckenburg of
Middle-Ing Esquire Ebor. 404 Julij 20 Philip Constable of Everingham Esquire Ebor. 405
Julij 30 Ralph Blackston of Gibside Esquire Durh. 406 Aug. 8 Sir Edward Widdrington
of Cartington, Baronet of Scotland. Northumb. 407 Aug. 15 Robert Markham of
Sedgbrook Esquire Linc. 408 Aug. 15 Philip Hungate of Saxton Esquire Ebor. 409 Aug. 15
Stephen Lennard of West-Wickham Esquire Kent 410 Aug. 24 Sir William Thorold of
Marston Knight. Linc. 411 Aug 29 Walter Rudston of Hayton Esquire Ebor. 412 Aug. 30
Walter Wrotesley of Wrotesly Esquire Staff. 413 Aug. 30 Thomas Bland of Kippax-Park
Esquire 414 Sept. 1 Robert Throckmorton of Coughton Esquire UUarw. 415 Sept. 10 Will.
Halton of Samford Esquire Essex 416 Sept. 26 Brocket Spenser of Offley Esquire Hartf.
417 Sept. 27 Edward Golding of Colston-Basset Esquire Not. 418 Sept. 27 William
Smith of Crantock Esquire Cornub. 419 Oct. 1 Henry Henn of Wingfield Esquire Berks. 420
Oct. 5 Walter Blount of Sodington Esquire Wigorn. 421 Oct. 14 Adam Littleton of
Stoke-Milburge Esquire Salop. 422 Nov. 2 Thomas Lidell of Ravensholme-Castle Esquire
Durh. 423 Nov. 9 Richard Lawday of the City of Exeter Esquire (Extinct). Devon. 424
Febr. 4 Thomas Chamberlain of Wickham Esquire Oxon. 425 Febr. 28 Henry Hunloke of
Wingarworth Esquire Derb. 426 Febr. 28 Thomas Badd of Cames-Oysells Esquire Hants. 427
Martij 20 Richard Crane of Wood-Rising Esquire (Extinct). N^rff. 428 Martij 21
Samuel Danvers of Culworth Esquire Northamp.
Anno Dom. 1643. and Regis Car. 1. xix.
429 Julij 3 Henry Anderson of Penley Esquire Hartf. 430 William Vavasour of Esquire
(Extinct) Ebor. 431 Julij 25 Sir Henry Jones of Abermarles Knight. Caernarv.
432 Aug. 1 Sir Edward Waldgrave of Hever-Castle Knight. Kent 433 Oct. 28 John
Pate of Sysonby Esquire (Extinct). Lric. 434 Nov. 9 John Bale of Carleton-Curley
Esquire (Extinct). Lric. 435 Nov. 13 Brian O Nele of in Comm. Dublin Esquire Irish. 436
Nov. 16 Willoughby Hickman of Gaynesborough Esquire Linc. 437 Dec. 7 John Butler of
Bramfield Esquire Hartf. 438 Jan. 17 Edward Acton of Aldenham Esquire Salop. 439 Martij
14 Sir Francis Hawley of Buckland Knight. (Irish Baron viz. L. Hawley) Summers.
Anno Dom. 1644. and Regis Car. 1. xx.
440 Apr. 1 John Preston of the Manor in Furnesse Esquire Lanc. 441 Apr. 2 John
Web of Odstoke Esquire UUilts. 442 Apr. 25 Thomas Prestwich of Holme Esquire Lanc. 443
Maij 4 Henry Williams of Guernevet Esquire Breckn. 444 Maij 20 Gervase Lucas of
Fenton Esquire Governor of Belvoir-Castle for King Charles the I. in time of the
late horrible rebellion (Extinct). Linc. 445 Junij 14 Robert Thorold of Hawley
Esquire Linc. 446 Julij 23 John Scudamore of Balingham Esquire Heref. 447 Oct. 8 Sir
Henry Bard of Stanes Knight, a commander in the late kings Army, and
Ambassador from our present Sovereign to the Emperor of Persia (Irish
Viscount viz. Vic. Bellamount Extinct). Midd. 448 Febr. 12 Sir Richard Vivian
of Trelowren Knight. Cornub, 449 Febr. 28 William Van-Colster of Amsterdam in
Holland. 450 Martij 21 William de Boreel of Amsterdam in Holland. (v. Hugh
Ackland Jan. 21. 1677). (v. Francis Edwards Apr. 22. 1678).
Anno Dom. 1645. and Regis Car. 1. xxj.
451 Maij 9 George Carteret of Metesches in the Isle of Jersey
Vice-Chamberlaine of the Kings Household, one of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy-Councill, Treasurer of the Navy, since whose decease Sir George his
Grandson and heir is lately Created an English Baron viz. Lord Carteret.
Jersey. 452 Nov. 25 Thomas Windibanke of Haynes Esquire UUilts. 453 Febr. 7
Benjamin Wright of Dennington Esquire (This Patent was afterward Superseded by the
Kings Warrant). Suff. 454 Martij 6 Edward Charleton of Hesleyside Gent.
Northumb.
Anno Dom. 1646. and Regis Car. 1. xxij.
455 Junij 11 Sir Richard Willis Knight (Brother to Sir Thomas Willis of
Fen-Ditton) Colonel of a Regiment of Horse; as also Colonel general of the
Counties of Lincoln Notingh. and Rutland, and Governor of the town and Castle
of Newarke. Cambr.
BARONETS Created by K. Charles THE SECOND.
Anno Dom. 1649. and Regis Car. 2. primo.
456 Sept. 1 RIchard Brown of Deptford Esquire (for several years Resident for
King Charles I. and his now Majesty with the French Kings Lewis the 13th and
the present King Lewis the 14th and one of the Clerks of his Majesty's Most
Honorable Privy Council) by Letters Patents, Dated at St. Germans in France.
Kent 457 Sept. 3 Henry de Vic of the Isle of Garnsey (Resident for his late
Majesty near twenty years in Bruxells) afterward Chancelour of the most Noble
Order of the Garter, by Letters Patents, dated at St. Germans in France.
Garnsey 458 Sept. 18 Richard Forster of Stokesley Esquire (by Letters Patents dated
at St. Germans abovesaid). Ebor.
Anno Dom. 1650. and Regis Car. 2. iij.
459 Sept. 2 Richard Fanshaw (a younger Brother to Thomas Lord Viscount Fanshaw
of Dromore in Ireland) Secretary of State to his Majesty at Worcester Battle,
where he was taken prisoner; Master of the Requests (since his Majesty's
Restoration) and Ambassador extraordinary in Spain and Portugal.
Anno Dom. 1652. and Kegis Car. 2. v.
460 Apr. 2 William Curtius then Resident for His Majesty with Gustavus King of
Sweden and the Princes of Germany.
Anno Dom. 1657. and Regis Car. 2. ix.
461 October. 19 Sir Arthur Slingsby of near Canterbury (by Letters Patents,
Dated at Bruges in Flanders). Kent
Anno Dom. 1658. and Regis Car. 2. x.
462 Thomas Orby of Esquire Servant to the Queen Mother (by Letters Patents bearing
Date at Bruxells in Brabant). Linc. 463 Tho. Bond Esquire (Servant to the Queen
Mother) by Letters Patents bearing Date at Bruxells. 464 Aug. Arthur Marigny
Carpentier (a Frenchman) at Bruxells.
Anno Dom. 1659. and Regis Car. 2. xi.
465 Julij 1 Henry Brown of Kiddington Esquire (son of Sir Peter Brown Knight,
slain in the service of K. Charles the first) for default of issue male, to
Francis his Brother etc. Dated at Bruxells. Oxon.
Anno Dom. 1660. and Regis Car. 2. xij.
466 Apr. 2 Jeremy Whichcot of the Inner Temple London. Bruxells 467 Sir
Anthony de Merces (a Frenchman) Extinct. 468 Maij 29 (Stilo Novo) Sir John
Evelin of by Letters Patents bearing Date at the Hague in Holland. 469 Maij 30
(Stilo Novo) Sir Gualter dc Raed of in Holland. 470 Junij 7 Sir Orlando
Bridgeman of great Lever Knight, Chief Baron of the Exchequer, then Lord Chief
justice of the Common pleas and afterward Lord Keeper of the Great seal of
England. Lanc. 471 Junij 7 Sir Geofrey Palmer of Carleton Knight. Attorney General
to his Majesty. Northamp. 472 Junij 7 Sir Heneage Finch of Raunston Knight.
Solicitor General to his Majesty, then Attorney General, now Lord Chancellor
of England and English Earl viz. Earl of Nottingham. Buck. 473 Junij 7 Sir John
Langham of Cotsbrooke Knight Alderman of London. Northamp. 474 Junij 9 Humphrey
Winch of Hannes Esquire now one of the Commissioners of the Admiralty. Bedf. 475
Junij 9 Sir Robert Abdy of Albins Knight. Essex 476 Junij 9 Thomas Draper of
Sunninghill-Parke Esquire Berks. 477 Junij 11 Henry Wright of Dagenham Esquire
(Extinct). Essex 478 Junij 12 Jonathan Keate of the Hoo Esquire Hertf. 479 Junij 12
Sir Hugh Speak of Hasilbury Knight. Wilts. 480 Junij 13 Nicholas Gould of the
City of London Esquire (Extinct). Land. 481 Junij 13 Sir Thomas Adams Knight
Alderman of London. Land. 482 Junij 13 Richard Atkins of Clapham Esquire Surr. 483
Junij 14 Thomas Allen then Lord Mayor of London. Land. 484 Junij 14 Henry North
of Mildenhall Esquire Suff. 485 Junij 15 Sir William Wiseman of Rivenham Knight.
Essex 486 Junij 18 Thomas Cullum of Hastede Esquire Suff. 487 Junij 20 Thomas Darcy
of St. Cleres-Hall in St. Osith's, Esquire Essex 488 Junij 20 George-Grubham How of
Cold-Barwick Esquire Wilts. 489 Junij 21 John Cuts of Childerley Esquire (Extinct).
Cambr. 490 Junij 21 Solomon Swale of Swale-Hall Esquire Ebor. 491 Junij 21 William
Humble Citizen of London. Land. 492 Junij 22 Henry Stapleton of Miton Esquire Ebor.
493 Junij 22 Gervase Elwes of Stoke juxta Clare. Suff. 494 Junij 22 Rob.
Cordell of Melford Esquire Suff. 495 Junij 22 Sir John Robinson Knight, Lord Mayor,
and Lieutenant of the Tower, of London Land. 496 Junij 22 Sir John Abdy of
Moors Knight (Extinct). Essex 497 Junij 25 Sir Robert Hilliard of Patrington
Knight. Ebor. 498 Junij 25 Jacob Astley of Hill-Morton Esquire Warw. 499 Junij 25
Sir William Bowyer of Denham Knight. Buck 500 Junij 25 Thomas Stanley of
Alderley Esquire Cestr 501 Junij 26 John Shuckborough of Shuckborough Esquire UUarw.
502 Junij 27 William Wray of Ashby Esquire Linc 503 Junij 27 Nicholas Steward of
Hartley-Mauduit Esquire Hants 504 Junij 27 George Warburton of Areley Esquire Cestr 505
Junij 27 Francis Holles of Winterburn Esquire (son and heir to Denzill Lord Holles)
English Baron viz. Lord Holles. Dors 506 Junij 28 Oliver St. John of Woodford
Esquire Northamp 507 Junij 29 Ralph de la Val of Seton Esquire Northumb 508 Junij 30
Andraeas Henley of Henley Esquire Summers 509 Junij 30 Thomas Ellis of Wyham Esquire
Linc 510 Julij 2 John Covert of Slangham Esquire Suss 511 Julij 2 Peter Lear of
London Gent. Land 512 Julij 2 Maurice Berkley of Bruton Esquire (Irish Visc. viz.
Vic. Fitz-Harding). Summers. 513 Julij 3 Henry Hudson of Melton-Moubray Esquire
Leic. 514 Julij 3 Thomas Herbert of Tinterne Esquire Monm. 515 Julij 4 Tho.
Middleton of Chirk Esquire Denb. 516 Julij 6 Verney Noell of Kirkby Esquire Leic. 517
Julij 7 George Buswell of Clipston Esquire Northamp. 518 Julij 10 Robert Austen of
Bexley Esquire Kent 519 Julij 12 Robert Hales of Bekeskurne Esquire Kent 520 Julij 13
Sir William Boothby of Bradley-Ashe Knight. Derb. 521 Julij 14 Wolstan Dixey of
Market-Bosworth Esquire Leic. 522 Julij 16 John Bright of Badsworth Esquire Ebor. 523
Julij 16 John Warner of Parham Esquire 524 Julij 17 Sir Job Harby of Aldenham
Knight. Hartf. 525 Julij 18 Samuel Morland, alias Morley of
Suthamstede-Banaster Esquire one of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Privy-Chamber in
ordinary and master of the Mechanics. Berks. 526 Julij 19 Sir Thomas Hewit of
Pisho-Bury Knight. Hartf. 527 Julij 19 Edward Honywood of Evington Esquire Kent 528
Julij 19 Basil Dixwell of Bromehouse Esquire Kent 529 Julij 22 Richard Brown Lord
Mayor of London. Land. 530 Julij 23 Henry Vernon of Hodnet Esquire Salop. 531 Julij
23 Sir John Aubrey of Llantrithied Knight. Glam. 532 Julij 23 William Thomas of
Fowington Esquire Suss. 533 Julij 25 Thomas Sclater Esquire (of Cambridge). Cambr. 534
Julij 25 Henry Conway of Botrithan Esquire Flint. 535 Julij 26 Edward Green of
Sonpford Esquire Essex 536 Julij 28 John Stapeley of Patcham Esquire Suss 537 Julij 30
Metcalfe Robinson of Newby Esquire Ebor. 543 Aug. 6 Anthony Oldfield of Spalding
Esquire Linc. 544 Aug. 10 Peter Leicester of Tabley Esquire Cestr. 545 Aug. 11 Sir
William Wheeler of the City of Westminster. Knight, with Remainder to Charles Wheeler
Cousin to the said Sir William and the heirs males of the body of the said
Charles. Midd. 546 Aug. 16 John Newton of Barscote Fsque Glouc. 547 Aug. 16
Thomas Lee of Hartwell Esquire Buck. 548 Aug. 16 Thomas Smith of Hatherton Esquire with
Remainder (for want of Issue male of his body) to Laurence Smith his brother,
etc. and for want of Issue male of Laurence, to Francis Smith his brother, etc.
Cestr. 549 Aug. 17 Sir Ralph Ashton of Middleton Knight. Lanc. 550 Aug. 17 John
Rous of Henham Esquire Suff. 551 Aug. 22 Henry Massingbeard of Bratosts-Hall Esquire
Linc. 552 Aug. 28 John Hales of Coventre Esquire Warm. 553 Aug. 30 Ralph Bovey of
Hill-fields Esquire (Extinct). UUarm. 554 Aug. 30 John Knightley of Offchurch Esquire
UUarm. 555 Aug. 31 Sir John Drake of Ash Knight. Devon. 556 Sept. 5 Oliver St.
George of Carickermrick in the County of Trim Esquire Ireland 557 Sept. 11 Sir John
Bowyer of Knipersley Knight. Staff. 558 Sept. 13 Sir William Wild Knight,
Recorder of the City of London, afterward one of the justices of the Kings
Bench. Land. 559 Sept. 19 Joseph Ash of Tittenham Esquire Midd. 560 Sept. 22 John
How of Compton Esquire Glouc. 561 Sept. 26 John Swinburne of Chap-Heton Esquire
Northumb. 562 Oct. 12 John Trot of Laverstoke Esquire (Extinct). Hants. 563 Oct. 13
Humphrey Miller of Oxenheath Esquire Kent 564 Oct. 15 Sir John Jews of Ledston
Knight (Extinct). Ebor. 565 Oct. 19 John Beale of Maidston Esquire Kent 566 Oct. 16
Sir Richard Fraklin of Moore-Parke Knight. Hartf. 567 Nov. 8 William Russell of
Langhorn Esquire Caerm. 568 Nov. 9 Thomas Boothby of Friday-Hill in the Parish of
Chingford Esquire (Extinct). Essex 569 Nov. 9 William Backhouse Esquire Grandchild to
Rowland Backhouse late Alderman of London) (Extinct). Midd. 570 Nov. 12 Sir
John Cutler of the City of London Knight. Midd. 571 Nov. 16 Giles Mottet of
Liege Esquire 572 Nov. 21 Henry Gifford of Burstall Esquire Leic. 573 Nov 21 Sir Thomas
Foot Knight, Citizen of London. v. Arthur Onslow Maij 8. 1674. Midd. 574 Nov.
22 Thomas Manwaring of Over-Pever Esquire Cestr. 575 Nov. 22 Thomas Bennet of
Baberham Esquire Cambr. 576 Nov. 29 John Wroth of Blendenhall. Kent 577 Dec. 3
George Win of Nostell Esquire Ebor. 578 Dec. 4 Heneage Fetherston of Blakesware
Esquire Hartf. 579 Dec. 4 Humphrey Monnox of Wotton Esquire Bedf. 580 Dec. 10 John
Peyton of Dodington within the Isle of Ely Esquire (Extinct). Cambr. 581 Dec. 11
Edmund Anderson of Broughton Esquire. Linc. 582 Dec. 11 John Fagg of Wiston Esquire
Suss. 583 Dec. 18 Matthew Herbert of Bromfield Esquire Salop. 584 Dec. 19 Edward
Ward of Bexley Esquire Norff. 585 Dec. 22 John Keyt of Ebrington Esquire Glouc. 586
Dec. 22 William Killegrew of Arwynike Esquire with remainder to Peter Killegrew of
Arwynike aforesaid Esquire Son of Sir Peter Killegrew Knight. Cornub. 587 Dec. 22
John Buck of Lamby grange Esquire Linc. 588 Dec. 24 William Frankland of Thirkelby
Esquire Ebor. 589 Dec. 24 Richard Stiddolph of Norbury Esquire (Extinct). Surr. 590
Dec. 24 William Gardner Citizen of London. Midd. 591 Dec. 28 William Juxon of
Albourne Esquire Suss. 592 Dec. 29 John Legard of Ganton Esquire Ebor. 593 Dec. 31
George Marwood of Little-Buskby Esquire Ebor. 594 Dec. 31 John Jackson of Hickleton
Esquire Ebor. 595 Jan. 2 Sir Henry Pickering of Whaddon Knight. Cantab. 596 Jan. 2
Henry Bedingfield of Oxbrough Esquire Norff. 597 Jan. 4 Walter Plomer of the
Inner Temple London Esquire Midd. 598 Jan. 8 Herbert Springet of Broyle Esquire
(Extinct). Suss. 599 Jan. 23 William Powell (alias Hinson) of Pengethley Esquire
Heref. 600 Jan. 25 Robert Newton of the City of London Esquire (Extinct). Midd. 601
Jan. 29 Nicholas Staughton of Staughton Esquire Surr. 602 Jan. 29 William Rokeby of
Skyers Esquire Ebor. 603 Febr. 2 Walter Ernley of New-Sarum Esquire UUilts. 604 Febr. 2
John Hubaud of Ipsley Esquire UUarw. 605 Febr. 7 Thomas Morgan of Langattock. Monm.
606 Febr. 9 George Lane of Tulske in the County of Roscommon Irish Viscount
viz. Vic. Lanesborough. Ireland. 607 Febr. 13 George Wakefren of Beckford Esquire
Glouc. 608 Febr. 15 Benjamin Wright of Cranham Hall Essex 609 Febr. 18 John
Colleton of the City of London Esquire Midd. 610 Febr. 18 Sir James Modyford of the
City of London Knight. Midd. 611 Febr. 21 Thomas Beaumont of Stoughtongrange
Esquire Leic. 612 Febr. 23 Edward Smith of Eshe Fsque Durh. Martij 4 John Napier,
alias Sandy Esquire with remainder to Alexander Napier, etc. with remainder to the
heirs male of Sir Robert Napier Knight Grandfather to the said John: And with
precedence before all Baronets made since the four and twentieth of September
Anno 10. Regis Jac. at which time the said Sir Robert was Created a Baronet.
Which Letters Patents so granted to the said Sir Robert Napier, were surendred
by Sir Robert Napier (father of the said John and Alexander) lately deceased;
to the intent that the said degree of Baronet should be granted to himself,
with remainder to the said John and Alexander. 613 Martij 4 Thomas Gifford of
Castle-Jordan in the County of Mead (Extinct). Ireland. 614 Martij 4 Tho.
Clifton of Clifton Esquire Lanc. 615 Martij 4 William Wilson of Eastborne Esquire Suss.
616 Martij 4 Compton Read of Barton Esquire Berks. 617 Martij 10 Sir Brian
Broughton of Broughton Knight. Staff. 618 Martij 16 Robert Slingesby of New
cells Esquire Hartf. 619 Martij 16 John Crofts of Stow Esquire Suff. 620 Martij 16
Ralph Verney of Middle-Claydon Esquire Buck. 621 Martij 18 Robert Dicer of Uphall
Esquire Hartf. 622 Martij 20 John Bromfield of South warke Fsque Surr. 623 Martij
20 Thomas Rich of Sunning Esquire Berks. 624 Martij 20 Edward Smith of Edmundthorpe
Esquire Leic.
Anno Dom. 1661 and Regis Car. 2. xiij.
625 Martij 26 Walter Long of Whaddon Esquire Wilts. 626 Martij 30 John Fetiplace
of Chilrey Esquire Bexks. 627 Apr. 8 Walter Hendley of Louchfield Esquire Suss. 628
Apr. 9 William Parsons of Langley Esquire Buck. 629 Apr. 9 John Cambell of Woodford
Esquire (Extinct). Essex 630 Apr. 20 William Morris of Werrington Esquire eldest son
to William Morris Knight (one of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of
State). Devon. 631 Apr. 20 Sir Charles Gawdey of Crowshall Knight. Suff. 632
Apr. 29 William Godolphin of Godolphin Esquire Cornub. 633 Apr. 26 William Caley of
Brumpton Esquire Ebor. 634 Apr. 30 Thomas Curson of Water-Perry Esquire Oxon. 635 Maij
1 Edmund Fowell of Fowell Esquire Devon. 636 Maij 7 John Cropley of Clerkenwell Esquire
Midd. 637 Maij 10 William Smith of Red-Cliff Esquire Buck. 638 Maij 10 George Cook
of Wheatley Esquire Ebor. 639 Maij 10 Charles Llhoyd of Garth Esquire Montgom. 640 Maij
10 Nathaniel Powell of Ewhurst Esquire Essex 641 Maij 15 Denney Ashburnham of
Bromham Esquire Suss. 642 Maij 16 Hugh Smith of Long-Ashton Esquire Summers. 643 Maij 18
Robert Jenkinson of Walcot Esquire Oxon. 644 Maij 20 William Glinne of Bisseter
alias Burncester Esquire Oxon. 645 Maij 21 John Charnok of Holcot Esquire Bedf. 646
Maij 21 Robert Brook of Netton Esquire Suff. 647 Maij 25 Thomas Nevill of Holt Esquire
Leic. 648 Maij 27 Henry Andrews of Lathbury Esquire Buck. 649 Junij 4 Anthony
Craven of Spersholt Esquire Berks. 650 Junij 5 John Clavering of Axwell Esquire Durh.
651 Junij 8 Thomas Derham of West-Dereham Esquire Norff. 652 Junij 17 William
Stanley of Houton Esquire Cestr. 653 Junij 17 Abraham Cullen of East-Shene Esquire
Surr. 654 Junij 17 James Roushout of Milnst-Maylers Esquire Essex 655 Junij 17
Godfrey Copley of Sprotborough Esquire Ebor. 656 Junij 17 Griffith Williams of
Penrhin Esquire Caern. 657 Junij 18 Henry Winchecumbe of Buckdebury Esquire Bexks. 658
Junij 18 Clement Clarke of Lande-Abby Esquire Leic. 659 Junij 18 Thomas Viner
Alderman of London. Midd. 660 Julij 18 John Sylyard of de la War Esquire Kent 661
Julij 10 Christopher Guise of Elsmore Esquire Glouc. 662 Julij 11 Reginald Forster
of East-Grenewiche Esquire Kent 663 Julij 16 Philip Parker of Erwarton Esquire 664
Julij 16 Sir Edward Duke of Denhall Knight. Suff. 665 Julij 21 Charles Hussy
of Caythorp Esquire Linc. 666 Julij 21 Edward Barkham of Waynflete Esquire Linc. 667
Julij 23 Thomas Norton of the City of Coventry Esquire Warw. 668 Julij 23 John
Dormer of the Grange Esquire Buck. 669 Aug. 2 Thomas Carew of Haccombe Esquire Devon.
670 Aug. 7 Mark Milbanke of Halnaby Ebor. 671 Aug. 16 Richard Rothwell of
Ewerby and Stapleford Esquire Linc. 672 Aug. 22 John Banks of the City of London.
(now of Alesford in Kent). Midd. 673 Aug. 30 Henry Ingoldsby of Lethenborow Esquire
Buck. 674 Sept. 3 Francis Bickley of Attilborough. Norff. 675 Sept. 5 Robert
Jason of Broad-Somerford Esquire Wilts. 676 Sept. 26 Sir John Young of Culliton
Knight. Devon. 677 Oct. 4 John Frederick van Freisendorf of Herdick, Lord of
Kymp, of Council to the King of Sweden, and Ambassador extraordinary to His
Majesty King Charles the II. 678 Nov. 8 William Roberts of Willesdon Esquire Bidd.
679 Nov. 15 William Luckin of Waltham. Essex. 680 Nov. 28 Thomas Smith of
Hill-Hall. Essex 681 Dec. 3 Edwyn Sadler of Temple-Donesley Esquire Hartf. 682 Dec.
9 Sir William Windham of Orchard-Windham Knight. Summers. 683 Jan. 24 George
Southcote of Bliborough Esquire Linc. 684 Jan. 24 George Trevilian of Nettlecombe
Esquire Summers.
Anno Dom. and Regis Car. 2. xiv.
685 Febr. 4 Francis Duncombe of Tangley Esquire Surr. 686 Febr. 7 Nicholas Bacon
of Gillingham Esquire Norff. 687 Febr. 7 Richard Cox of Dumbleton. Glouc. 688 Febr.
11 John Osburne of Chicksand Esquire Bedf. 689 Febr. 27 John Coriton of Newton Esquire
Cornub. 690 Febr. 28 John Llhoyd of Woking Esquire Surr. 691 Martij 1 Edward Moore
of Moorehall Esquire Note That this patent to Edward Moore, though at this time the
Recepi was made, did not pass the Seal until 22. Nov. 1675. Lanc. 692 Martij 7
Tho. Proby of Elton Hall Esquire Hunt. 693 Martij 20 Miles Stapleton of Carleton
Esquire Ebor.
Anno Dom. 1662. and Regis Car. 2. xiv.
694 Apr. 16 Sir Richard Braham of New-Windsor Knight. Berks. 695 Maij 2 Sir
John Witerong of Stantonbury Knight. Buck. 696 Junij 13 Philip Matthews of
great Gobions in Collyer-Rowward Esquire Essex 697 Julij 1 Robert Bernard of
Huntingdon Esquire Sergeant at Law. Hunt. 698 Julij 15 Roger Lort of Stock-poole
Esquire Pembr. 699 Julij 15 Edward Gage of Hargrave Esquire Suff. 700 Julij 22 Thomas
Hook of Flanchford. Surr. 701 Julij 24 John Savile of Copley Esquire Ebor. 702
Aug. 5 Christopher Wandesford of Kirklington Esquire Ebor. 703 Aug. 13 Richard
Astley of Patshull Esquire Staff. 704 Aug. 16 Sir Jacob Gerard of Langford Knight.
Norff. 705 Aug. 21 Edward Fust of Hill Esquire Glouc. 706 Sept. 1 Robert Long of
the City of Westminster Esquire Auditor General of the Exchequer and one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council with remainder for lack of Issue male
upon John Long of Draycot-cerne in Com. Wilts. and the heirs male of his body.
Bidd. 707 Sept. 13 Sir Robert Can of Compton-Greenfield Knight. Glouc. 708 Oct.
24 William Middleton of Belsey-Castle Esquire Northumb. 709 Nov. 17 Richard Graham
of Norton-Coniers Esquire. Ebor. 710 Nov. 17 Thomas Tankard of Burrow-Brigg Esquire
Ebor. 711 Nov. 20 Cuthbert Heroh of Chipchase Esquire Northumb. 712 Nov. 29 Sir
Francis Wenman of Caswell Knight. Dron. 713 Dec. 4 Henry Purefey (son and heir
to George Purefey of Wadley Esquire) Berks. 714 Dec. 9 Thomas Cobb of Adderbury Esquire
Dron. 715 Dec. 12 Henry Brook of Norton Esquire Cestr. 716 Dec. 22 Peter Pindar of
Edinshaw Esquire Cestr. 717 Jan. 19 Sir Nicholas Slaning of Mariston Knight of the
Bath and Standard bearer to the band of Gentlemen Pensioners. Devon. 718 Jan.
22 Sir George Reeve of Thwayte Knight. Suff.
Anno Dom. and Regis Car. 2. xv.
719 Martij 18 Thomas Brograve of Hammels Esquire Hartf.
Anno Dom. 1663. and Regis Car. 2. xv.
720 Apr. 7 Sir Thomas Bernardeston of Ketton alias Kedington Knight. Suff. 721
Maij 11 Samuel Bernardeston of Bright-Hall Esquire and to the heirs males of his
boby; and for want of such issue to Nathaniel Bernardeston of Hackney Esquire etc.
with remainder to Pelitiax Bernardeston of London Esquire etc. Suff. 722 Junij 1
Sir John Daws of Putney Knight. Bidd. 723 Junij 1 Sir John Holman of Banbury
Knight. Dron. 724 Junij 29 William Cook of Bromehall Esquire Norff. 725 Junij 30
John Bellot of Moreton Esquire Cestr. 726 Julij 1 Sir George Downing of East-Hatley
Knight, Ambassador in Holland, Secretary to the Treasury and now one of his
Majesty's Commissioners of the Customs. Cambr. 727 Julij 13 William Gawdey of
West-Herting Esquire Norff. 728 Julij 14 Sir Charles Pym of Brymmore Knight.
Sonters. 729 Julij 29 Sir William D'oyley of Shottesham Knight. Norff. 730 Aug.
12 Sir John Marsham of Cuckston Knight. Kent 731 Aug. 15 Robert Barnham of
Boughton Munchensye Esquire Kent 732 Dec. 15 Francis Leeke of Newarke upon Trent
Esquire Governor of Gravesend. Not. 733 Dec. 30 John St. Barbe of Broadlands Esquire
Hants
Anno Regis Car. 2 xvj.
734 Febr. 12 Thomas Cambell of Clay-Hall Esquire Essex 735 Febr. 22 James Pennyman
of Ormesby in Cleveland Esquire Ebor. 736 Martij 1 Thomas Muddiford of Lincolns
Inn Esquire Midd. 737 Martij 3 George Selby of Whitehouse Esquire Durh.
Anno Dom. 1664. and Regis Car. 2. xvij.
738 Martij 31 Sir Edmund Fortescue of Fallowpit Knight. Devon. 739 Martij 31
Samuel Tuke of Cressing-Temple Esquire Essex 740 Maij 25 John Tempest of Tongue Esquire
Ebor. 741 Junij 25 Littleton Osboldeston of Chadlinglington Esquire Oxon. 742 Julij
1 Giles Tooker of Maddington Esquire UUilts. 743 Julij 13 Stephen Anderson of
Eyworth Esquire Bedf. 744 Aug. 31 Thomas Bateman of How-Hall Esquire Norff. 745 Sept.
26 Thomas Lorrayne of Kirke-Harle Esquire Northumb. 746 Sept. 27 Thomas Wentworth
of Bretton Esquire Ebor. 747 Nov. 2 Sir Theophilus Biddulph of Westcombe Knight.
Kent 748 Nov. 2 William Green of Micham Esquire (Extinct). Surr. 749 Dec. 24
William Cooks of Norgrave Esquire Wigorn. 750 Jan. 10 Sir John Wolstenholme of
London Knight. (one of the Farmers of the Customs). Midd. 751 Jan. 11 Sir John
Jacob of Bromley Knight, (another of the Farmers of His Majesty's Customs).
Midd. 752 Jan. 12 John Yeomans of the City of Bristol Esquire Summers. 753 Jan. 13
John Pie of Hone Esquire Derb. 754 Jan. 18 Thomas Tailor of the Parkehouse in the
Parish of Maydston Esquire Kent
Anno Dom. Car. 2. xvij.
755 Martij 3 William Leman of Northaw, alias Northall Esquire Hartf.
Anno Dom. 1665. and Regis Car. 2. xvij.
756 Martij 30 Sir Robert Smith of Upton Knight. Essex 757 Apr. 14 Sir Nicholas
Crispe of Hamersmith Knight. Midd. 758 Apr. 15 Sir John Shaw of the City of
London Knight, (one of the Farmers of His Majesty's Customs). Midd. 759 Maij 10
John Brown of Caversham Esquire Oxon. 760 Maij 20 George Rawden of Moira in Com.
Down Esquire Ireland 761 Junij 8 Robert Jocelyn of Hyde-Hall Esquire Hartf. 762 Junij
16 Robert Duckenfield junior of Duckenfield-Hall Esquire Cestr. 763 Julij 6 John
Lawson of Brough Esquire Ebor. 764 Julij 20 Philip Tyrrell of Hanslap and
Castlethorpe Esquire Buck. 765 Julij 25 Francis Burdet of Burchet Esquire Ebor. 766
Julij 26 George Moore of Mayds-Morton Esquire Buck. 767 Sept. 9 Abell Barker of
Hambleton, alias Hambledon Esquire Kotel. 768 Dec. 12 Sir William Oglander of
Nunwell in the Isle of Wight Knight. Hants. 769 Jan. 31 William Temple of
Sheene Esquire Resident for His Majesty at Bruxells. Afterward Ambassador to the
States General of the united Provinces and one of his Majesty's
Plenipotentiaries at the Treaty of Nimmegen. Surr. 770 Martij 1 Sir William
Swan of Southflete Knight. Kent 771 Martij 6 Anthony Shirley of Preston Esquire
Suss. 772 Martij 6 Maurice Diggs of Chilham-castle Esquire (Extinct). Kent 773
Martij 6 Peter Gleane of Hardwick Esquire Norff.
Anno Dom. 1666. and Regis Car. 2. xviij.
774 Maij 10 John Nelthorpe of Grays-Inne Esquire Midd. 775 Maij 10 Sir Robert
Viner Lord Mayor of London Knight. Midd. 776 Junij 13 Sir Thomas Twysden of
Bradburne juxta East-Malling Knight, one of the Justices of the Kings Bench.
Kent 777 Julij 4 Sir Anthony Aucher of Bishops Bourne Knight. Kent 778 Julij 7
John D'oylie of Chiselhamton Esquire Oxon. 779 Julij 12 Edward Hoby of Bisham Esquire
Berks. 780 Julij 21 Thomas Put of Comb Esquire Devon. 781 Oct. 22 John Tirell of
Siringfield Esquire son and heir apparent of Sir John Tirell of Heron in Com. Essex
Knight. Essex 782 Nov. 17 Gilbert Gerard of Fiskerton, Entayling the same Title
upon his issue male by Mary his second Wife, Daughter to Dr. John Cozens Lord
Bishop of Durham. Linc. 783 Dec. 31 Sir Robert Yeomans of Redlands Knight.
Glouc. 784 Jan. 16 Carr Scroope of Cockerington Esquire Linc. 785 Jan. 29 Peter
Fortescue of Wood Esquire Devon.
Anno Regis Car. 2. xix.
786 Feb. 7 Sir Richard Bettenson of Wimbleton Knight. Surr. 787 Martij 21
Algernon Peyton of Dodington in the Isle of Ely. Cantabr.
Anno Dom. 1667.
788 Martij 28 Roger Martin of Long-Melford Esquire Suff. 789 Maij 7 Richard
Hastings of Redlench Esquire Summers. 790 Maij 24 William Hanham of Winburne Esquire
Dors.
Anno Dom. 1668. and Regis Car. 2. xx.
791 Julij 25 Francis Topp of Tormarton Esquire Glouc. 792 Aug. 28 William
Langhorne of the Inner Temple London Esquire Land.
Anno Dom. 1669. Car. 2. xxij.
793 Apr. 28 Edw. Mostyn of Talacre Esquire Flynt. 794 Maij 5 Sir George
Stonehouse, for life (having surrendered his former Patent by a fine) with
remainder to John Stonehouse his second son and to the heirs male of his body;
and for lack of such issue to James his third son etc. with precedence to him
and his said sons according to the first patent dated 7. Maij 1628. Berks. 795
Junij 4 Philip Carteret of St. Owen Esquire Iersey 796 Oct. 25 Fulwar Skypwith of
Newbold-Hall Esquire UUarw.
Anno Dom. 1670. Car. 2. xxiij.
797 Martij 22 Sir John Sabin of Eyne in the Parish of Gravenhurst Knight.
Bedf.
Anno Dom. 1671. Car. 2. xxiiij.
798 Junij 28 William Chater of Croft-Hall Esquire Ebor. 799 Nov. 18 Herbert Croft
of Croft-Castle (son and heir to the Bishop of Hereford.) Heref. 800 Dec. 11
John St. Aubin of Clowance Esquire Cornub.
Anno Dom. 1672. Car. 2. xxv.
801 Nov. 13 Robert Eden of West-Aukland Esquire Durh. 802 Nov. 28 John Werden Esquire
Secretary to his Royal Highness the D. of York. Chesh. 803 Febr. 7 Thomas Allen
of Blundesdon a Captain at sea, sometime Admiral in the Streights, then
Controler of the Navy and one of the Commissioners thereof. Suff
Anno Dom. 1673.
804 Junij 2 Francis War of Hestercombe Esquire Summers. 805 Nov. 12 Orlando
Bridgeman of Ridley Esquire second son to Sir Orlando Bridgeman Knight and Baronet
Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England. Chesh. 806 Nov. 18 Francis Windham of
Trent Esquire Summers. 807 Dec. 1 Arthur Harris of Stoford Esquire Devon. 808 Dec. 12
William Blaket of Newcastle Esquire Northumb. 809 Dec. 12 John Thompson of
Haversham Esquire Buck.
Anno xxvi. Car. 2.
810 Junij 7 Halsewell Tint of Halsewell Esquire Summers.
Anno Dom. 1674. Car. 2. xxvij.
811 Martij 25 Cornelius Martin Trump Vice Admiral of Holland and
West-Friezland. 812 Maij 22 Sir Robert Parker of Ralton in the Parish of
Willingdon Esquire Suss. 813 Maij 20 John Sherrard of Lopthorpe Esquire Linc. 814 Maij
8 Arthur Onslow of West-Clandon Esquire in reversion after the death of his Father
in law Sir Thomas Foot, without issue male (who was created 21. Nov. 1660.)
and with the same precedence. Surr. 815 Oct. 30 Walter Cleargis of St. Martins
in the Feilds Esquire Midd 816 Nov. 2 Thomas Williams of Eltham Esquire his Majesty's
Physician in Ordinary. Kent 817 Dec. 26 Robert Filmer of East-Sutton Esquire Kent
Anno Dom. 1674. Car. 2. xxviij.
818 Febr. 24 Sir Edward Nevill of Grove Knight. Not.
Anno Dom. 1675. Car. 2 xxviij.
819 Apr. 23 Sir Richard Tulpe of Amsterdam in the Province of Holland Knight.
820 Dec. 22 Thomas Samuel of Upton Esquire Northamp 821 Jan 24 Charles Rich of the
City of London Gent for life with remainder to Rober^ Rich of Sonden in Com.
Essex Esquire. mi^ 822 Martij 11 Benjamin Maddox of Wormle Esquire. Heart
Anno Dom. 1676. Car. 2. XXIX.
823 Martij 29 Will. Barker of Bockenhall Esquire E^ 824 Junij 13 John Brooks
Citizen of York Esquire Ebor. 825 Junij 19 Rich. Head of Rochester Esquire Kent 826
Junij 21 William Pennington of Moncaster Esquire Cumbr. 827 Dec. 18 Bennet Hoskins
of Harwood Esquire Heref. 828 Febr. 8 Richard Standish of Esquire Lans. 829 Febr. 26
Alexander Robertson, alias Colyear of the Province of Holland. 830 Martij 3
Tho. Dike of Horeham Esquire Su^^.
Anno Dom. 1677.
831 Martij 29 Sir Robert Cotton of Cumbermeir Knight. Chesh. 832 Apr. 7
Francis Willoughby of Wollaton Esquire (with remainder for lack of Issue male to
Thomas his brother and to the heirs male of his body). Not. 833 Junij 29
Ignatius Vitus, alias White (second son of Sir Dominlck White of Lymerick in
Ireland) for want of Issue male, to his nephew Ignatius Maximilian Vitus, and
to the heirs male of his body. Ireland 834 Julij 13 John Barlowe of Slebege Esquire
Pembr. 835 Julij 24 Richard Newdigate of Erdbury Sergeant at law. Warw. 836
Sept. 29 Richard Cust of Stanford Esquire Linc. 837 Oct. 8 Francis Anderton of
Lostoke Esquire Lanc. 838 Oct. 18 James Simeon of Chilworth Esquire Oxon. 839 Oct. 25
James Poole of Poole in Worrell Esquire for lack of issue male to William his
brother, and to the heirs male of his body. Chesh. 840 Dec. 31 George Wharton
of Kirkby-Kendall Treasurer of the Ordnance. UUstmerl. 841 Jan. 21 Hugh Ackland
of Columb-John Esquire with a special clause for precedence before all Baronets
created since the year 1644. Devon.
Anno Dom. 1678. Car. 2. xxx.
842 Apr. 22 Francis Edwards of Shrewsbury Esquire and to the heirs male of his
body, with remainder to Thomas, Benjamin, Herbert and Jonathan and the heirs
male of their bodies etc. and a special clause for precedence before all
Baronets created after the year 1644. Salop. 843 Maij 8 Sir Henry Oxenden of
Deane Knight. Lanc. 844 Maij 18 Sir James Bowyer of Leighthorne Baronet, Grandson
and heir to Sir Thomas Bowyer Baronet (created 23. Julij 3. Car. 1.)
surrendering his patent, had now a new Creation to that dignity, for life only;
the remainder to Henry Goring of Highden in the same county Esquire and to the
heirs males of his body, with the same precedence as the said Sir Thomas Bowyer
enjoyed. Suss. 845 Junij 20 Walter Curle of Suberton Esquire Hants. 846 Junij 22
Raphe Dutton of Sherborne Esquire Glouc. 847 Julij 6 William Dyer of Totenham Esquire
Hertf. 848 Julij 18 Josias Child of Wansted Esquire Essex 849 Julij 27 Sir Thomas
Skypwith of Metheringham Knight. Linc. 850 Dec. 6 Walter Hawkesworth of
Hawkesworth Esquire Ebor. 851 Junij 25 Jeremy Snow of Salesbery Esquire Hertf.
Anno Dom. 1679. Car. 2. xxxi.
852 Martij 29 William Kenrick of Whitley Esquire Berks. 853 Julij 16 Sir Samuel
Marrow of Berkswell Knight. Warw. 854 Nov. 17 Sir Roger Bradshaigh of Haigh
Knight. Lanc. 855 Dec. 20 William Stapleton Esquire Governor of the Leeward-Islands
in America. 859 Jan. 27 Thomas-Pope Blount of Tittenhanger Esquire Hertf. 857 Jan.
28 Sir George Walker of Bushey Knight. Hertf.
Anno 1680. xxxij. Car. 2.
858 Oct. 22 Gelebrand Sas Van Bosch (a Servant to the Prince of Orange.) 859
Febr. 2 John Roberts of Bow Esquire Essex
Anno 1681.
860 Apr. 15 Roger Beckwith of Alborough Esquire Ebor. 861 Maij 18 Thomas Parkyns
of Bonney Esquire Not. 862 Junij 29 Thomas Bunbury of Bunbury and Stanney Esquire
Chesh. 863 Julij 1 Hugh Parker of the City of London Esquire and to the heirs male
of his body: with remainder to Henry Parker of Hunnington in Com. Warwick Esquire
etc. Land. 864 Julij 4 Henry Seymour Esquire son and heir to Henry Seymour, one of
the Grooms of his Majesty's Bedchamber, and to the heirs mal^ of his body;
with remainder to the said Henr^ the father, and to the heirs male of his body.
FINIS.
An Exact Alphabetical Catalogue, of all the Shires, Cities, Burrough-Towns,
Cinque Ports in England and Wales; Specifying the number of the Knights of the
Shires, Citizens, Burghesses, and Barons of the Cinque Ports, they do
respectively elect, to serve as their Representatives in Parliaments.
Before each Shire and Borough of Wales a W is Prefixed.

After the name of each Shire, is set down the number of Burghesses Citizens
and Knights chosen in that Shire.

Bur. ABington Berk-Shire Burghess 1 Amondesham vide Amersham Bur. St. Albans
Herford-Shire Burg. 2 Bur. Aldborough Suffolk Burg. 2 Bur. Aldborough
Yorkshire Burg. 2 Bur. Alesbury or Aylesbury Bucks Burg. 2 Allerton v.
North-Allerton Bur. Amersham alias Agmondesham Bucks Burg. 2 Bur. Andover
Hantshire Burg. 2 W. Shire Anglesey Parliament Men 2; Burg. 1 and Knight 1 Bur.
Appleby Westmorland Burg. 2 Bur. Arundel Sussex Burg. 2 Bur. Ashburton
Devonshire Burg. 2 Bur. Banbury Oxfordshire Burg. 1 Bur. Barnstable
Devon-Shire Burg. 2 City Bath Somersetshire Citizens 2 Shire Bedford-Shire P.
M. 4; Burg. 2, and Knights 2 Bur. Bedford Bedford-Shire Burg. 2 Bedwyn v.
Great-Bedwyn Bur. Berealston Devon-Shire Burg. 2 Shire Berks or Berkeshire P.
M. 9; Burg. 7; and Knights 2 Bur. Berwicke upon Tweed Northumberland Burg. 2
Bur. Beaerly Yorkshire Burg. 2 Bur. Bewdlye Worcestershire Burg. 1 W. Bur.
Bewmorris Anglesey Burg. 1 Bur. Bishops-Castle Shrop-shire Burg. 2 Bur.
Blechingly Surry Burg. 2 Bur. Bodmin Cornwall Burg. 2 Bur. Bossiney Cornwall
Burg. 2 Bur. Boston Lincolnshire Burg. 2 Bur. Brackley Northamptonshire Burg.
2 Bur. Bramber Sussex Burg. 2 W. Shire Brecon alias Brecknock-Shire; P. M. 2;
Burg. 1, and Knight 1 W. Bur. Brecon alias Brecknock Brecknock-sh. Burg. 1 Bur.
Bridport Dorset-shire Burg. 2 Bur. Bridge-north, alias Bruges, Shropshire Burg.
2 Bur. Bridgwater Somersetshire Burg. 2 City Bristol Somersetshire Citizens 2
Bruges v. Bridge-north Shire Bucks alias Buckingham-shire P. M. 14 Burg. 12,
and Knights 2 Bur. Bucks alias Buckingham Buckinghamshire Burg. 2 Bur.
Burroughbridge or Burroughbrig Yorkshire Burg. 2 Bury v. St. Edmonds-bury Bur.
Calne Wiltshire Burg. 2 Shire Cambridge-sh. P. M. 6; Burg. 4, and Knights 2
Bur. Cambridge University Burg. 2 Town Burg. 2
City Canterbury Kent Citizens 2 Bur. Camelford Cornwall Burg. 2 W. Shire
Cardigan-sh. P. M. 2, Burg. 1, and Knight 1 W. Bur. Cardigan Cardigan-Shire
Burg. 1 W. Bur. Cardiffe Glamorgan-Shire Burg. 1 W. Shire Carmarthen-Shire P.
M. 2; Burg. 1, and Knight 1 W. Bur. Carmarthen Carmarthenshire Burg 1 W. Bur.
Carnarvon Carnarvon-Shire Burg 1 City Carlisle Cumberland Citizens 2 Bur.
Castle-Rising Norfolk Burg 2 Shire Chester P. M. 4; Citizens 2, and Knights 2
City Chester Cheshire Citizens 2 City Chichester Sussex Citizens 2 Bur.
Chippenham Wiltshire Burg. 2 Bur. Chipping-Wicomb Bucks. Burg. 2 Bur.
Christs-Church Hantshire Burg. 2 Bur. Cirencester Gloucester-Shire Burg. 2
Clifton v. Dartmouth Bur. Clithero Lancashire Burg. 2 Bur. Cockermouth
Cumberland Burg. 2 City Colchester Essex Citizens 2 Bur. Corfe-Castle in the
Isle of Purbecke Dorsetshire Burg. 2 Shire Cornwall P. M. 44 Burg. 42, and
Knights 2 City Coventry Warwickshire Citizens 2 Crampound v. Grampound. Bur.
Cricklade Wiltshire Burg. 2 Shire Cumberland P. M. 6 Burg. 4, and Knights 2
Bur. Dartmouth Clifton, and Hardness Devonshire Burg. 2 W. Shire Denbigh-shire
P. M. 2, Burg. 1, and Knight 1 W. Bur. Denbigh Denbigh-shire Burg. 1 Shire
Derby-Shire P. M. 4 Burg. 2, and Knights 2 Bur. Derby Derby-shire Burg. 2 Shire
Devonshire P. M. 26; Burg. 22, Citizens 2 and Knights 2 Bur. The Devizes
Wiltshire Burg. 2 Shire Dorsetshire P. M. 20; Burg. 18, and Knights 2 Bur.
Dorchester Dorset-shire Burg. 2 Cinq. P. Dover Kent Barons 2 Bur. Downton
Wiltshire Burg. 2 Bur. Droitwich Worcestershire Burg. 2 Dunhevet or Dunhivid v.
Lanceston Bur. Dunwich Suffolk Burg. 2 Shire Durham P. M. 4; Citizens 2, and
Knights 2 City Durham Citizens 2 Bur. East Grinstead Sussex Burg. 2 Bur.
East-Low Cornwall Burg. 2 Bur. East-Retford Nottingham-shire Burg. 2 Bur. St.
Edmonds-Bury Suffolk Burg. 2 Shire Essex P. M. 8, Burg. 6, and Knights 2 Bur.
Evesham Worcestershire Burg. 2 Bur. Eye Suffolk Burg. 2 City Exeter, alias
Exon Devonshite Citizens 2 W. Shire Flintshire P. M. 2; Burg. 1 and Knight 1 W.
Bur. Flint Flintshire Burg. 1 Bur. Fowey, or Foy Cornwall Burg. 2 Bur. Gatton
Surry Burg. 2 Bur. St. Germains, or Jermins Cornwall Burg. 2 W. Shire
Glamorganshire P. M. 2; Burg. 1 and Knight. 1 Shire Gloucestershire P. M. 8; Burg.
4, Citizens 2, and Knights 2 City Gloucester Gloucestershire Citizens 2 Bur.
Grampound or Crampound Cornwall Burg. 2 Bur. Grantham Lincolnshire Burg. 2
Bur. Great-Bedwyn Wiltshire Burg. 2 Bur. Great-Grimsby Lincolnshire Burg. 2
Bur. Great-Marlow Bucks Burg. 2 Bur. Great-Wenlock Shrop-shire Burg. 2 Bur.
Great-Yarmouth alias North-Yarmouth Norffolk Burg. 2 Grnistead v.
East-Grinstead Bur. Guilford Surry Burg. 2 Shire Hampshire or Hantshire, alias
Southampton P. M. 26; Burg. 22, Citizens 2, and Knights 2 Hardness v. Dartmouth
Bur. Harwich Essex Burg. 2 Bur. Haslemere Surry Burg. 2 Cinq. P. Hastings
Sussex Barons 2 W. Bur. Haverford-West Pembrook-shire Burg. 1 Bur. Helston
Cornwall Burg. 2 Shire Hereford-shire P. M. 8; Burg. 4, Citizens 2, and Knights
2 City Hereford Hereford-shire Citizens 2 Shire Hertford P. M. 6; Burg. 4, and
Knights 2 Bur. Hertford Hertford-shire Burg. 2 Bur. Hetsbury or Heitsbury
Wiltshire Burg. 2 Bur. Heydon Yorkshire Burg. 2 Bur. Higham-Ferrers
Northamptonshire Burg. 1 Bur. Hindon Wiltshire Burg. 2 Bur. Honiton Devonshire
Burg. 2 Bur. Horseham Sussex Burg. 2 Hull v. Kingston upon Hull Shire
Huntingtonsh. P. M. 4, Burg. 2 and Knights 2 Bur. Huntington Huntington-shire
Burg. 2 Cinq. P. Hyth Kent Barons 2 St. Jermins v. St. Germains Bur. Ilcester
Somersetshire Burg. 2 Bur. Ipswich Suffolk Burg. 2 Bur. St. Ives Cornwall Burg
2 Shire Kent P. M. 10; Burg. 4; Citizens 4, and Knights 2 Bur. Killington
Cornwall Burg 2 Kings-Lyme, v. Lyme-Regis Kings-Lynn, v. Lyn-Regis
Kings-Melcomb, v. Melcomb-Regis Bur. Kingston upon Hull Yorkshire Burg. 2 Bur.
Knaesborough Yorkshire Burg. 2 Shire Lancaster, or Lancashire P. M. 14; Burg.
12 and Knights 2 Bur. Lancaster Lancashire Burg. 2 Bur. Lanceston Launcestoun
or Launston alias Dunhevet Cornwall Burg. 2 Shire Leicestershire P. M. 4; Burg.
2, and Knights 2 Bur. Leicester Leicestershire Burg. 2 Bur. Lempster
Herefordshire Burg. 2 Bur. Leskard Cornwall Burg. 2 Bur. Lestathiel,
Lestwithiel, or Lostwithiel Cornwall Burg. 2 Bur. Leverpoole, or Liverpoole
Lancash. Burg. 2 Bur. Jews Sussex Burg. 2 Bur. Limmington Hantshire Burg. 2
Shire Lincolnshire P. M. 12; Burg. 8, Citizens 2, and Knights 2 City Lincoln
Lincolnshire Citizens 2 City Litchfield Staffordshire Citizens 2 City London
Middlesex Citizens 4 Lostwithiel v. Lestuthiel Low v. East-Low West-Low
Bur. Ludgershall Wiltshire Burg. 2 Bur. Ludlow Shropshire Burg. 2 Bur.
Lyme-Regis alias Kings-Lyme Dorsetshire Burg. 2 Bur. Lynn-Regis, alias,
Kings-Lynn Norfolk Burg. 2 Bur. Maidston Kent Burg. 2 Bur. Marlborough
Wiltshire Burg. 2 Bur. Malden Essex Burg. 2 Bur. Malmesbury Wiltshire Burg. 2
Bur. Malton Yorkshire Burg. 2 Marlow v. Great-Marlow Bur. St. Mawes Cornwall
Burg. 2 Medena v. Newport Bur. Melcomb-Regis alias Kings-Melcomb Dorsetshire
Burg. 2 W. Shire Merionethshire P. M. 1; viz. Knight 1 Bur. St. Michael
Cornwall Burg. 2 Shire Middlesex P. M. 8, Citizens 6, and Knights 2 Bur.
Midhurst Sussex Burg. 2 Bur. Milborn-Port Somersetshire Burg. 2 Bur. Minehead
Somersetshire Burg. 2 W. Shire Mongomery-shire P. M. 2; Burg. 1, and Knight 1
W Bur. Mongomery Mongomery-shire Burg. 1 Shire Monmouth-shire P. M. 3; Burg. 1,
and Knights 2 Bur. Monmouth Monmouth-shire Burg. 1 Bur. Morpeth Northumberland
Burg. 2 Bur. Newarke upon Trent Nottinghamsh. Burg. 2 Bur. New Castle under
line Staffordshire Burg. 2 Bur. New Castle upon Tine Northumber. Burg. 2 Bur.
Newport Cornwall Burg. 2 Bur. Newport alias Medena in the Isle of Wight
Hantshire Burg. 2 Cinq. P. New-Rumney Kent Barons 2 New-Sarum v. Salisbury Bur.
New Shoreham Sussex Burg. 2 Bur. Newton or Newtown in the Isle of Wight
Hantshire Burg. 2 Bur. Newtown or Newton Lancashire. Burg. 2 Bur. New Windsor
Berkshire Burg. 2 Bur. New Woodstock Oxfordshire Burg. 2 Shire Norfolk P. M.
12; Burg. 8, Citizens 2, and Knights 2 Bur. North-Allerton Yorkshire Burg. 2
Shire Northamptonshire P. M. 9; Burg. 5, Citizens 2, and Knights 2 Bur.
Northampton Northamptonshire Burg. 2 Shire Northumberland P. M. 8; Burg. 6, and
Knights 2 North Yarmouth v. Great Yarmouth City Norwich Norfolk Citizens 2
Shire Nottinghamshire P. M. 8; Burg. 6, and Knights 2 Bur. Nottingham
Nottinghamshire Butg. 2 Bur. Oak Hampton Devonshire Burg. 2 Bur. Old-Sarum
Wiltshire Burg. 2 Shire Oxon alias Oxford Oxfordshire P. M. 9; Burg 5, Citizens
2, and Knights 2 City Oxon alias Oxford Oxfordshire University Burg. 2 City
Citizens 2
Bur. Ortford Suffolk Burg. 2 W. Shire Pembrokeshire P. M. 3; Burg. 2, and
Knight 1 W. Bur. Pembroke Pembrokeshire Burg. 1 Bur. Penryn Cornwall Burg. 2
City Peterborough Northamptonshire Citizens 2 Bur. Peterfield Hantshire Burg. 2
Bur. Plymouth Devonshire Burg. 2 Bur. Plympton Devonshire Burg. 2 Bur. Pomfret
alias Pontefract Yorkshire Burg. 2 Bur. Pool Dorsetshire Burg. 2 Port Pigham v.
West-Low Bur. Portsmouth Hantshire Burg. 2 Bur. Preston in Amounderness, or
Anderness Lancashire Burg. 2 Bur. Queensborough or Quinborough Kent Burg. 2 W.
Shire Radnorshire P. M. 2, Burg. 1, and Knight 1 W. Bur. Radnor Radnorshire
Burg. 1 Bur. Reading Berkshire Burg. 2 Retford v. East-Retford Bur. Richmond
Yorkshire Burg. 2 Bur. Rippon Yorkshire Burg. 2 City Rochester Kent Citizens 2
Rumney v. New-Rumney Shire Rutland P. M. 2, viz. Knights 2 Cinq. P. Rye Sussex
Barons 2 Bur. Ryegate Surry Burg. 2 City Salisbury alias New-Sarum Wiltsh.
Citizens 2 Salop County v. Shropshire Town v. Shrewsbury
Bur. Saltash Cornwall Burg. 2 Cinq. P. Sandwich Kent Barons 2 Sarum New-Sarum
v. Salisbury Old-Sarum
Bur. Scarborough Yorkshire Burg. 2 Cinque P. Seaford Sussex Barons 2 Bur.
Shaftsbury alias Shafton Dorsetshire Burg. 2 Shoreham v. New-Shoreham Bur.
Shrewsbury alias Salop, Shropshire Burg. 2 Shire Salop alias Shropshire P. M
12, Burg. 10, and Knights 2 Shire Somersetshire P. M. 18, Burg. 10, Citizens
6, and Knights 2 Southampton the County v. Hampshire Bur. Southampton Hampshire
Burg. 2 Bur. Southwarke Surry Burg. 2 Bur. South-Yarmouth in the Isle of Wight
Hantshire Burg. 2 Shire Staffordshire P. M. 10, Burg. 6, Citizens 2, and
Knights 2 Bur. Stafford Staffordshire Burg. 2 Bur. Stamford Lincolnshire Burg.
2 Bur. Steyning Sussex Burg. 2 Bur. Stockbridge Hantshire Burg. 2 Bur. Sudbury
Suffolk Burg. 2 Shire Suffolk P. M. 16, Burg. 14, and Knights 2 Shire Surry P.
M. 14, Burg. 12, and Knights 2 Sh. Sussex P. M. 20, Burg. 16, Citiz. 2, and
Knights 2 Bur. Tamworth Staffordshire Burg. 2 Bur. Tavistocke Devonshire Burg.
2 Bur. Taunton Somersetshire Burg. 2 Bur. Tewksbury Gloucestershire Burg. 2
Bur. Thetford Norffolk Burg. 2 Bur. Thirske Yorkshire Burg. 2 Bur. Tiverton
Devonshire Burg. 2 Bur. Totnes Devonshire Burg. 2 Bur. Tregony Cornwall Burg. 2
Bur. Truro Cornwall Burg. 2 Vizes v. Devizes Bur. Wallingford Berkshire Burg. 2
Bur. Wareham Dorsetshire Burg. 2 Shire Warwickshire P. M. 6, Burg. 2, Citizens
2 and Knights 2 Bur. Warwick Warwickshire Burg. 2 Bur. Webly or Weobly
Herefordshire Burg. 2 City Wells Somersetshire Citizens 2 Wendlock v. Great-
Wendlock Burg. 2 Bur. Wendover Bucks Burg. 2 Bur. Westbury Wiltshire Burg. 2
Bur. West-Low alias Port-Pigham Cornw. Burg. 2 City Westminster Middlesex
Citizens 2 Shire Westmorland P. M. 4, Burg. 2, and Knights 2 Bur. Weymouth
Dorsetshire Burg. 2 Bur. Whit-Church Hantshire Burg. 2 Wiccomb v. Chipping
Wiccomb Bur. Wigan Lancashire Burg. 2 Shire Wiltsh. P. M. 34, Burg. 30, Citi.
2, and Knights 2 Bur. Wilton Wiltshire Burg. 2 Cinq. P Winchelsey Sussex Barons
2 City Winchester Hantshire Citizens 2 Windsor v. New-Windsor Woodstock v.
New-Woodstock Bur. Wooton-Basset Wiltshire Burg. 1 Shire Worcestershire P. M.
9, Burg. 5, Citizens 2, and Knights 2 City Worcester Worcestershire Citizens 2
Yarmouth v. North-Yarmouth South-Yarmouth
v. Great-Yarmouth Shire Yorkshire P. M. 30 Burg. 26, Citizens 2, and Knights 2
City York Yorkshire Citizens 2
THe total number of all the Knights of the Shires, Citizens, Burghesses, and
Barons of the Cinque Ports of England and Wales, which (when the Kings Majesty
Summons a Parliament) are Respectively chosen by the several Shires etc. as the
Representatives of all the Commons of England.

Knights of the Shires, 2. for each of the 40. Shires in England reckoning
Monmouthshire, as one 80 Citizens for the 25. Cities in England; for London 4,
for each of the other Cities 2. 52 Burghesses 2. for each of the 2.
Universities, and for each of the 171. Burrough-Towns in England, except for
Abington, Banbury, Bewdly, Higham-Ferrers, and Monmouth, for each of which only
1. 341 Barons of the Cinque Ports, viz. Hastings, Dover, Hyth, Rumney; and the
3. Principal members of the Cinque- Ports, Winchelsey, Rye, and Seaford, of
each 2. 16 Knights of the Shires 1. for each of the 12. Shires of Wales 12
Burghesses 1. for each of the 12. Burrough-Towns of Wales 12 The full and
Complete number of all the Members of the House of Commons. 513
A True and Perfect CATALOGUE OF THE Nobility OF SCOTLAND

THE Bookseller TO THE READER.
THe frequent complaints I have heard, from several learned and Ingenuous
persons, of the errors and defects in all the Catalogues, of late Printed, of
the Nobility in his Majesty's Dominions, created in me a belief, that the
publication of exact and correct Catalogues thereof, would be very acceptable
to the public. And this induced me, to attempt it. In order whereunto, I
obtained the preceding Catalogue of the Nobility of England, from the Author
of the aforegoing Treatise, a person who by reason of his Office of Garter, is
best enabled to publish it most correctly and Authentickly. And in August last
(the Parliament of Scotland then sitting) by the favor of a friend there. I
procured a copy, of the then Lord R^gister his Role of the Nobility of
Scotland. But their Christian names not being inserted therein, my
Correspondent was so careful and industrious, as to inform himself thereof,
either from the several Noblemen themselves, then assembled into Parliament, or
from the near Relations, or intimate acquaintances of those absent; and for
those few Christian names of which he could receive no certain information, he
has left blanks; and having thus procured it, he transmitted it to me. Since
when it has been communicated to several, very intelligent persons in the
affairs of that Kingdom, who have very well approved thereof, so that I may
with a modest assurance affirm this present Catalogue to be more accurate then
most of this nature hitherto published. And yet I will not confidently averr
that there are no errors therein, for I am told the Nobility of Scotland are no
more careful, then the Noblemen of England, to Register their descents and
successions; the defect of which does almost occasion an impossibility, with an
accurate exactness to publish any Catalogue of this nature. But if any person
shall percieve any error or defect therein, or any Nobleman judges himself
injured, either by any omission or misrecitall of his name or title, if he
shall be pleased to notify it to me, with directions how it ought to be
corrected and supplied, or to inform therein Mr. Robert Meine Postmaster of
(Edinburgh) I shall take all possible care that in the next edition all the
errors may accordingly be amended, and all due right don to every individual
Nobleman.

To the present Catalogue, is annexed a list of all the Shires and Royal
Buroughs in Scotland, with the number of Barons, Commissioners, and Burghesses
they do respectively retain to serve in Parliament. Which I have don in the
same manner, as in compliance with the desires of several persons, I have
published the preceding Alphabetical Catalogue of all the Shires, Cities,
Buroughs and Cinque Ports in England and Wales.

A true and perfect Catalogue of the Officers of State, Nobility, Lords
Spiritual and Temporal of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND, according to their
Respective Precedencies.
His Majesty's High-Commissioner
HIS Royal Highness James Duke of Albany
Princes of the Blood Royal
James Duke of Albany, his Majesty's aforementioned High-Commissioner, and Lord
High Admiral of Scotland, (Duke of York in England, and Earl of Ulster in
Ireland)
Archbishops (II), and Great Officers (IV), (Who in respect of their Offices,
precede all the Nobility except those of the Blood Royal)
The Lord High Chancellor This Office is now vacant The Archbishop of St.
Andrews Lord Primate and Metropolitan of All Scotland Dr. Alexander Burnet Lord
Archbishop of St. Andrews The Lord High Treasurer This Office is now executed
by Commissioners The Archbishop of Glasgow Lord Primate and Metropolitan of
Scotland Dr. Arthur Ross Lord Archbishop of Glasgow The Lord President of the
Privy Council John Duke of Lauderdale The Lord Privy Seal John Marquess of
Atholl
Dukes (IV)
William Hamilton Duke of Hamilton * James Scot, Duke of Buccleugh, Lord High
Chamberlain of Scotland (and Duke of Monmouth in England) * John Maitland Duke
of Lauderdale, Lord President of the Privy Council in Scotland (and Earl of
Guilford in England) * Charles Lenos Duke of Lennox (and Richmond in England)
Marquesses (IV)
George Gordon Marquess of Huntley William Douglas Marquess of Douglas James
Grahame Marquess of Montrose John Murray Marquess of Atholl (Lord Privy Seal
and Admiral Deputy of Scotland)
Earls (LXII) and (I) Countess
The Lord Secretary of Scotland, in respect of his Office, preceeds all of his
Degree, and at present, that Office is executed by an Earl, viz. Alexander Earl
of Murray Archibald Campbell Earl of Argyle John Lindsay Earl of Crawford John
Hay Earl of Arroll (Lord High Constable of Scotland by Inheritance) George
Keith Earl Marshal (Great Marshal of Scotland by Inheritance) George Sutherland
Earl of Sutherland Charles Erskeine Earl of Mar William Grahame Earl of
Menteith and Airth John Lesley Earl of Rothes William Douglas Earl of Morton
William Erskeine Earl of Buchan John Cunningham Earl of Glencairn Alexander
Montgomery Earl of Eglinton John Kenedie Earl of Cassils George Sinclare Earl
of Caithness Alexander Stewart Earl of Murray (Lord Secretary of Scotland)
Robert Maxwel Earl of Nidisdail George Seaton Earl of Winton George Levingston
Earl of Linlithgow James Home Earl of Home James Drummond Earl of Perth James
Seaton Earl of Dunfermling John Fleming Earl of Wigton Patricke Lion Earl of
Strathmore and Kinghorne Hamilton Earl of Abercorne Robert Kerr Earl of
Roxburgh Alexander Ereskeine Earl of Kellie Charles Hamilton Earl of Hadington
William Stewart Earl of Galloway Kenneth Mac-Kenzie Earl of Seaforth Robert
Carr Earl of Lothian William Hay Earl of Kinnoul John Campbell Earl of Loudoun
William Crichton Earl of Drumfreis William Douglas Earl of Queensberrie William
Alexander Earl of Sterling Robert Bruce Earl of Elgin (and Aylesbury in
England) Robert Carnegie Earl of South-eske John Stewart Earl of Traquaire
Charles Carr Earl of Ancram David Weimes Earl of Weimes William Ramsey Earl of
Dalhousie James Ogiluie Earl of Airlie James Ogiluie Earl of Finlator James
Dalziel Earl of Carnwath Alexander Levingston Earl of Callander David Leslie
Earl of Leven William Johnstoun Earl of Annandail Elizabeth (present Duchess
of Lauderdale) Countess of Dysert, Daughter and Coheir of William Murray Earl
of Dysert (first married to Sir Lionel Talmach Baronet of England, her eldest
Son by whom, now bears the Title of Lord Hunting-Tower, being heir in
succession to the Earldom of Dysert) George Mauld Earl of Panmeure John Hay
Earl of Twedall. David Carnegie Earl of North-Eske Alexander Bruce Earl of
Kincarden Colin Lindsay Earl of Balcarres Archibald Douglas Earl of Forfar
Charles Middleton Earl of Middleton. Charles Gordon Earl of Aboyne Walter Scot
Earl of Tarras James Levingston Earl of Newbrugh William Boyde Earl of
Kilmarnocke William Cochraine Earl of Dandonald George Douglas Earl of
Dunbarton John Keith Earl of Kintor John Campbell Earl of Braid-Albin and
Holland
Viscounts (XIII)
Anthony Carey Viscount Falkland Robert Constable Viscount Dunbar David Murray
Viscount Stormont William Gordon Viscount Kenmeare Robert Arbuthnet Viscount
Arbuthnet William Crichton Viscount Frendraught Alexander Seaton Viscount
Kingston Robert Mackgill Viscount Oxenford Edward Ingram Viscount Irwing James
Levingston Viscount Kilsyth Peregrine Osburne Viscount Dumblane Richard Grahame
Viscount Preston James Cheney Viscount Newhaven
Bishops (XII)
Dr. John Patterson L. B. of Edinburgh Dr. James Atkins L. B. of Galloway Dr.
Andrew Bruce L. B. of Dunkell Dr. Patrick Scougall L. B. of Aberdeen Dr. Colin
Falconer L. B. of Murray Dr. Alexander Young L. B. of Ross Dr. George
Halliburton L. B. of Brechen Dr. James Ramsey L. B. of Dumblane Dr. Andrew Wood
L. B. of Cathness Dr. Archibald Grahame L. B. of the Isles Dr. Hector
Mack-clene L. B. of Argyle Dr. Murdo Mack-Kenzie L. B. of Orkney
In the same order, as the several Bishoprics are here inserted, the
Respective Bishops do constantly precede each other, without regard to the
seniority of their Consecrations.

Lords (XLVII)
Alexander Forbes Lord Forbes Alexander Frazer Lord Salton Robert Gray Lord
Gray Allan Cathcart Lord Cathcart Henry Saintclare Lord Saintclare James
Douglas Lord Mordington Francis Semple Lord Semple John Elphingston Lord
Elphingston Charles Oliphant Lord Oliphant Hugh Frazer Lord Louat John
Borthwick Lord Borthwick George Ross Lord Ross Walter Sandilands Lord
Torphichen John Leslie Lord Lindoris John Elphingston Lord Balmerinoch and Ld.
Cowper Henry Erskeine Lord Cardrass Alexander Stewart Lord Blantyre James
Cranston Lord Cranston John Balfour Lord Burgleigh Robert Kerr Lord Jedburgh
David Drummond Lord Madertie George Meluil Lord Meluil Archibald Napier Lord
Napier Henry Fairfax Lord Fairfax of Cameron Henry Richardson Lord Cramond
Walter Aston Lord Aston of Forfare Donald Mack-Ray alias Forbes Lord Rae James
Forester Lord Forester Alexander Forbes Lord Pitsligo John Mackleland Lord
Kirkudbright Charles Frazer Lord Frazer John Hamilton Lord Bargeny George
Ogiluie Lord Bamff Patricke Murray Lord Elibank Thomas Galloway Lord Dunkell
Alexander Falconer Lord Hackerton John Hamilton Lord Belhaven John Carmichael
Lord Carmichael James Sutherland Lord Duffes Andrew Rollo Lord Rollo Robert
Colvil Lord Colvil David Ruthuen Lord Ruthuen John Rutherford Lord Rutherford
John Bellenden Lord Bellenden David Leslie Lord Newark James Weimes Lord Burnt
Island David Nairne Lord Nairne
Other Officers of State Lord and precedence of all under the degree of
Noblemen and their eldest Sons.
Charles Maitland of Hatton Lord Treasurer Depu. Sir George Mack-Kenzie of
Torbat Lord Register Sir George Mack-Kenzie of Roshaugh Lord Advocat Richard
Maitland of Duddip Lord Justice Clerk
A List of the XXXIII Shires in Scotland each of which send: II Barons
Commissioners, to serve in Parliament, as the Representatives of the several
Respective Shires.
Edinburgh Hadington Berwick Roxburgh Selkirk Peeblis Lanerick Drumfreis Wigton
Air Dunbarton Bute Renfrew Sterling Linlithgow Perth Kincarden Aberdeen
Innerness Nairne Cromartie Argyle Fife Forfar Bamff the Stewarty of
Kirkcudbright Sutherland Cathness Elgin Orkney Clackmannan Ross Kinross
The number of the Barons Commissioners for the Shires. LXVI
A List of the Royal Buroughs in Scotland; each of which send only one
Burghess to Parliament, as their Representative except Edinburg which sends two
Burghesses Commissioners
Edinburgh Perth Dundee Aberdeen Sterling Linlithgow St. Andrews Glasgow Air
Hadington Dysert Kirkcaldie Montrose Cowper in Fife East-Anstruther Drumfreis
Innerness Burnt Island Inner-Keything Kinghorne Brechen Irwing Iedburgh
Kirkcudbright Wigton Dunfermling Sanyhuar New Galloway Fort-Ross Dingwall
Dornoch Queens Ferrie Innerara Pittenweem Selkirk Dunbarton Renfrew Dunbar
Lanerick Aberbrothock Elgin Peeblis Crail Tayne Culross Bamff Whitherne Forfar
Rothesay Nairne Forres Rutherglen North- Berwick Callen Kilrinnie Lauder Kintor
Annand Lochmaben Inner-Durie Rosemarkie Cromartie Wick Kirkwall Inner-Beruie
The number of Burghesses Commissioners for the Royal Buroughs. LXV
* Note That since this present Catalogue was committed to the press Archibald
Campbell Earl of Argyle has been and is attainted of High treason.

FINIS.
A True and Perfect CATALOGUE OF THE Nobility OF IRELAND.

To Mr. Moses Pit at the Theater in Oxford
SIR Whitehall 24. Jan. 1681/2.
YOur Letter to my Lord Chamberlain of 22. of this month his Lordship has
sent me to be answered; but the time you allot for it being the very next post,
or else you say the Irish Catalogue will be printed, in which said Catalogue
it is questioned whether the present Lord Ossory be a Peer:

None can resolve that point better then my Lord Vicount Lansbrough, who is now
in Ireland; and was Secretary to my Lord of Ormond, and concerned for his
Grace, and his Sons, at such times when those additional Honors were conferred
upon them in England and Ireland; So that unless I be allowed time to receive
his Lordships answer, I dare not take upon me to speak to the point in
question, so as to justify the printing thereof.

I Am Your most humble Servant RICHARD MULYSE


To my best remembrance I have heard my Lord Lansbrough say, that Thomas Butler
the late Earl of Ossory had his place in the Parliament of Ireland by the Kings
Writ as Earl of Ossory; (and to precede all other Earls, but not to be a
President for the future) and in England as Thomas Butler Baron of Moore Park:
And that by virtue thereof James Butler the present Earl of Ossory was to
succeed to his Father in the same places and Honors. However I will send this
night to Ireland for better information.

A true and perfect Catalogue of the Great Officers of State, Nobility, Lords
Spiritual and Temporal of the Kingdom of Ireland, according to their respective
precedencies.
The Lord Lieutenant or Chief Governor
James Duke of Ormond.
Princes of the Blood Royal.
* His Royal Highness James Earl of Ulster, Duke of York in England and Albany
in Scotland.
Archbishops (IV) and Great Officers (II) (who in respect of their Offices,
precede all the Nobility except those of the Blood Royal)
The Lord Archbishop of Armagh Primate of All Ireland Dr. Michael Boil Lord
Archbishop of Armagh The Lord Chancellor Michacl Lord Archbishop of Armagh
beforementioned
The other Archbishops
The Lord Archbishop of Dublin Primate of Ireland Dr. Francis Marsh Lord
Archbishop of Dublin The Lord Archbishop of Cashels Dr. Thomas Price Lord
Archbishop of Cashels The Lord Archbishop of Tuam Dr. Joseph Vesey Lord
Archbishop of Tuam. The Lord Treasurer Richard Earl of Cork
Dukes
* James Butler Duke of Ormond Lord Lieutenant of Ireland (and Earl of
Brecknock in England)
Marquesses
Randolph Macdonnel Marquess of Autrim
Earls (XXX)
John Fitzgerald Earl of Kildare Henry O Bryen Earl of Thomond William Burgh
alias Bourke Earl of Clanrickard James Touchet Earl of Castlehaven (and Baron
Audley in England) Richard Boil Earl of Cork Lord Treasurer of Ireland by
inheritance (and Earl of Burlington in England) Thomas Nugent Earl of Westmeath
Wentworth Dillon Earl of Roscomon Robert Ridgway Earl of Londonderry William
Fielding Earl of Desmond (and Denbigh in England) William Brabazon Earl of
Mead Richard Barry Earl of Barrimore Richard Vaughan Earl of Carbery (and
Baron Vaughan in England) Luke Plunket Earl of Fingall Thomas Cromwell Earl of
Arglas (and Baron Cromwell in England) Arthur Chichester Earl of Donnegall
Lambert Earl of Cauan William O Brien Earl of Inchequin Donnugh Macarty Earl of
Clancarty Richard Boil Earl of Orrery Charles Coot Earl of Montrath Henry
Moore Earl of Drogheda Charles Talbot Earl of Waterford and Wexford (and
Shrewsbury in England) Hugh Montgomery Earl of Mount-Alexander Roger Palmer
Earl of Castlemain Richard Butler Earl of Arran (and Baron Butler of Weston in
England) Nicholas Taaf Earl of Carlingford Richard Power Earl of Tyrone Richard
Jones Earl of Rannelagh Francis Aungier Earl of Longford Charles-Henry
Kirkhoven Earl of Bellomont (and Baron Wotton in England)
Uiscounts (XLIX)
Jenico Preston Viscount Gormanston David Roch Viscount Fermoy Richard Butler
Viscount Mountgarret William Viliers Viscount Grandison Arthur Annesly Viscount
Valentia (and Earl of Anglesey in England) Thomas Dillon Viscount Dillon of
Costillogallen Nicholas Nettervile Viscount Nettervile of Dowth Arthur Luftus
Viscount Luftus of Elye Beaumont Viscount Beaumont of Swords Arthur Magenis
Viscount Magenis of Evagh Thomas Needham Viscount Kilmurry David Sarsfeild
Viscount Sarsfeild of Kilmallock Edward Conway Viscount Killultagh (and Earl of
Conway in England) Miles Burgh Viscount Burgh of Mayo George Sanderson Viscount
Castleton Patricke Chaworth Viscount Chaworth of Armagh John Scudamore Viscount
Scudamore of Slygoe Richard Lumley Viscount Lumley of Waterford (and Baron
Lumley in England) Thomas Smith Viscount Strangford Philip Wenman Viscount
Wenman of Tuam Carol Molineux Viscount Molineux of Marybourgh William Fairfax
Viscount Fairfax of Emmely James Butler Viscount Ikerine Thomas Fits-Williams
Viscount Fits-Williams of Merion Lewis Odempsi Viscount Glanmaleyra Brien
Cockain Viscount Cullen Tracy Viscount Tracy Francis Smith Viscount Carington
of Barrefore (and Baron Carington in England) Richard Bulkley Viscount Bulkley
of Cashells William Brounker Viscount Brounker of Lions Richard Ogle Viscount
Ogle of Catherlough Peircy Butler Viscount Galmoy Henry Barnwell Viscount
Kingland Henry Boil Viscount Shannon John Skeffington Viscount Masarene Hugh
Cholmondley Viscount Cholmondley of Kellis Evelyn Fanshaw Viscount Fanshaw of
Dromore William Dungan Viscount Claine Daniel O Brien Viscount Clare Lewis
Trevor Viscount Dungannon Charles Boil Viscount Dungaruan (and bears the
title in England of Lord Clifford) Maurice Berkley Viscount Fitzharding of
Beerhaven William Caulfeild Viscount Charlemount Foliut Wingfeild Viscount
Powers-Court Murrogh Boil Viscount Blesington Arthur Forbes Viscount Granard
George Lane Viscount Lanesbrough John Dawney Viscount Down Richard Persons
Viscount Ros
Bishops (XVIII)
Dr. Anthony Doppin L. B. of Mead Dr. William Morton L. B. of Kildare Dr. Hugh
Gore L. B. of Waterford Dr. Edward Wolley L. B. of Clonfert Dr. John Hudson L.
B. of Elphin Dr. Richard Boil L. B. of Fernes and Laghlin Dr. Roger Boil L.
B. of Clogher Dr. Essex Digby L. B. of Dromore Dr. Thomas Otway L. B. of Ossory
Dr. Ezekiel Hopkins L. B. of Derry Dr. Thomas Hacket L. B. of Down Dr. John
Roan L. B. of Killallow Dr. Edward Wettenal L. B. of Cork Dr. Simon Digby L.
B. of Limericke Dr. Patricke Sheridan L. B. of Cloyne Dr. Tenison L. B. of
Killalla Dr. Smith L. B. of Rapho Dr. William Sheridan L. B. of Kilmore The
Bishop of Mead in respect of his Bishopric is always a Privy Counselor, and
he and the Bishop of Kildare have constantly precedence before the rest of the
Bishops who take place according to the seniority of their Consecrations.
Barons (XXXII)
Francis Bermingham Lord Bermingham of Athenry Almericus Ceurcy Lord Courcy of
Kingsale William Fitz-Morrice Lord of Kerry and Lixnaw Randolph Flemming Lord
Slane Thomas St. Laurence Lord of Howth Robert Barnwell Baron of Trimleston
Christopher Plunket Lord of Dunsany Peircy Butler Lord of Dunboyne Brien
Fitz-Patricke Lord of Upper Ossory Matthew Plunket Lord of Lowth William Bourke
Lord Bourke of Castle-Connel Theobald Butler Lord of Cahire Toby Bourke Lord
Bourke of Brittas Steward Lord Steward of Castle Steward Foliot Lord Foliot of
Balishannon William Maynard Lord Maynard of Wickelow (and Baron Maynard in
England) Richard George Lord George of Dandalk Simon Digby Lord Digby of
Geashil William Fitz-Williams Lord Fitz-Williams of Lifford. Henry Blany Lord
Blany of Monaghan Henry Herbert Lord Herbert of Castle-Island (and Baron
Herbert of Chirbury in England) John Calnert Lord Baltimore William Brereton
Lord Brereton of Laghlin Henry Hare Lord Colrane Benedict Sherard Lord Sherard
of Letrim Claud Hamilton Lord Hamilton of Strabane Francis Hawly Lord Hawly of
Donamore William Allington Lord Allington of Killard John King Lord Kingston
Richard Coot Lord Colonel Richard Barry Lord Santry Altham Anesly Lord Altham
A List of all the Shires Cities and Buroughs of Ireland which make returns of
Parliament with the number how many each place returns
Comitatus Armagh 2 Borough of Armagh 2 Bur. of Charlemount 2 6 Com. Antrim 2
Bur. of Belfast 2 Bur. of Carickfergus 2 Bur. of Lishbon 2 Bur. of Antrim 2 10
Com. Catherlaugh 2 Bur. Catherlaugh 2 Bur. Old Leighlin 2 6 Com. Cork 2 City
of Cork 2 Bur. of Mallow 2 Bur. of Baltimore 2 Bur. of Cloghnekilty 2 Bur. of
Bandon Bridge 2 Bur. of Kingsale 2 Bur. of Younghall 2 16 Com. Cavan 2 Bur. of
Cavan 2 Bur. of Belturbet 2 6 Com. Clare 2 Bur. of Inish 2 4 Com. Dublin 2 City
of Dublin 2 University of Dublin 3 Bur. of New Castle 2 Bur. of Swords 2 11
Com. Down 2 Bur. of Down 2 Bur. of Newtown 2 Bur. of Newry 2 Bur. of
Balkillaleagh 2 Bur. of Bangor 2 Bur. of Hilsborough 2 14 Com. Donegal 2 Bur.
of Lifford 2 Bur. of Ballyshannon 2 Bur. of Killbeggs 2 Bur. of Donegal 2 Bur.
of Sir John's town 2 12 Villa. de Drogheda 2 2 Com. Gallway 2 Bur. of Gallway 2
Bur. of Athenry 2 Bur. of Tuam 2 8 Com. Fermanagh 2 Bur. of Eniskilling 2 4
Com. Kerry 2 Bur. of Traley 2 Bur. of Dingleicough 2 Bur. of Ardfart 2 8 Com.
Kilkenny 2 Civit. Kilkenny 2 Bur. of Cullen 2 Bur. of Thomas Town 2 Bur. of
Gowran 2 Bur. of Enisteoge 2 Bur. of Knoctopher 2 Bur. of St. Kennis 2 16 Com.
Kildare 2 Bur. of Kildare 2 Bur. of Naas 2 Bur. of Athy 2 8 Com. Regis 2 Bur.
of Philips Town 2 Bur. of Banagher 2 6 Com. Letrim 2 Bur. of James Town 2 Bur.
of Carricdrumrasck 2 6 Com. Lymerick 2 Civit. Lymerick 2 Bur. of Kilmallock 2
Bur. of Askeaton 2 8 Com. Longford 2 Town of Longford 2 Bur. of Sir John's Town
2 Bur. of Lanesborough 2 8 Com. Lowth 2 Bur. Carlingford 2 Bur. of Dundalke 2
Bur. of Atherdee 2 8 Com. Londonderry 2 Civit. Londonderry 2 Bur. of Colraine
2 Bur. of Limauddy 2 8 Com. Mayo 2 Bur. of Castlebarr 2 4 Com. Mead 2 Bur. of
Trym 2 Bur. of Kells 2 Bur. of Navan 2 Bur. of Athbay 2 Bur. of Duleeke 2 Bur.
of Ratooth 2 14 Com. Monaghan 2 Bur. of Monaghan 2 4 Com. Reginae 2 Bur. of
Ballinakin 2 Bur. of Maryborough 2 6 Com. Roscomon 2 Bur. of Roscomon 2 Bur. of
Tulske 2 6 Com. Sligoe 2 Bur. Sligoe 2 4 Com. Tipperary 2 Bur. of Clonnel 2
Bur. of Fetherd 2 Town of Cashells 2 8 Com. Tyrone 2 Bur. of Donegal 2 Town of
Clogher 2 Bur. of Agber 2 Bur. of Strabane 2 10 Com. Waterford 2 Civit.
Waterford 2 Bur. of Dungaruan 2 Bur. of Lismore 2 Bur. of Tallow 2 10 Com.
Westmeath 2 Bur. of Athlone 2 Bur. of Four 2 Bur. of Kilbegan 2 Bur. of
Molingra 2 10 Com. Wicklow 2 Bur. of Wicklow 2 Bur. of Caresford 2 Bur. of
Baltinglass 2 8 Com. Wexford 2 Town of Wexford 2 Town of Ross 2 Bur. of
Eniscourthy 2 Bur. of Feathard 2 Bur. of Banow 2 Bur. of Cloghmaine 2 Bur. of
Tughman 2 Bur. of Newborough 2 18 The total of Parliament Men returned in the
whole Kingdom of Ireland. 275

A CATALOGUE of BOOKS Printed at the Theater in Oxford, since the first
Printing there which was in the Year 1672 to 1682 (With several others) and
sold in London, by Moses Pit at the Angel against the Great North-door of St.
Pauls-Church. 1682.
IN FOLIO.
BIble for Churches with Chronology and an Index.

The English Atlas Vol. 1st. containing the description of the North Pole, as
also Muscovy, Poland, Sweden and Denmork.

The second Vol. of the Atlas containing half the Empire of Germany.

The fourth Vol. containing the 17 rovinces.

And the third Vol. containing the other half of the Empire of Germany. now in
the Press.

(...) sive Pandectae Canonum S. S. Apostolorum and Conciliorum ab Ecclesia
Graeca receptorum, nec non canonicarum S. S. Patrum Epistolarum una cum Sholijs
antiquorum singulis annexis, and Scriptis alijs huc spectantibus, quorum
plurima e Bibliothecae Bodleianae, aliarumque MSS. codicibus nunc primum edita,
reliqua cum iisdem MSS. summa fide and diligentia collata. Totum opus in duos
Tomos divisum, Gul. Beveregius Ecclesiae Angl. Presbyter recensuit,
Prolegomenis munivit, and Annot. auxit.

Catalogus impressorum Librorum Bibliothecae Bodleianae in Acad. Oxon.

Historia Universitatis Oxoniensis duobus voluminibus comprehensa. Autore
Antonio a Wood.

Oxonia illustrata, sive omnium celeberrimae istius Univesitatis Collegiorum,
Aularum etc. Scenographia per Dav. Loggan.

Plantarum Umbelliferarum distributio nova per tabulas cognationis and
affinitatis, ex libro naturae observata and detecta, Aut. Rob. Morrison, Prof.
Botanico:

Plantarum Historiae Universalis Oxoniensis pars 2d. seu Herbarum distributio
nova, per tabulas cognationis and affinitatis ex libro naturae observata and
detecta. Autore Rob. Morrison medico and Professore Botanico Regio 1680.

The History of Lapland English.

Marmora Oxoniensia, ex Arundelianis, Seldenian is, aliisque conflata, etc. cum
notis Lydiati and aliorum. per Humph. Prideaux.

The Natural History of Oxfordshire, being an Essay toward the Natural
History of England. By R. Plot, L. L. D.

Theatri Oxoniensis Encaenia, sive Comitia Philologica, Jul. 6. Anno 1677.
Celebrata.

Dr. Pocock's Commentary on Micha and Malachi.

Iamblichus Chalcidensis de Mysteriis Aegyptiorum Graec. Lat. Interpret T.
Gale.

Regis Aelfredi vita, cum Notis.

A short view of the late troubles in England from the year 1637 to 1660 by Sir
William Dugdale Knight. Garter King of Arms (this book was presented the Queens
Majesty by the University of Cambridge when they entertained the King and Queen
in the year 1681).

D. Cypriani opera Notis illustrata. In the Press.

Gualteri Charletoni M. D. Onomasticon Zoicon, Editio secunda, priori long
auctior.

Josephus Gr. Lat. cum Notis. In the Press.

Irenaej opera. Gr. Lat.

Provinciales constitutiones Angliae, per Guil. Lyndwood.

Hugonis Grotij opera omnia Theologica intres Tomos divisa. Land. 1679.

Labbaei Glossaria Latino-Graeca and Graeco-Latina. Paris 1679.

Huetii (Pet. Dan) demonstratio Evangelica ad serenis. Delphinum Paris 1679.

Episcopij (Simonis) Opera Theologica cum horis Hebraicis and Talmudicis in
Acta Apostolorum. 1678.

Charras Pharmacopoea, Galenical and Chemical.

Websters display of Witchcraft, wherein is affirmed that there are many sorts
of deceivers and imposters. 1677.

The History of the Council of Ttent written by Patre Paolo, translated into
English, to which is added his Life.

The Journal of St. Amor Dr. of Sorbonne, concerning the five famous
propositions.

Johan. Scotus de Divisione Naturae.

De Ratione ac Jure finiendi controversias Ecclesiae Disputatio Authore Herb.
Thorndike.

Theses Theologicae variis Temporibus in Academia Sedanensi editae, and ad
disputandum propositae. Authore Ludovico Le Blanc verbi Divini Ministro and
Theologiae professore. In quibus exponitur sententia Doctorum Ecclesiae
Romanae, and Protestantium. 1675. Price 20 s.

Dr. Henry Hammond's Sermons. 1675.

A Table of ten thousand Square Numbers, by John Pell D. D. sticht, 1 s. 6 d.

Tuba Stentoro-Phonica, or the Speaking-Trumpet; being an instrument of
excellent use both at Sea and Land; by Sir Samuel Morland. Price of the Book 1
s. of the Instrument 2 l. 5 s.

Catalogus Librorum in Regionibus Transmarinis nuper Edirorum.

The Commentaries and Life of Julius Caesar, Containing his Wars in Gallia, and
the Civil Wars betwixt him and Pompey, with the Notes of Clement Edmonds. 1677.
16 s.

Taverneirs travels into Persia, the East Indies, Tounquin etc. Vol. 2.

IN QUARTO.
SEveral English Bibles with the Liturgy, Apocrypha, singing Psalms and
Chronology.

Icones and Descriptiones rariorum Plantarum Siciliae, Melitae, Galliae and
Italiae. Autore Paulo Boccone.

Common Prayer-Books.

Theophilus and Philodoxus, 4 controversial dialogues, Of Prayer in an unkown
tongue. The half Communion. The worshipping of Images. The Invocation of
Saints. by Gilb. Cole D. D.

The Divine Authority of Scripture, a Sermon by Dr. Allestree.

The Character of the last days, a Sermon by Dr. Johu Fell Lord Bishop of
Oxford.

Tractatus Maimonidis de donis Pauperum, cum versione latina and Notis Hum.
Prideaux Art. mag. ex Aed. Chr.

Historia Jacobitarum in Aegypto, Lybia, Nubia, Aethiopia tota, and part Cypri
insulae habitantium, per Jos. Abudacnum.

A view and survey of the dangerous errors to Church and State in Mr. Hobbs his
Book entitled Leviathan, by Edward E. of Clarendon.

Votum pro pace Christiana Autore An. Sall. D. D.

Benefits of our Savior to Mankind.

A Sermon before the House of Peers Dec. 22d, 1680. by John Lord Bishop of
Oxford.

A discourse of Unequal Glasses.

Dr. Willis de Anima Brutorum.

Pharmaceutice Rationalis vol. 2.

Claudii Ptolomaei Harmonica Gr. Lat. ex recensione and cum Notis Joh. Wallis
S. T. D. Geom: Prof.

Archimedis Opera, Apollonii Pergaei Conicorum Libri IIII. Theodosii Sphaerica,
Methodo nova Illustrata and succincte demonstrata. per Isaac. Barrow.

Lectiones Geometricae per Isaac. Barrow.

Apologia pro Ecclesiae patribus adversus Johannem Dalleum de usu patrum Auth.
Math. Scrivener.

Beveregii Codex Canonum Ecclesiae Primitivae vindicatae.

Hereboordi (Adriani) Melitemata Philosophica Amsterdam 1680.

Vita selectorum aliquot virorum, qui Doctrina Dignitate aut Pietate inclaruere
London 1681.

History of Tyths, by John Seldom London 1618.

Johannis Bonae (Cardinalis) Opera Theologica 1677 16 s.

Dr. Pell's introduction to Algebra 7 s.

Nich. Mercatoris Logarithmo-Technia, sive methodus construendi Logarithmos,
1668 and Jac. Gregorii Exercitationes Geometricae, 1668 2 s.

Snellii Typhis Batavus, Ludg. Bat. 1624 5 s.

Dr. Thomas Jacomb, on the eighth Chapter of the Romans 8 s.

Dr. Wallis Opera Mechanica, 22 s.

Hieronymi Mercurialis de: Art Gymnastica Libri sex cum figuris, 1672.

J. Crellii Ethica Aristotelica and Christiana, 16 s. Huic Editioni praeter
praefixam Auctoris vitam, accedit Cathechesis Ecclesiarum Polonicarum, a Jo.
Crellio, Jona Schlethtingio, M. Kuaro, and A Wissowatio recognita atque
emendata, Casmop. 1681.

Joan. Binchii Mellificium Theologicum, 16 s.

Holy Fast of Lent defended, 1667 6 d.

A Looking-Glass for all new converts, 1667 1 s.

There is newly published two Recantation-Sermons, (Preached at the French
Church in the Savoy) by two converted Romanists, Mr. De la Motte, late Preacher
of the Order of the Carmelites, and Mr. De Luzanzy, Licenciate in Divinity?
wherein the corrupt Doctrines of the Church of Rome are laid open and confuted.
Both Printed in French and English.

A Modest Survey of the most material things in a discourse, called the Naked
Truth, 6 d.

Marshal Turene's Funeral Sermon 1677.

Jer. Horrocii. Angl. Opusc. Astron. 1673.

An Historical Vindication of the Church of England in point of Schism, by Sir
Rob. Twisden.

Dr. Tillotson's Sermon before the King, April 18 1675.

Dr. Wilkins's two Sermons before the King, March 7 1669 and Feb. 7 1670.

Dr. Jo. Tillotson's Rule of Faith, 1676.

Coopers Hill, Latin redditum ad Nobilissimum Dominum Gulielmum Dominum
Cavendish, Honoratissimi Domini Gulielmi Comitis Devonioe Filium unicum

St. Cyprian of the Unity of the Church.

IN OCTAVO.
THO. Lydiati Canones Chronologici, nec non series summorum Magistratuum and
Triumphorum Romanorum.

Saul and Samuel at Endor, or the new ways of salvation and Service, which
usually tempt Men to Rome, and detain them there, truly represented and refuted
by Dan. Brevint D. D. with the vindication of his Missale Romans the second
Impression.

A Paraphrase and Annotations upon the Epistles of St. Paul to the Romans,
Corinthians and Hebrews.

The Ladies Calling.

The Government of the Tongue.

The Art of contentment.

The Lively Oracles given to us, Or the Christians Birthright and duty in the
custody and use of the Holy Scripture: these four by the Author of the whole
duty of Man.

Zenophon Cyrop. Graec.

A short Dissertation concernining Free-Schools, being an Essay toward a
History of the Free-Schools of England, by Christopher Wase of St. Mary Hall
Oxon. Superior Beadle of the Civil Law in the same University.

Epicteti Enchiridion, Cebetis Tabulae, Theophrasti Caract. Gr. L. cum Notis
1680.

Parecbolae, sive excerpta e corpore statutorum Univ. Oxon. etc.

M. Fabii Quintiliani Declamationes undeviginti, cum ejusdem (utnonnullis
visum) dialogo de causis corruptae Eloquentiae, quae omnia notis illustrantur.

Nemesii Philosophi and Episcopi^ de natura hominis lib. unus, denuo recognitus
and manuscriptorum collatione in integrum restitutus, annotationibusque insuper
illustratus, Graec. Lat.

West Barbary, or a short narrative of the revolutions of the Kingdom of Fez
and Morocco, with an account of the present customs, sacred, civil, and
domestic, by L. Addison.

Homeri ilias, cum Scholiis Didymi Gr.

Theocritus cum Scholiis Graecis.

Aratus cum Scholiis Gr.

Suetonius Tranquillus, cum Notis.

De Ecclesiae Graecae statu hodierno Epist. per Tho. Smith S. S. Th. Bac.

Gul. Oughtredi opuscula hactenus inedita.

Caii Plinii Caecilii Secundi Epistolae and Oration Panegyrica, cum Notis
illustratae.

Rhetores selecti, Gr, Lat, Demetrius Philereus, de Elocutione; Tiberius
Rhetor, de Schematibus Demosthenis; Anonymus Sophista, de Rhetorica; Severi
Alexandrini Ethiopoeiae. Demetrium emendavit, reliquos e MSS. edidit and Latin
vertit; omnes Notis illustravit Tho. Gale, Sc. Co. M.

(...). Georgii Diaconi Primarii Judicis, atque Scriniorum custodis Pachymerii,
Epitome Logices Aristotelis.

Reflections upon the Council of Trent, By H. C. de Luzancy, M. A. Chapter Chapter and
Deacon of the Church of England.

Psalterium Gr. Juxta M. S. Alexand. cum verse. Vulg. per Dr. Tho. Gale.

Herodiani Hist. Gr. La. cum Notis.

Zozomi Historia Gr. La.

Catholica Romanus Pacificus. per Jo. Barnes.

Common Prayer.

Lucii Caecilii Firmiani Lactantii Liber ad Donatum Confessorum de mortibus
persecutorum cum Notis Steph. Baluzii. Oxon. 1681.

A discourse of the Original of Arms with a Catalogue of all the Nobility, Bps.
and Baronets of England by Sir William Dugdale Knight. Garter King of Arms. To
which is added a Catalogue of all the Nobility and Bishops of Scotland and
Ireland according to their precedence.

Bibles with References and Chronology.

Dr. Isaac Vossius de Poematum Cantu.

De Oraculis Sibyllinis.

Dr. Mayow Tractatus quinque de Spiritu nitroaereo etc.

Lactantius cum Notis now in the Press.

The Certainty of Christian faith by Dr. Whitby.

Didascalocophus or the deaf and dumb Man's tutor.

Historiae Poeticae scriptores antiqui, Apollodorus, etc. Grae. La. cum notis
and Indicibus necessariis.

Sophocles Gr. La. cum Notis.

Gradus ad Parnassum.

A Scriptural Catechism, according to the method observed by the Author of the
Whole Duty of Man, 1676.

How, of delighting in God, and of the Blessedness of the Righ teous, Two Vol.

Art of speaking, by M. du Port Royal. 1676.

A Discourse of Local Motion, undertaking to demonstrate the Laws of Motion,
and withal to prove, that of the seven Rules delivered by Mr. Des Carts on
this subject he has mistaken Six: Englished out of French, 1671. 1 s.

The History of the late Revolution of the Empire of the Great Mogol, with a
description of the Country, in two Volumes, 7 s.

The History of the Conquest of the Empire of China by the Tartars, 1671. 4 s.

Mystery of Iniquity unvailed in a Discourse, wherein is held forth the
opposition of the Doctrine, Worship, and Practices of the Roman Church, to the
Nature, Designs, and Characters of the Christian Faith, by Gilbert Burnet 1 s.

Theod. Turqueti, De Mayerne, De Arthritide, Accesserunt ejusdem consilia
aliquot Medicinalia, 1 s.

A new way of curing the Gout, and Observations and Practices relating to Women
in travel, 3 s.

Elenchi Motuum Nuperorum in Anglia pars tertia, sive Motus Compositi. Ubi G.
Monchii e Scotia progressus, nec non Aug. Caroli Secundi in Angliam Reditus;
ejusdemque Regiae Majest. per Decenniun gesta fideliter enarrantur, 1676.

Gualteri Needham Disputatio Anatomica de Formato Foetu. 1677, 3 s. 6 d.

Buxtorfius's Epitome of his Hebrew Grammar Englished, by John Davis, 1658. 1
s. 6 d.

The Fortunate Fool, or the Life of Dr. Cenudo, a Spanish Romance, 1670. 2 s.

The adventures of Mr. T. S. an English Merchant, taken prisoner by the Turks
of Argiers, with a description of that Kingdom, and the Towns and Places
thereabouts, 1670. 1 s. 6 d.

Contemplations on Mortality, 1670. 1 s.

A Discourse written to a Learned Friar, by Mr. Des Fourneillis, showing that
the Systeme of Mr. Des Carts, and particularly his Opinion concerning Brutes,
does contain nothing dangerous; and that all he has written of both, seems to
have been taken out of the first Chapter of Genesis: To which is annexed the
Systeme General of the Cartesian Philosophy, 1 s.

The Relation of a Voyage into Mauritania in Africa, by Roland Frejus of
Marseilles, by the French King's Order, 1666, to Muley Arxid King of
Taffaletta, etc. with a Letter in Answer to diverse questions concerning their
Religion, Manners, etc. 1671. 1 s. 6 d.

A Genuine Explication of the Visions in the Book of Revelation, by A. B.
Peganius. 1671. 2 s.

Prodromus to a Dissertation concerning Solids naturally contained within
Solids, laying a foundation for the rendering a rational account, both of the
Frame and the several Changes of the Mass of the Earth, as also the various
Productions of the same, By Nich. Steno, 1671 1 s. 3 d.

The Poetical Histories, being a complete Collection of all the Stories
necessary for a perfect understanding of the Greek and Latin Poets, and other
ancient Authors, written Originally in French, by the Learned Jesuit P.
Galtruchius. Now Englished and Enriched with Observations concerning the Gods
worshipped by our Ancestors in this Island, by the Phaenicians and Syrians in
Asia; with many useful Notes and occasional Proverbs, gathered out of the best
Authors: Unto which are added two Treatises; One of the Curiosities of Old
Rome, and of the difficult Names relating to the affairs of that City; The
other containing the most remarkable Hieroglyphics of Egypt. The third
Edition, with Additions. By Marius D. Assigny, B. D. 3 s. 6 d.

An Essay about the Origin and Virtues of Gems, by the Honorable Robert
Boil. 1 s. 6 d. Idem Latin. twelves, 1 s.

A Complete Treatise of Chyrurgery, containing Barbetts Chyrurgery. Mindererus
of Diseases Incident to Camps and Fleets: with a Chyrurgion's Chest of
Medicines and Istruments, etc. 6 s.

Dr. Lower de cord. Amster. 1671 3 s.

Crowei Elenchi Script. in Scripturam 3 s. 6 d.

Eugelenus de Scorbuto.

Grotii via ad Pacem.

Mr. Boil of hidden Qualities of the Air against Hobs, and of attraction by
Suction, 2 s. 6 d.

Mr. Boil of Effluviums of fire and flame, and of the previousness of Glass 3
s.

Memoires of Mr. Des-Ecotais formerly styled in the Church of Rome, The most
Venerable Father Cassianus of Paris, Priest and Preacher of the Order of the
Capucins; or the Motives of his Conversion. In English 2 s. In French 2 s. In
French and English 4 s. All Printed 1677.

Les Memoires De Madame la Princess Marie Mancini Colonne G. Connetable du
Royaume de Naples 1677.

La vie and les Actions Memorables de Lieut. Amiral Michel de Ruyter, 1677 5 s.

A vindication of the Primitive Church and Diocessan Episcopacy, in answer to
Mr. Baxters Church history by H. Morice Fellow of Jesus Col. Oxon.

A Catechism.

Hugo Grotius de Jure Belli ac Pacis cum Notis 1680.

IN DUO DECIMO.
(...). Novi testamenti lib. omnes. Accesserunt parallela Scripturae loca, nec
non variantes lectiones ex plus 100 MSS. Cod. and antiquis versionibus
collectae.

De Secretione animali cogitata, Aut. Gilb. Cole. M. D.

H. Grotius de Veritate Relig. Christi.

St. Clementis Epist. Gr. Lat. cum Notis.

Cornelii Nepotis vitae Excellent. Imper. Collat. 4 MSS. recognitae. Accessit
Aristomenis vita, ex Pausania.

Ars Rationis, maxima ex part ad mentem Nominalium. lib. 3.

Guil. Lilii Grammatica Latina, additis subinde observationibus utiliss. ex
Despaut. Alvar. Sanct. Sciop. Voss. Busbeo, and quotquo nuper scripsere, Gram.
Latinis.

The Education of Young Gentlemen, in two parts.

The Christian Sacrament and Sacrifice by way of Discourse, Meditation and
Prayer, upon the nature, parts and blessings of the Holy Communion, by Dan.
Brevint, D. D.

Missale Romanum, or the Depth and Mystery of the Roman Mass.

Maximus Tyrius, Gr. Lat.

Willisii Pharmac. rationalis.

Archimedis Arenarius, and de dimensione circuli, cum Eutocii comment. Gr. Lat.
ex versione and recens. Dr. Wallis Prof. Geom. Savil.

M. Juniani Justini Historiarum, ex Trogo Pompeio lib. 44 ex Cod. MS.
collatione recogniti.

Catholic Religion maintained in the Church of England, by A. Sall, D. D.

Sallustii Hist. cum Notis.

Antoninus. Gr. Lat.

Faustini Presbiteri Scriptores Seculi quarti and fidei Orthodoxae adversus
Arianos, vindicis accerimi, Opera. 1678.

Elegantiae Poeticae.

Testamentum Latinum.

Senecae Tragediae, cum Notis.

Horatius cum Notis Menellii.

Bibles large Letter.

Testaments several sorts.

Common Prayers of several sorts.

-- Idem in 24, several sorts.

A brief explanation of the Church Catechism.

Biblia Francois, 18.

Voyage d'Italie, de Dalmatie, de Graece and du Levant fait in aux annes, 1675,
and 1676. par Jacob Spoon, D. M. Et George Wheeler Gentlehomme Anglois, 3 Vol.
1678.

Abrege de la Philosophiae de Gassendi en VIII Toms, par F. Bernier Lion, 1678.

A Paradise of Delights, or an Elixir of Comforts offered to Believers, in two
Discourses, the first on Heb. 6. 17, 18. the second on Romans 8. 32. by Robert
Wine 1 s.

Grotii Sophompaneas.

Gronovius in Livium.

Primrose Ars Pharmaceutica.

Schook de Pace.

Suetonius.

Swalve Alcali.

Severini Synopsis Chyrurgiae.

Terentii Flores.

Trelcatii loci Communes.

Balduinus de Calceo and Nigronius de Caliga Veterum. Accesserunt ex Q. Sept.
Fl. Tertulliani, Cl. Salmasii and Alb. Rubenii Scriptis plurima ejusdem
Argumenti, 1667.

Ottonis Tachenii Hyppocrates Chymicus, 1671.

Theodori Kerckringii, D. M. Commentarius in Currum Triumphalem Antimonii
Basilii Valentini a se latinitate donatum, 1671.

Jo. Pincieri M. D. Aenigmatum Libri Tres cum solutionibus. 1655.

Francisci Redi Experimenta circa res diversas naturales, speciatim illas quae
ex Indiis adferuntur, 1675.

Aulus Gellius.

Besterfeldus Redivivus.

Herls Wisdoms Tripos.

Wilkins Beauty of Providence.

Gramatica Rationis.

Bishop Andrews Devotions Gr. Lat.

Athenagorae Apologia pro Christianis and de Resurrectione Mortuorum Gr. Lat.

Lactantius de Mortibus persecutorum and passionibus S. perpetuae and
Felicitatis.

Several other ancient books and MS. preparing for the press.


