THE CONFORMITY OF THE Discipline and Government Of those who are commonly
called INDEPENDANTS To that of the ANCIENT PRIMITIVE CHRISTIANS. By Dr. Lewis
Du Moulin sometime History Professor of Oxford.

Qui reperta veritate aliquid ulterius discutit, mendacium quaerit.
Valentinianus and Martianus. LONDON, Printed for Richard Janeway, 1680.

THE TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHap. 1. Of prejudices in General, and of the force of the objections commonly
urged against the Tenets and principles of Nestorius, to serve by way of
Introduction to the prejudices that are formed against the Independants. Page
1. Chap. 2. The advantages of the Congregational may above any other
Establishment of the Church beside: That it is the most reasonable; and that
all others have insuperable inconveniences. p. 3. Chap. 3. That upon the Ground
of this Hypothesis* that every supreme Authority either in the Popish, or the
Presbyterian Church is subject to ernour, Monsieur de Condom has reason to
approve of the Congregational may, and the independancy of particular Churches
on any other Authority than that of Jesus Christ in his word. p. 8. Chap. 4.
That the design of the Congregational Churches is most holy and most
reasonable, when they labor to retain a conformity of Faith with the other*
reformed Churches; but take the liberty to differ from them in matter of
discipline: Of the Veneration* they have for Calvin, and for the Churches which
follow his Doctrine, and discipline. p. 12. Chap. 5. That the Congregational
Churches do most rationally establish the Authority of Synods, and Pastors, and
the nature of the Church. p. 14. Chap. 6. An Answer to those who say that the
Congregational way is incompatible with the Civil Power; and that it deprives
the Magistrate of the right he has to the Government of the Church; that it is
introductory of Irreligion, Ignorance, and Schism in the Church. p. 16. Chap.
7. That the Congregational way has been practiced in all Ages of the World. p.
23. Chap. 8. Of the great Benefit and Advantage that comes from the
Establishment of the Congregational way in the World. p. 34. Chap. 9. That the
most Judicious Divines of France and other places, without thinking of it, do
naturally fall into the Hypotheses of the Congregational Churches. Of the
Judgment which ought to be made of their Confession of Faith, of their
discipline, and conduct. p. 38. Chap. 10. Of the Wise and Prudent carriage of
the Independants, and of their way to get further off the Church of Rome than
any other, and to condemn all the ways of Reconciliation with it, and the
Churches that hold any Communion with Rome. That the endeavor to come near it
is damnable and pernicious: as is sufficiently seen in the present posture of
the affairs of England. p. 43. Chap. 11. A continuance of the same matter
concerning the wise carriage of those Churches that are for their way
Congregational, when they condemn all manner of speaking like to Rome, and all
practices, that do any whit savor of theirs: and the six Maxims on which the
Pope and his Church are founded: a Confirmation of that by a History taken out
of the Life of Joseph Hall. p. 47. Chap. 12. An Apology for the Author of the
Conformity of the congregational Churches with that of the Ancient Primitive
Christians: That a disinteressed person, such as he is, is the most fit to
write about these matters. Of the Obligation he has to the Bishop of Condom
for the light he has given him. p. 53. Chap. 13. The Explication of one
difficulty which runs throughout the whole precedent discourse. p. 58. Chap.
14. Remarks upon the Fault that some may find in the Title of this discourse.
p. 60. Chap. Ult. An Answer to those who accuse the Independants for being the
Authors of the late Civil Wars in England, and particularly for having had an
immediate hand in the death of KING CHARLES the first. p. 68.
THE CONFORMITY OF THE GOVERNMENT Of those who are commonly called
INDEPENDANTS, With that of the ANCIENT PRIMITIVE CHRISTIANS
CHAP. I. Of prejudices in General, and of the force of the Objections commonly
urged against the Tenets and Principles of Nestorius, to serve by way of
Introduction, to the prejudices that are formed against the Independants.
IT IS above fifty years, since some learned and judicious Persons, as well of
the Gown, as others, have now brought to light an important and necessary
truth, which the strength of prejudice, and a General and Opinionative
blindness, that has lasted for more than this thousand years, has kept under
a Bushel: It Is that of Nestorius, which the eminent Authority of Cyril, has
made to pass, during all that time, and even from the third Ecumenical
Council, for an absolute lie, and with which all the learned, both the general
and particular Councils, all the Fathers, and all the new Doctors of both
Communions, have been so successively prepossessed, that they have thought it
nearly concerned their honor, not only to deny it; but even to be continually
throwing their Anathema's at the head of the poor Nestorius, whom they have
made to pass for an abominable Heretic, although at the bottom, Nestorius was
he of the two who was by far the more Orthodox, and the honester man; and on
the other hand, Cyril was the Heretic. For it is with the Authority of
Cyrillus, as with that eminent Authority of the Church of Rome, to which
Monsieur A^^auld would have all men fixed, and with which he thought to
overwhelm and undo Monsieur Claude.

NOT to make any Application of this History to what has happened to my self in
particular, as to the necessary truths I have promulged and advanced, I will
content my self with fixing to one, which is like to that of Nestorius; it is
that about those who are called Independants; who though they will not yield,
in exactness of living, or in holiness of Doctrine, to any of the Protestants
in Europe, for they are led more than other Christians by the Spirit of Jesus
Christ, which is a Spirit of meekness, moderation, and of a sound mind, and
they are farthest off from the spirit of malignity and Persecution, and their
Doctrine has more of conformity with that of the Apostles, and the Primitive
Christians, than any of the others; and though, to conclude, their confession
of Faith is the most Nervous and sinewy, the most Orthodox, and coutched up in
terms so strong and powerful, that of all pieces, which yet have appeared in
the World, fince the Writings of the Apostles, it is the most full and perfect:
Yet have they had the unhappiness to be loaded with injuries by our Synods, and
by those of our Divines, who are the most eminent in learning, and of a life
and piety the most exemplary, and that too in a manner altogether inhumane and
barbarous; so far, as that Monsieur Amy^auld calls them Fools, Enthusiasts, and
such as are infamous in their lives. Monsieur D' Aille, the Father says of
them, that it is a pernicious Sect, which from the very foundation overthrows
the Empires and Governments of the World; and others have no better opinion of
them, imputing to them practices contrary to truth; as to receive into their
Communion the most loose, disordered, and impious persons; though on the
contrary, their fault, if it be one, is just at the other extremity, not to
receive, neither into their Society, nor their Communion any but such, in whom
they probably find the marks of regeneration; and that beside, their greatest
Crime is to condemn the practice of Churches, as Popish and Tyrannical, when by
a right pretended to be divine, and by virtue of the power of the Keys, and of
that of binding and loosing; they erect a Tribunal, or a National
Ecclesiastical power, independent and distinct from that of the Magistrate,
though otherwise they approve of the Government of our Churches of France
according to the principles of those who establish it upon a natural right, and
upon a considerate discipline, in a manner absolutely like to the civil and
politic. For it is upon this ground of natural right, of confederation, of
Arbitrary Discipline, and purely humane, which may, and ought to be changed and
altered, according to times and places, it is upon this ground, I say, that the
Discipline of the Reformed Churches of France is established and founded, as
the last Article of their Discipline, says it, in the very express terms.

CHAP. II. The Advantage of the Congregational way, above any other
establishment of the Church beside: That it is the most reasonable, and that
oll others have insuperable inconveniences.
THIS Congregational way has incredible advantages over and above all the
other establishments of Religion, which most commonly are of the same extent as
the civil State of every Territory: but, beyond all, this way introduces into
all the Churches which conform to it, or at least into a great many of those
Churches, a Reformation in Doctrine, in Discipline, and in manner of
Government; wholly Apostolical: it being impossible that of a hundred
Congregations, or particular Churches, which should differ one from another in
Faith, and in the way of Government, otherwise Independent each on the other,
or on the Synods, but that there should be some or other which does retain this
Apostolical holiness: whereas it is not any ways possible, as we have seen by
experience since the time of Constantine the Great, but that one national
Church of the same extent as the civil State, or as the Empire or Dominion of a
Prince, must needs have many defects, errors, and apparent disorders, not only
in Discipline, but also in Doctrine, for these following Reasons,

1. We must consider a National Church, either in the manner, as it was
established by Constantine, Theodostus, and Justinian, of as great an extent as
the Roman Empire, in which the State Ecclesiastical was regulated after the
Model of the Civil State: where the Bishop of a City or place, whose extent was
called (...), was parallel to the Defensor Civitatis, or to the Dux; The
Archbishop, or the Metropolitan of the Province was parallel to the Praeses or
Proconsul, and Corrector. The Diocesan, the Primate, or the Patriarch, who was
also the Hexarch in the time of the Calcedonian Council, was parallel to the
Legate of the Emperor, or Vicarius, where the Praetorium was, and where there
was in the Ecclesiastical State a subordination of Courts and Tribunals, as in
the Civil State: for that was the Error of the Ancients to adjust the
Ecclesiastical Government to the Civil, instead of practicing the quite
contrary, according to the judicious maxim of a wise Italian Politician.
Bisogna accomodare la ragione di Stato alla Religione, and non la Religione
alla rag one di Stato.

Or we must consider the National Church, when the Pastors are in an equality
of rank and dignity, but with subordination to Provincial or National
Assemblies, Consistories, Colloquies, and Synods. Now in either manner of
establishment, where there is observed in all things an uniformity of Doctrine
and of Discipline, and which is pressed by the same rigorous severities in the
State Ecclesiastical, as the Laws are in the Civil, in either manner, I say,
even, when the Magistrate favors the true Worshippers of Jesus Christ, there
happens Errors and disorders innumerable, which never would be found in the
establishment of the Congregational way: as when the Bishop or a small number
of Pastors has the whole management and supervision of affairs; and where it is
impossible but that Heresy, Ambition, Envy, Politic regards, temporal
interest, the Spirit of Pride and Grandeur, and Factions should reign among
them; and that these Errors and disorders should so easily be visible, and
taken notice of, as in a particular composed of one or two Pastors, and of a
small number of People, This is what has been observed by the Historians
Socrates, and Sozomen, and by the Fathers. Gregory Nazianzen says, that he had
never seen Synods to produce any good effects, but that they had rather
increased Heresy, then stifled and suppressed it. Martyn, the Bishop of Tours,
had no better opinion of them. All the Synods, especially, the Ecumenical, had
been Shire*halls, houses of confusion, or even Aceldama's, if the Emperors, or
their Commissaries had not thrown water upon the fire which they had kindled:
Yet they could not always so hinder, but that these two great evils of Synods
and Bishops, the (...), and the (...), did transport them to the very
extremities of tyranny and cruelty: insomuch that Dioscorus who was President
in the second Council of Ephesus over four hundred persons, was so moved with
rage and passion against Flavian Bishop of Antioch, that he rose up from his
seat, and killed him with blows and kicks, and also trampled upon his body
after he was dead. It Is remarkable that the Canons full of piety and pure
Doctrine, were never made in Numerous and Ecumenical Synods, but in those that
were private, and composed of a few persons, such as was that of Orange, where
we read these words that deserve to be writ in Gold. Tales nos amat Deus,
quales futuri sumus ipsius dono, non quales sumus nostro merito: having in it
only the first Nicene Council which has produced us this most Nervous
confession concerning the blessed Trinity.

I add that in the Establishment of a National Church, which observes in a
large extent of Dominion the same uniformity of Religion as of Polity, it is
neither goodness nor truth, neither sincerity, nor a well-form'd design that
acts, but it is hazard, worldly interrest, power, and the greatest number,
which is oftentimes the most erroncous, and the will of one single Person
invested with an absolute power, which is most commonly taken up by Flatterers,
and Counselors, who are animated with other motives than those of Conscience,
or who, how good soever, and sincere otherwise, are not illuminated, nor
learned enough to give a right judgment about matters of Religion. Carneades
said, that the State of Athens was unhappy, in which wise men made fair
Overtures, and gave good Counsels, but Fools judged of them, and ordered all
things according to their idle and extravagant fancies. And indeed Wise men may
consult* but it is the greatest number, or the longest and best sword that
determines, which is too often in the hands of those, who have more strength of
power, than force of judgment, so that by this establishment of a National
Ecclesiastical Government, thousands of Christians and faithful Souls are as
much obliged to submit themselves to the Religion of a whole Empire, according
to the establishment which shall be made of it by an Idolatrous Rehoboam, by an
Arrian Constantius, by an Apostate Julian, by a Popish Mary Queen of England,
as to that which shall be set up by a David, by a Constantine the the Great,
and by a Queen Elizabeth of ever blessed memory; which Inconveniences neither
can nor ever will be able to happen in a place, where the Congregational way
shall be established. It may be one Sovereign, who shall be as Heretic, as
Constantius, will issue forth his commands for the establishment of his heresy
in all the places of his dominion, as Theodosius the second made another for
that of the Orthodox Faith, when he commanded, that all the Subjects of his
Empire should receive the faith from Damaseus of Rome, and from Peter of
Alexandria. But it may likewise fall out, that that same Emperor, to wit,
Theodosius the second, might make two Ordinances, which may mutually destroy
one another; for he convoked the first Synod of Ephesus, which condemned the
Opinion of Nestorius, and some years after he convoked the second Synod of
Ephesus, which contradicted it, and allowed the opinion of Nestorius.

2. THIS same inconvenience is verified by the establishment of the best
reformed Churches in the World, I mean that of Luther, and of Calvin: For as
the Reformation was that of a National Church of the same extent with that of
the Territory of the Sovereign where it was established; so likewise did it
carry the Obligation into Germany, Sweedland, and Denmark that they should
submit to Consubstantiation, without any bodies having the liberty to form
assemblies to themselves which may reject it; which Churches might do if they
were Independent. The same inconvenience is happened, and must happen from the
National establishment of the Reformation which Calvin has made in England,
Holland, some parts of Germany, and elsewhere: and how pure soever the
Reformation was as for the Doctrine of that holy man, it is extremely defective
as to the Discipline, the power Ecclesiastic, and that Tribunal which he
Erected in Geneva, distinct and Independent on the Magistrate, by virtue of a
pretended Divine right and power, which has been the cause of all those
infinite disorders, confusions, and even Schisms in England, Scotland, Holland,
and Geneva, even in the time of Calvin, as we read in his Epistles.

3. ONE great convenience which is found in the Establishment of a National
Government, is, that it is always grounded upon humane principles, cruel, and
barbarous, as to constrain, to persecute* and even to burn those who in matter
of Religion do not embrace that of the Ecclesiastical State, or of the
Magistrate that establishes it, and do not conform to all the practices that he
appoints and commands.

4. THEY say that this National establishment of Ecclesiastical Government,
deprives Man of his Reason, and his natural and Religious liberty, in the
choice he ought to make of his God, and of the worship he ought to render him,
and to which he should not be constrained, but persuaded* neither to be brought
to it by custom nor by birth, nor likewise by the Law of the Magistrate,
unless he be convinced that his Ordinances and commands in matters of Religion
are conformable to the word of God; for they press mightily upon this
consideration, that this establishment divests Man of the same liberty in his
religious life, as he has in the Civil, where he is not restrained by any Law
of the Magistrate to choose his house, his Wife, his Master, his Servant, his
Lawyer, his Physician, his Calling, nor any one particular manner how to govern
his Family, provided it may be done without breaking the public peace.

5. THEY say, that how unjust or how extravagant soever the Laws of the
Magistrate might be for the regulating of Polity, yet there is nothing
unreasonable, neither in the Magistrate generally to command the practice of
them, nor in all Subjects submitting to them, without reserve or exception* so
long as the importance of those Laws do not extend beyond the present life; but
if it reaches further, and Conscience and Eternal Salvation be concerned
therein, they believe, that an uniformity of Faith and of Religion, which
should be imposed upon us, how good so ever the thing might be in its self, it
would be wicked and unreasonable, because it would do violence to the
Conscience, of which the Magistrate is not the Master, nor the Arbiter, as he
is of the Bodies and estates of Men.

CHAP. III. That upon the ground of this Hypothesis, That every Supreme
Authority, either in the Popish or the Presbyterian Church, is subject to
Error; Monsieur de Condom has reason to approve of the Congregational way, and
the Independency of particular Churches on any other Authority than that of
Jesus Christ in his Word.
BUT there is nothing, which does more reasonably establish the Independancy of
particular Churches, nor which more powerfully destroys this Authority in the
Church, by a divine right, and the necessity there is, that a person, or a
particular Church should depend upon its Ordinances, (unless that Supreme
Authority is infallible; for if it be subject to Error, it must of necessity do
violence to the Christian liberty of the faithful, and so degenerate into a
Tyrannical Authority) there is nothing, I say, which establishes more
reasonably the Independency of particular Churches, nor which more powerfully
destroys their dependency, than the account which the Bishop of Condom gives
of the judgments of the Independants, and of the Sentence that the Synod of
Charenton pronounced against them.

THEY believe, says he, that every faithful Member ought to follow the
illuminations of his own Conscience, without submitting his judgment to the
Authority of any Body, nor any Ecclesiastical Assembly, and they do not refuse
to submit to the word of God, nor to embrace the decisions of Synods, when
after a due and through Examination of them, they find them reasonable. That
which they refuse to do, is to submit their judgment to that of any Assembly,
because it is a Society of Men that are subject to Error.

THE Gospel it self is not more true than this persuasion of Independants, and
that Bishop could not approve of one more reasonable, to wit, that a particular
person, or Church, ought not to submit their Faith, their Religion, nor the
guidance of their manners to an Authority which is subject to error, but only
to the Word of God, which is an infallible Authority. Upon this ground the
Bishop of Condom has reason to condemn the Synod of Charenton, for having
taxed the Judgment of the Independants with Error, which consists, as says
the Synod, in what they teach, that every Church ought to be governed by its
own laws, without any dependence upon any in matters Ecclesiastical, and
without any obligation to acknowledge the authority of Synods for its
governance and conduct.

THEN a little after, this same Synod decides, that this Sect is as prejudicial
to the State as to the Church: that it opens a door to all sorts of
Irregularities and extravagancies: that it takes away all the means of bringing
any remedy to them; and that if it had field-room enough it would form to it
self as many Religions, as Parishes or particular Assemblies.

THESE last words, says the Bishop, discover, that it is principally in
matters of Faith, that the Synod would establish dependancy, since the greatest
inconvenience that he takes notice of, into which the faithful people of God
would fall by independancy, is, that they would frame as many Religions as
Parishes; then, says he, of necessity, according to the Doctrine of that Synod,
each Church, and by a stronger reason each particular, must depend, as to what
respects faith, upon a supreme Authority, which resides in some Assembly, or in
some body, to which Authority all the faithful people of God ought to submit
their Judgment.

THIS Bishop could take notice of nothing more unreasonable, and more
extravagant in our Synods, than to oblige a private person to submit himself in
matters of Faith to the Judgment of an Assembly* whose decisions are not the
Word of God, that is to say, not infallible.

IT IS true, that pre-supposing all Supreme Authority in the Church, whether in
the Protestant or Romish, is subject to error, the Government of the
Adversaries of Rome, of Independants, or other Protestants, is equally
justifiable, when they refuse to pay submission to the Authority of Rome, since
that it is incomparably more defective than that which the Protestants set up
in their Churches.

BUT on the other side, if it be true, that, upon this ground, the Government
of the Independants is more justifiable and more reasonable than that of other
Protestants who blindly submit themselves to a Tribunal subject to error, and
whose conduct and gonance is beyond all comparison further off from Reason,
than is that of the Papists; for pre-supposing that the Authority of Rome is
infallible, the submission* which the people pay to that supreme Authority, is
so much the more reasonable as that of the Protestants is the less, when they
submit to a supreme Authority which they themselves believe is subject to
error.

IN short, the Bishop of Condom has great reason to be sure, that the
Protestants are mightily beside the Cushion, and to blame, for condemning the
Infallibility of Rome, so long as the Incontestability, and indisputableness
which they invest their supreme Authority withal, carries the same Obligation
along with it to obedience and submission. A great Divine of ours who relates
the Judgment of the Protestants hereupon, libr. 1. cap. 8. de Clavibus,
expresses himself in these words. Hujus ligamenti quo Pastores Ecelesiae
constringunt peccatores, tanta est vis and certitudo, ut Christus pronunciet,
si quid ligaverint pastores in terris, id fore lig^tum in coelo; id est, Deum
Ratum habiturum hanc ligationem, potest fieri aliquando ut ligatio sit injusta,
vult tamen Christus eam ratam esse; non enim fas est homini qui injuste
excommunicatus est, invaaere sacram Coenam, and invitis Pastoribus irrumpere in
communionem Ecclesiae.

IS not that to tell us, that a man excommunicated unjustly, is as much obliged
to submit himself to the excommunication pronounced against him by an Authority
which has erred, as when it is given by an Authority which has not erred? And
is not that to tell us, that in every way, whither justly or unjustly, a person
delivered to Satan (as is the general opinion of all Protestants (excepting my
Father) that to deliver to Satan and to excommunicate are one and the same
thing) ought not to dispute o^^ resist that Authority, which has delivered him
up to that evil Spirit? To conclude, is not that to speak in the Language of
the Canon, Si papa distinct. 40* which will by no means permit a person cast
thus to the Devil, although against all right and justice, by the Authority of
the Pope, to resist that supreme Authority.

THE Bishop likewise has no less good Reason to be sure, that the conjunction
of all the parts of Romish Church in one body would be unreasonable, if they
were not cimented by infallibility; and to divest it of its Infallibility, is
to break it in pieces, is to cast every of its least parts into Independancy,
and to give liberty to every of them to govern themselves according to their
own mode and way, and to do their business by themselves.

BUT here we should observe, as we go along, that of two depths of Satan, the
Ecclesiastical Power, and Infallibility, the first is a Lie, an Imposture, and
a cheat; but that presupposing that it is not a cheat, but a thing that is
good, and true, and the use of which is necessary in the Church, Infallibility
is naturally and reasonably a consequence of it. And in truth, our Reformers
have placed Incontestability in the room of Infallibility. But it is true also,
that if Infallibility be a pure cheat* the other is a pure and absolute
tyranny, and it is less reasonable, in not being a natural consequence of
Ecclesiastical power: incontestability is a thousand times worse than
Infallibity except it be in one thing, and that is, that it has not been of so
long a Duration.

IT IS here no doubt wherein the illuminations of humane Reason were not so
great to our first Reformers, as to the generation of men in this Age: For as
those soresaw in it, that a submission of so many Princes and people, who
differed in Customs, Laws, and Languages, to an Authority subject to error,
was not only unreasonable, but also impossible, to prevent the revolt both of
Kings and people, they with a great deal of Justice invested it with
Infallibility.

AND it is here too that the Bishop of Condom triumphs over us, and has great
reason for it on his side, when he reproaches us that we have been deficient in
our Politics, in not erecting among us an infallible Tribunal, and that we are
much to blame, for obliging the faithful people of God with so much rigor and
severity to submit to a tribunal subject to error; but those of Rome are not
so, for they oblige their people to submit to one that is infallible.

BUT the Independants, as they are led by the illumination of grace, and
reason, so likewise are they most reationally, and with great Justice and Piety
disengaged not only from a pretended Infallible Tribunal, but also from the
Tyranny of such dependence, or submission to an Authority subject to error.

AS to the Assertion of the Synod of Charenton, that the Sect of the
Independants opens the door to all manner of Irregularities and Extravagances,
that Assertion, I say, seems plausible at the first, as in truth it is not only
plausible, but most reasonable in matters purely Civil, in which, if there were
not a last Resort and Refuge, and Appeal from Court to Court in the Territories
of a Sovereign, there would be as many Courts erected Independent one on the
other, not only as there are Families, but as there are private persons. Which
inconvenience is not one in matters of Religion, Faith, Doctrine and Divine
Worship, in* which the Conscience of every one is the last resort wherein the
business is to be judged without any further Appeal, and where none ought to be
constrained, but exhorted and persuaded: A Synod is to persuade a particular
Church to embrace such a Faith; but it has neither right nor power to force
it. Now a particular Church is to do the same as to one of its Members, and if
it carries any constraint with it, it no longer acts as a Church, and as an
Assembly of Christians and faithful^ people, but as a Magistrate, at least like
an Arbiter and Judge, to whom Jesus Christ sent the planteth in the eighteenth
Chapter of St. Matthew, in these words tell it to the Church, that is to say,
tell it to an Assembly which had neither any Court, nor any power, nor
Jurisdiction, and where the party intimated mightly decline, or refuse the
Judgment without damage, as it appears by those words of Jesus Christ, if he
dres not hearken to the Church. For by these words, let him be unto thee, etc.
Jesus Christ does not command the Church to proceed to an Excommunication of
that party that has done the wrong, but he advises the offended party to cite
the other, who has deprived himself of the quality of a Brother before the
natural Judges, as well of the Publicans as of the Heathens the one being the
Ministers of the State, and the other being of the Religion of the Emperor. In
short, the Church as such, and considered as Christians, and honest men, has
no more jurisdiction* that a College of Philosophers.

CHAP. IV. That the design of the Congregational Churches is most holy and most
reasonable, when they labor to retain a Conformity of Faith with the other
Reformed Churches, but take the liberty to differ from them in matter of
Discipline: Of the veneraiton they have for Calvin, and for the Churches which
follow his Doctrine and Discipline.
THE design of producing their Confession of Faith, is to show, that it is the
very Masterpiece of an extremely juditious Government; and as it was the work
of persons most perfect in the Study of Divinity, the principal design they had
in the composition of their Confession was to declare and testify to the
World, that although every Church might take the liberty to differ from others in
discipline, they ought nevertheless to labor above all things to retain and
keep the same faith in matters, that are essential with all the Reformed
Churches. This is what the Congregational party have done with great care and
circumspection in the making of their Confession: for beside, that they do but
a very little differ from that of the Presbyterians, and that they do not at
all divide from them, but in matter of Discipline, they have also endeavored
to have their Faith conformable to the Doctrine of the Church of England: and
as to their Discipline, it is very simple and naked: they have no other than
that which Saint Paul gives in three words, to wit, That every thing in the
Church should be done Decently and in Order. They have especially had an eye to
the practice of the Churches under the good Roman Emperors, under Constantine,
Theodosius, Martianus, and Justinian, under whom they kept a strict uniformity
in Faith* and that correspondence was maintained by letters which they called
Literae Testimoniales, Circulares, Ecclesiasticae, Formatae; tho otherwise they
took the liberty to differ one from another, even under one and the same
Emperor, in Discipline, in Customs, and in Ceremonies. Saint Austin, Epist.
ad Tanuarium, 119. and Epist. 86. ad Casulanum Presbyterum, permits any Church
to differ from others in Ceremonies, and in manner of Government, provided that
they agree with them in Unity of Faith. The Historian Socrates, libr. 5. cap.
21. tells us, that there was not to be found two Churches in all the Roman
Empire, which observed one and the same form of Prayers to God. The Jesuit
Mainbourg, how zealous soever he is to the Uniformity of Rome in his Doctrine
and discipline, yet he ceases not to say, and to maintain, that the diversity
of usages, customs, and practices, is compatible with the unity of Faith. One
ought not, says he, never to separate for the diversity and customs, which may
be different the one from the other, without the wounding the Unity of Faith.
Page 303. of his third book of the Treatise of Schism among the Grecians. I
have read as much in a great Lawyer, it is Godefrey the Son. Certissima olim
fidei* contesseratio erat una Eucharistiam s^mere. (...) dicebantur non in
eadem disciplina, sed fid^.

WE must also do them this justice, that there are no Doctors who have a
greater Veneration for the Doctrine and memory of Caloin, nor who desire with
more ardent zeal to have a strict and close Communion with the Churches which
follow the Doctrine of that holy man, than their Pastors; although they believe
that they may have, as I have said, the liberty to differ from them in matter
of discipline, without thinking themselves guilty, either of separation* or
schism.

CHAP. V. That the Congregational Churches do most rationally Establish the
Authority of Synods and Pastors, and the nature of the Church.
IT IS a great wrong and injury done to the Independants, to affirm that they
condemn Synods, since on the contrary, they Establish the true use of them, as
the Bishop of Condom, who has more charity for them than other Synods, and our
Divines acknowledge. The Independants, says he, do not refuse to embrace and
comply with the decisions of Synods, when, after they have duly examined them,
they find them not unreasonable: that which they refuse to do, is to submit
their Judgment to that of any Assembly or Society subject to error.

THE Independants argue as Mr. Pajon does: Though Jesus Christ himself, says
he, should come down from Heaven to dwell on the earth again with all the rays
of Glory that are roand about him, to teach us, and to guide and direct us; yet
it would be impossible for us to obey him reasonably, without making use of our
iwn illumination to know it, and to judge whither it be just and reasonable to
obey him in all things.

If he would not have a humane Judgment submit to that which discovers it is
Infallibility with so much dazzling and luster, unless reason lead one to it; by
an Argument a fortiori would he approve of the conduct of the Independants as
reasonable, when they refuse to submit to a Judgment that is humane and
fallible.

BUT the true Constitution of Synods according to them, when they look upon
them as the Assemblies of the Ministers of Jesus Christ, of Divines, and of
faithful people, and the true use they make of them, and which ought to be made
of them, is to ask, and receive from them advice and counsel, as one expects,
and as one ought to receive it from wise and experienced men, and not by way of
command and impulse. That is all the Authority that the great Archbishop of
Armagh, and Mr. Baxter gives them, when they consider them as such: And also
the Ecumenical Synods which were held under Constantine and Martian, had no
more, before those Emperors gave to their conclusions the force and prevalence
of Canons, and the Sanction of Imperial Laws.

THEY take the Apostolical Synod for the model of the Authority of all Synods,
at least of that which they would attribute to themselves: and although it was
the onley Synod that was guided by the spirit of Infallibility, and its
Authority was much more eminent otherwise than that of all the Synodal
Assemblies in the succeeding Ages; yet it never went, as the others have done
since, to throw out Anathema's at the heads of those who refuse to be obedient
to them; but it only concludes with this exhortation, if you keep these Canons,
you will do well,

THEY speak of the nature of the Church, of the power and calling of Pastors,
and of their Ordination, and according to the good maxims of Monsieur
Mestrozat, Monsieur Pajon, and Monsieur Claude, and their Doctors were the
first who have established the true nature of Schism.

AS to what respects the Power, the Authority, and the Jurisdiction of Pastors,
they acknowledge no other in the Church than that which is confined in every
particular Church, and which goes not beyond persuasion* or at the farthest a
declaration that it makes, that it no longer owns such and such, either for the
Pastors, or Members of its Society: And this is what is done by a natural
right, and not in shooting out the thunderclaps of Excommunication, or
deposition against them; for Excommunication is not a business that is much
disputed of among them. The heretics and the wicked, being condemned by their
own confession, have no need to be excommunicated, because they are
excommunicated of themselves, as the Bishop Godean tells us in his Paraphrase
upon the eleventh Verse, of the third Chapter of the Epistile to Titus, A man
that is an Heretic after the first and second Admonition reject, knowing that
he that is such, is subverted, and sins, being condemned of himself* and it
is what he says, after Saint Jerome. If any one of their Assemblies practice
Excommunication, it is that of the Ancient Christians, it is not a privation
from the holy Supper, but an ejection of the body out of the Assembly, no
longer to be reckoned any of their Members.

CHAP. VI. An Answer to those who say that the Congregational way is
Incompatible with the Civil power; and that it deprives the Magistrate of the
Right he has to the Government of the Church; that it is Introductory of
Irreligion, Ignorance, and Schism in the Church.
THE four and twentieth Chapter of their confession of faith, condemns those
who speak of them, as of persons that despise Superior Powers: For it is easiy
to demonstrate that their way is so far from being, as Monsieur Daille
believed, pernicious, and such as troubles the peace of the world, or which
over-throws the Governments of it, and the authority both of Sovereigns and
their states, that, on the contrary, there is no way in the world which
contributes more to the strengthening of Empires, Especially of Monarchies, and
which ought less disquiet the Crowned heads for fear least they should cause
by it any commotions in the State, than theirs: For as they do not set up and
establish any Ecclesiastical tribunal independent on the Magistrate, which
draws along with it the two thirds of the most considerable persons of the
State, especially, those who are most nice and Scrupulous in Religion; it is
impossible that there should be any troubles made by leagues and confederations
in that manner as may be in all the Presbyterian Churches of a Nation, and as
those practice it, when they form to themselves, as often times they have done
an Assembly of their deputies.

ALL the world knows that these general and National Assemblies of the Clergy,
have been formidable to Kings and Parliaments* because they are as an Altar,
and a Sovereign Ecclesiastical power; opposed to a Sovereign and civil power,
of which there have been seen pernicious effects in Scotland, and which France,
would have found, if the reformed Religion had prevailed over the Romish: And I
am very much persuaded that nothing so much diverted Henry the fourth from the
thoughts he might have had to establish the Reformed Religion in France, as the
apprehension he had that his actions, being somewhat free, might be too far
looked into and examined by the Synods and the Consistories, and that his person
should be brought under their Jurisdiction.

AS therefore the Independants do condemn these Maxims, and these practices,
which are absolutely contrary to theirs; how ill intended soever they were, or
might be, it is no more possible for them to set up in a Kingdom, a Sovereign
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, than for all the Companies of Merchants and
Tradesmen, or for all the Families of France to erect a Tribunal, and a
Merchandising, or Ecumenical Power, which may be equal with that of the Civil
State,

IN a word, as the Congregational Churches do neither receive Ordinances, nor
Commandments from their Synods, but only counsels and advice, and that they
cannot assemble in a body by their deputies, they give a great advantage unto
Magistrates to possess an entire and perfect Sovereignty, and to take for their
Motto, Divide and Impera. For those who deprive their Synods of all Authority,
and who do not attribute to themselves any other power than that of persuasion,
are the most remote of all from framing to themselves, either an Empire, or one
to be chief over them.

IT IS true, their weakness is their subscribing to that Maxim of Cicero, libr.
de Officiis. Vt tutela, sic procuratio Reipublicae ad utilitatem eorum qui
commissi sunt, non ad eorum quibus commissa est gerunda est: and to that of
Salvian, libr. de Providentia. Infinitam Regiae Majestatis potestatem isti
agnoscunt, qui infinitam divini Numinis Omnipotentiam non credunt.

IT IS true, they are accused for depriving the Magistrate from the same
Authority, and Sovereign Intendence over the Ecclesiastical State, as over that
of the Civil* But notwithstanding they do sufficiently satisfy all reasonable
and considerate persons of this in the four and twentieth Chapter of their
Confession. Beside those who condemn that collaterality of Governments and of
Tribunals, the one Ecclesiastical, and the other Civil, in one and the same
territory, and who believe that it comes from the forge of Antichrist, and that
it has introduced Popery into the world, do not trouble themselves about
resolving the difficulty, nor about assigning to each his Laws, his Courts,
his Officers, his Sovereign, and the measure of his Power and Authority.

I add, that as the force and efficacy of Laws does not consist in, whither
they are Ecclesiastical or Civil, nor in their goodness, justice, and truth;
but in the will of him, or those, who sit at the Helm of Affairs, the
Congregational Churches must of necessity acknowledge the force of all those
Laws, whither for the Ecclesiastical, or the Civil State: only they affirm,
that as the Magistrate is not Infallible, he may possibly abuse his right, and
orr either in the publication, or the execution of his Laws, of what Nature
soever they be: and as they are not obliged to obey all Civil Laws, no more are
they obliged to obey all Laws Ecclesiastical; they affirm also, that as the
Empire of Jesus Christ, in matters of Religion, is not over the bodies, but
over the hearts of men, the Magistrate who is the Protector and Defender of the
visible Church of Jesus Christ in his Territories, sins extremely, when he
makes Laws and Ordinances that do violence to the bodies of his Subjects, and
that take from them that liberty, which every man ought to have in the choice
of his Religion, and in the manner of serving God.

BUT that crime which is imposed on them, supposing it to be one, is
incomparably less, than that of Presbyterian Churches, all which follow the
establishment, and the practice of Calvin, who set up in Geneva an
Ecclesiastical Tribunal, Independent and distinct from that of the Magistrate;
insomuch that a learned man named Monsieur Jurieu, has writ a large Book,
wherein he endeavors to prove, that the Sovereign Magistrate, considered as
such, has not any jurisdiction, nor Intendence over the Collected Churches in
his Dominions, and that he has no other right than that of Inspection, and
considered as a Christian, and one of his principal Members* wherein Monsieur
Jurieu is more Independent than the Independants themselves, and he does not
afford so much Authority to the Magistrate over the Churches that are collected
within his Territories and Dominions, as the Independants do.

THE Independent Churches and their Pastors are very wide from these thoughts
and practices: For the Authority of every Congregation, being as that of every
Family, what liberty soever it has to govern it self according to its own way
and humor, it is not, neither in right, nor in power, nor even in will, to set
up a Tribunal distinct from, and Independent on that of the Magistrate.

AFTER all, a Prince who should endeavor to establish an Arbitrary Power in
his Kingdom, that should depend only upon God and his Sword, might imagine he
should be less hindered by several thousands of Independent Congregations, not
only on him, and on his Courts, but also the one Independent on the other; than
by one entire body of all those Churches, which should set up by their deputies
an Ecclesiastical Tribunal distinct from, and Independent on the Civil: For the
strengeh of all those Independent Congregations, would be like that of several
threads, which may easily be broke one after another, whereas the strength of
all those Churches joined in one body, would be like to that of all those
threads twisted together, which it would be almost, if not absolutely,
impossible to break, or to undo, but by the same way that Alexander took to
break the Gordian-knot.

AS the Independent Churches do come the nearest to those of the Apostles, so
likewise they are further off, than any of the other reformed Churches, from
that thought and practice which has accomplished the Mystery of Inquity, which
is nothing else but the Empire of the Clergy, and so consequently That of the
Pope, in the Empire of the secular Powers, under the Mask and Disguise of
Religion, and Ecclesiastical power.

AS to the Objection that is made against them, that in case there should be no
other Ecclesiastical Establishment in a Kingdom than theirs, the three fourths
of the Inhabitants would live in great negligence, and a gross Ignorance of
Religion. To that they say, that their way does not exempt Pastors from
attending upon the Office of their Ministry, at all times and places, both
within and without their particular Congregations; and to take the same pains
as the Presbyterian Ministers do, for what repects the preaching of the word in
the most public places: also they do very much approve, that the Magistrate
should erect Academies, and Colleges; assign Tithes, and Revenues, and
Temples; establish persons to be employed in the instruction of people in
public, to invite them to it, and to excite the Ignorant to frequent the
Schools, and the Lectures of the Professors of Arts and Sciences, where they
should go for the love of virtue and knowledge, without being constrained.

AS to the crime of Schism, which is imposed on them, as their being separate
from all the visible Churches of Jesus Christ, in the same manner as the
Donatists, the Novatians, and the Luciferians did: it is a false Accu sation.
Those who accuse them of Schism, do not understand the nature of Schism.

1. IT IS not Schism, when a particular Church separates from another Church, as
the Church of Luther from that of Calvin, nor the Protestants from the Papists:
nor even one particular reformed Church from some other, with which it made
before but one body of a Church: But true Schism is formed among the Members of
one and the same particular Church, as was that of Corinth.

2. IT IS not Schism when a number of Heretics separate from the Orthodox party
of a particular Church* to make a Congregation apart, to the end they may
profess their heresy with greater liberty, but it is an Apostasy, and an
abandoning and forsaking of the Orthodox faith, or Church of Jesus Christ,
which is Catholic and visible: and upon this ground the Church of Rome is not
a Schismatical, but an Apostate Church; although it be one for the first
reason, because that what engagement or tie soever all its Members have to one
head, however they are not all agreed together. Schism properly is when the
Members of one Church are at variance, as were those of the Church of Corinth,
and upon that account there is always a Schism in the Romish Church.

3. THERE is no Schism among several particular Churches that differ one from
the other in discipline, but that retain and keep all the same foundation and
ground of faith, and who have for that point a great union, and a strict
correspondence with other Churches. And this being so, no more is there any
Schism, when the Congregationals are Independent on other Churches, and on
their Synods, but when their Churches are so among themselves.

4. THERE is no Schism among several particular Churches that agree in one and
the fame faith, and discipline, as are those of Metz and Sedan, but do their
own business apart independantly, not only on one another, but likewise on the
Synods. It Is with Independent Churches, or with several other particular
Churches, as with several families, or Neighbourhoods, or those that are pretty
distant the one from the other, who may all be good friends, and live in good
Intelligence together, without any thing of Schism, or rupture between them,
and yet every one does their own particular business by themselves.

5. THE Congregational men are no more guilty of Schism, when they form to
themselves Congregations, distinct from Parishes contrary to the command of the
Magistrate; it is a disobedience, not to a National Church which Jesus Christ
has not instituted, much less invested with either Jurisdiction or power to
make Laws in matters of Religion; but to the Magistrate, whom to disobey is not
Schism, but a crime of laesoe Majestaetis, or rebellion; but yet it ceases to
be that too, when it acts only from this principle of obeying God rather than
men.

NOW this clearing up of the Nature of Schism, which strongly establishes the
Independancy of the Churches, and makes it altogether reasonable, does not
destroy the Confederation of the Churches into one body, even under a national
Synod, when for the mutual preservation of these Churches against a common
Enemy that persecutes them, they are constrained to make but one body of State
or of Churches, such as is the Confederation of our Churches in France. But
then that necessity does not destroy the natural liberty of every particular
Church to be Independent: it is a Confederation established with prudence, in
that manner as was that of the Cities of Achaida, and as is at this day that of
the Low Countries, and of the Swizers; the conjunction, of which into one body,
and under one and the same jurisdiction does not divest any Town or Province of
their natural freedom and liberty to be Independent on one another.

THERE is however this temper, and menage to be observed in this Religious
Confederation, that it ought to be made, not by virtue of the Power of binding
and loosing, and of the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, which it is pretended
that God has committed to Pastors, or Synods; but by virtue of a confederated
discipline, which is in the place of a Magistrate. Also the Council of Monsieur
Amyraule should be observed, and it is the same that the Cities of Achaia
observed before, viz. that nothing should pass in the general Assembly, but
what has been first reviewed, and approved of by every particular Church.

AND this is that wherein the prudence of our first Reformers in France have
been wanting, when they sat up a discipline by virtue of an Ecclesiastical
power distinct from that of the Magistrate, and from that which has its
operation upon the heart by the Ministry of the word; and of a power fastened
to the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and to that of binding and loosing: by
virtue of which power, they depose and excommunicate, that is to say, as
Monsieur Claude says, they deliver up a person to the Devil: but they also
deliver him to him in the name and Authority of Jesus Christ, that so the
people may not imagine this power to be that of the Magistrate, or of the
confederate discipline, but of Jesus Christ, the Mediator, and King of his
Church, and by virtue of the power that he exercises over it, and of which the
Pastors and Ministers are the depositers.

AS to those who blame as much the separation of the Independants, as that of
the Donatists, the Novatians, and Luciferians, it is ill grounded: the vice of
the Donatists was in that they owned no other Church of Jesus Christ in the
World than theirs: for they rebaptized those who came from the Catholic Church
to them: the Independants are far from these thoughts and practices: they do as
those who having a particular care of their health, withdraw into a better
place, and sounder Air, but yet they do not think, but that they may do very
well in places, where the Air is not so good.

BEFORE I go to another Chapter, I shall take notice that the result of the
thoughts, and of the practices of the Congregationals, their Churches and their
Pastors, do come to these two Maxims.

1. THAT to establish peace and true Religion in the World, and among
Christians; we must go back to the Materia prima of the Congregational
Churches, which is, that every person, and every Society has the liberty to
deliberate and consult about the choice of a Religion, and of the way to serve
God; and to take upon that point the counsel of wise and sincere persons,
provided that that counsel tends not to Irreligion, and to some Establishment
of such maxims which shock the natural Notions concerning the existence of a
God, his Providence, the Immortality of the soul, the necessity of a Divine
Worship; provided also that the manner which every person, and every Church
has chosen to govern it self by, does not trouble the State in which one
lives; unless that trouble happen by accident, in the manner that Jesus Christ
says of the Gospel, which excites troubles, and brings Wars and contentions
into the World.

2. THAT this maxim of a national Church in every Territory, with an uniformity
of Doctrine, and discipline, distinct from the civil Tribunals in jurisdiction
and officers, has introduced the Pope into the World; that it has been, it
is, and it will be the cause that there never will be a Church in the World in
its true purity, unless Almighty God reserves some among the Congregational
Churches.

CHAP. VII. That the Congregational way has been practiced in all Ages of the
World.
I Could easily show that for above this four thousand years before Jesus
Christ, and even during the height of Popery, and in the bosom of the Church
of Rome, God has always reserved some true Worshippers of Jesus Christ, by
the way of Congregational Assemblies; there were an infinite number of them in
the Roman Empire, during the persecution that was set on foot by the Arrians,
and when, as St. Jerome says, all the World were Arrians.

BUT to come more particularly to the thing; they have had Independent Churches
in all times, and in all places, before the Law, and under the Law, in the time
of Jesus Christ, and of the Apostles, and after the Apostles, there were of
them in the time of Exos the Son of Seth; for so must be understood the last
Verse of the fourth Chapter of Genesis, when men began to call upon the name of
the Lord: that from his time the Children of God began to form themselves into
particular Congregations, and to separate from those that ran after the World,
and its vanities, and to be called the Children of God or of Jehova, and to pay
their adorations to him as to their Creator and Benefactor. The family of Noah
and his Ark was a Congregational Church, which God had separated from all the
rest of the World. The family of Job, that of Abraham, Josuah, Samuel, were
Independent Churches. Palestine was full of them, as Maimonides tells us, and
they were truly Independent, because they neither had any thing to do with the
national Church, nor with its tribunal, nor Sanhedrim. And so likewise the
Guides, who were called Prophets, Seers, and Doctors were not of the tribe of
Levi, but of another tribe: and it is from those that the Doctors of the Law
came, which Jesus Christ speaks of, the Scribes, the Pharisees, and the Esseni.
They called their Societies (...), Colleges, houses of Prayer, and Synagogues,
where they did not attend upon the Levitical Worship, but on Prayer,
exhortation, and the expounding of the Law, and we see the first establishment
of them in the first Verses of the three and twentieth Chapter of Leviticus,
they were distant one from the other the space of a Sabbath day's Journey, they
were nearer one another whilst they stayed in the Wilderness, and were then
called Tents, as were those of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, which were also
Independent Churches. David calls the Congregation that he frequented,
Sanctuary, where he consulted the mouth of God about his being healed from his
prejudices against the dispensation of God toward the generation of good men,
who were often times under the Rod, and in affliction; whilst the wicked were
in prosperity: and in the 87 Psalm, he speaks of the esteem that he had for
those Congregations or houses of Prayer which he did set forth by the Tents of
Jacob, although that which he had for the Ark, or for the gates of Zion, and
for his propitiatory, were greater. To conconclude, the seven thousand men,
that had not bowed their knee to Baal, were Independent Churches; for it cannot
be thought that so great a number of persons could assemble together in one
place, and that too in a time of so great persecution.

THERE were of them in the time of Jesus Christ; for the Apostolical College
was an Independent Church, and in his time, two or three persons assembled in
his name, made a Church, as also says Tertullian, ubi tres, ibi Ecclesia,
etiamsi Laici. Immediately after the Ascension of Jesus Christ, the first
Assembly of Christians in Jerusalem was Independent; and that where Cornelius
and his family were assembled, was a Congregational Church, of which St. Peter
was the Pastor for some days. Philemon had one of them in his house. Those of
whom Pliny the younger speaks, Epist. 97. libr. 10. were others of them.
Affirmabant hanc fuisse summam vel erroris, vel culpae, quod soliti essent,
stato die, ante lucem convenire, carmenque Christo quasi Deo dicere secum
invicem, seque Sacramento ne in Scelus aliquod obstringere, sed ne furta, ne
latrocinia, ne Adulteria committerent, ne sidem fallerent, ne depositunt
appellati abnegarent. Tertullian. libr. de Coron. Milit. adds that it was the
Custom in those Assemblies before day, to Celebrate the holy Supper. The
Independent Churches of England, at least some of them, are formed after this
Model, and exact from their Members, that they shall abstain from those crimes
of which Pliny makes mention.

NOW that custom of the Christians in the time of Pliny, which exacted from
the Members of their Churches, a life perfectly exemplary, stops the mouths of
those, who turn into rallery, the Independent Assemblies, because they only do
admit of those that are holy, and in whom they find the marks and signs of
Regeneration, and who oblige themselves by Oath, or verbal promise, to abstain
from those crimes that Pliny here has reckoned up, or to undergo the Penalty
set, according to the discipline of the Church.

ALSO that custom of the Christians testifies, that besides the numerous
Churches, as for instance that of Corinth, which consisted of several
thousands, where it could not be otherwise but that there must be a good number
of Heretics, and debauched and loose persons, there were established other
Congregational, taken out of the great Church, whereof the Members were more
holy and more Orthodox; and who resembled those whom Pliny speaks of, and those
Stations which Tertullian mentions: where beside the public Assemblies, some
families set a part by themselves one day of the week to fasting, to prayer and
other exercises of Piety, and also to the Celebration of the holy Supper: and
this is what they frequently practiced, and with good edification: for it is
with small Churches, as with small States, little Republics, Families,
particular Synods of twenty five or thirty persons; wherein it is much more
easy to establish a good order, and to bring those who are of it unto the
practice of good manners and life, than in great States, in great Churches, and
Ecumenical Synods, and such as are National, wherein Ambition, Envy, Factions,
Avarice, (...)* and (...), and corruptions reign, and cannot but do so. Strada
says very judiciously. In consessu plurium Senatorum, aut Consitiariorum,
parts su^s magis agit Ambitio, quam in paucorum. Lucian, libro de Artibus
dolosis, in speaking of great Assemblies, says, the greatest Bawlers have the
greatest advantage in such Assemblies, because those who understand nothing of
the matter, and to be sure, are always of the greatest number, judge of things
by the outside, and so give the cause for g^i^ed, to those who are the most
resolute and clamorous.

THESE considerations do furnish me with several others, which confirm me in
this Opinion that the Congregational way was that which God made use of, in the
Ancient Church, to convert to the faith, those, who were not Christians, but by
outward profession, from a State of nature to a State of Grace: and that the
way which they take at this day, when one person preaches to several thousands
is neither properly, nor efficaciously that which gains souls to Jesus Christ.
And this will appear by the opposition of the Government at this day in the
Church, to that of the ancient Primitive Christians. I believe, there will be
found but very little conformity, not only, in the persons that attend upon
the Ministry, but also in the places, and manner, where, and how it is
performed. Heretofore the Bishop alone in public did execute the office of
preaching, and the other duties of the holy Ministry; for he left those of
lesser consequence to the Deacons; but at this day just the Reverse is
practiced, and maintained. It Is now only the Priest that preaches in public in
the Assemblies of several thousands. And likewise as the extent of the place
unto which the Ministry of these at this day is confined, is called (...), so
it was also heretofore that of the Bishop, and he most commonly dated his
Letters thus ex mea paraecia. Which, by the way, plainly shows us, that the
Intendance and Government of the Bishop in the Primitive Church, was only over
a Town or Villa, which they called a Parish or a Suburb, for also every Villa
and Borough had their Chorepiscopum. Monsieur Larroque, without thinking of
it, makes it clear and evident, that it was the Ancient practice, for the
Bishop alone to have the charge of preaching in the greatest, and most numerous
Assemblies, because the Bishops being aged and sick, they called to his help
and assistance, not the Priests of the Bishop's Presbytry, but some neighbor
Bishops. He tells us of one Nareissus, Bishop of Jerusalem, who, being a
hundred and sixteen years old, had for his Coadjutor Alexander, that had been
Bishop of Capadocia: and of one Theoctenus, Bishop of Caesarea, that shared the
care of his Episcopacy with Anatolius, who, in truth, was not as yet Bishop,
but who* was then consecrated and called Bishop: which plainly shows was that
a Priest could not be his Coadjutor. This is also confirmed by the example of
Valerius Bishop of Hippo, who being old and decayed, took not one of those who
was to continue in the Presbytry for his Coadjutor; but he took Saint Austin,
who was to be his Successor, and who also was called Bishop of Hippo during the
life of Valerius.

AS to those of the Presbytry, who were called Deacons, as they were the
Creatures of the Bishop, and wholly at his Devotion, so likewise their Ministry
was that which is spoken of in the 6. of the Acts, which was not that of
preaching in public.

AS for the Priests or Elders, who were not Deacons, they did not ordinarily
preach in public assemblies, whence it happened, that we read of very few
Homilies composed and made by the Priests. Their Ministry was concluded and
bound within the apartment or paraecia of the Bishop, and, as I have already
said, it was less fixed, and more Itinerant, for they went from house to house:
there was not a day past but that the Priest, or Elder, visited the good
Families, went to prayers there* expounded the word, and administered the holy
Sacrament of the Lords Supper to them: and as for Baptism, it was most commonly
celebrated by the Deacons in great Assemblies, or in great Churches, at the
entrance of which, the Fonts were placed, or the Baptisterium.

IT IS true, the Bishops did frequently oppose those private assemblies and by
their Synods and Canons (so far as that the Synod of Gangr^ anatheniatized
them) called in derision those that frequented them A^^phales* and condemned
even those that communicated with them. They would do the like also to persons
of quality that kept in their houses Priests, and Oratories. It Is true also,
Saint Chrysostom would have the Lords Supper to be as public as Baptism, and
that both should be celebrated and performed in the eyes of the whole World.

BUT because it would scarcely be believed, that one Bishop singly, as Cyril of
Alexandria, Cyril of Jerusalem, and Saint Chrysostom of Constantinople, could
preach in public one Lord's day, to above a hundred thousand Auditors that
were in each of their Villa's; they say, that of necessity several of the
Presbytry must perform the office of Preachers in those other places of the
City where the Bishop did not preach: and this appears by the Homilies of Saint
Chrysostom, ad populum Antiochenum, when he was not Bishop: That is true, but
also those Priests had no fixed places, no cure, nor certain, parish, over which
they were pastors, because the Bishop himself was the Curate of the Parish, so
that the Priests were only the Vicars of the Bishops, in the same manner as
Nicholas. 1. called the Bishop of Germany, and of France, Suos Episcopos and
Vicarios. Those Priests were, as the Deacons at the devotion of the Bishop, and
were entirely his Creatures, and they might rather (I am sure better) be called
the Ministers of the Bishop, than of Jesus Christ, or of the Church, as it
appears by the six and twentieth Canon of the Synod of Agde, for they were like
persons taken upon hire, and to whom the Bishop gave Salary for their pains and
trouble.

AFTER all these discoveries and Manifestations, there is no doubt but that the
Churches in the time of the Apostles and for a long while after, were
congregational, and Independent on Synodes, since that even every Family of the
most considerable, and better sort was a Church, or, at least, they had one
among them, where the exercizes of Piety were regularly performed every day,
and where, during their repast, the holy Scripture was read, as we may learn
from the first Epistle to Timothy, Chapter the IV. verse the fifth. For every
Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with
thanksgiving: For it is sanctified by the word of God, and prayer. And where
before they departed, or, indeed, rose from Table, they received the Communion
as Tertullian tells us in his book de Corona Militis, declaring that this
practice was agreeing with the institution of Jesus Christ, as it was also
practiced much in the 3. Age in the time of Saint Cyprian, as he tells us in
one of his Epistles, Quotidie communicamus. Although several families, every
Lord's day, made very great and Numerous Assemblies, where in most solemn
manner they attended upon prayer, preaching, and celebration of the holy
Supper, yet he, who performed the Action, was called Primus Presbyter, (...),
and Episcopus. To which it seems Saint Paul has respect in his 1. Epistle to
Timothy. 5. 17. let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double
honor, especially they who labor in the word and Doctrine; where, though, in
the words, he does not speak of two kinds of Pastors, or Ministers, distinct in
rank and dignity, nor even in office, yet notwithstanding he does insinuate in
that place, that in the Presbytry, and in the Company of the Ministers of Jesus
Christ, named indifferently Bishops, Elders, and Presbyters, there were some
that were Deacons, and whose gifts were less for praying and preaching in
public.

FOR though I believe that the Apostles did not establish diverse degrees of
Pastors, and that in their time, and a long while after, they were called
indifferently Bishops, Priests, Elders, sacerdotes, Ministers, and Deacons: And
that the same Deacons bore a part in the Ministry of the word, with the rest,
as it is seen, for Example, in Saint Stephen, and Phillip, and by what Clemens
Alexandrinus tells us in the sixth book of his strom ites, and Mr. James Capel
in his Catechism: yet it is most certain that from the second age, they were
distinguished in names and offices, that the first Priest, or Bishop, attended
more peculiarly upon preaching in public, and the Priests and Deacons upon
the functions of lesser consequence, as almsgiving etc. from whence it is,
that we read so often of the first Bishops of Rome, that such a one created so
many Priests, so many Deacons, and that Hyggen in the year 141. created fifteen
Priests, fifteen Deacons, and six Bishops. That Eleutherius in the year 184
ordained 12 Priests. 8 Deacons, and 15 Bishops, not to serve in the Church of
Rome, but in other places, where the Bishop, who had ordained them, was to
attend upon the preaching in public, and the Priests and Deacons upon the
other functions of the holy Ministry; for their Ministry was less fixed; they
went to break bread from house to house, they instructed, they comforted, they
confirmed Christians, and those whom they called Fideles in the profession of
the Christian Religion, and in the Practice of Piety, and drew over Jews and
Gentiles to them, and they baptized them, adding every day some or other to the
Church of Jesus Christ to be saved. In a word, they formed almost as many
independent Churches, as there were families, but which then did not constitute
a Communion distinct from that of the same Fideles in the greater and more
numerous Assemblies, and where they assisted, not only at the h^aring of the
word, but also at the participation of the holy supper, and all the sacred
Ceremonies, as Mounsieur le Sueur tells us.

I must needs make one observation here which will be of no mean consequence,
as to what I have said, about the diversity of the names of Bishop, Priest,
Elder, Sacerdote, and Deacon in the same Ministry, against those who would fain
persuade us, that not only this Intendance of a Bishop over the Priests, but
also the prerogative that they attribute to themselves of having alone the
Authority and the right to ordain Pastors, is of divine right, and by the
Institution of the Apostles; I must needs observe, I say, that since the words,
and the Offices have been distinguished, Christian Antiquity never thought this
Intendance and Prerogative to be of divine right* because it was in the liberty
of a Bishop to abandon the order or office of Bishop, without quitting the
office of Priest, or of Minister of Jesus Christ, and indeed without being able
to do it, unless he were constrained to it by the sentence of deposition. They
did deprive themselves then of an humane, arbitrary, and Mutable order, unto
which they were called by men, but they could not divest themselves of that
which they had received from Jesus Christ. That was the Judgment of the Council
of Ancyra in the year 314. which having deposed some persons from the
Episcopacy* lest them in the Presbytry. This is what the sixth Ecumenical
Council did, Canon twenty, which deposed a Bishop, but did not take from him
the Presbytry; so that if there was then an Indelible Caracter, it was not that
of Bishop, but that of Tresbyter, and this is the farther confirmed, and more
strongly, by this consideration, that, as it was an Usurpation, or at least a
Right purely humane* when one of the Members of the Presbytry, who was called
Bishop, attributed to himself alone the right and the office of Preaching in
public, and not of communicating it to others, but only as far as he pleased:
The same Judgment ought to be made of this Intendance over Priests, and this
prerogative to ordain; and to conclude, that neither Episcopacy, nor the power
to ordain, nor that to preach in public which one person reserved peculiarly
to himself, were of Christ's Institution.

THIS is, if I am not mistaken, an observation, which has not as yet by any
been thought on, but which is the unravelling of all the difficulties that
those great men Mounsieur Daille the Father, Mounsieur Larroque etc. On one
side, and Mounsieur Pearson Bishop of Chester on the other, have formed
concerning either the Establishment, or the overthrow of Episcopacy. And here
now is the Resolution of the words of Saint Jerome, which have put so many
people on the rack, and have spent both so much precious time and paper. Quid
facit Episcopus, quod non facit presbyter, except^ ordinatione? Which words
Marsillius de Padoua understands of the power that the Bishop reserved alone to
himself, by a right purely humane, to regulate the Affairs of the Church;
because it would be a thing altogether absurd, to make Saint Jerome say, that
Jesus Christ had in all things equalled the Priest to the Bishop, except the
power to ordain. And now also you may see, by all these declarations and
discoveries, a very strong establishment of the Congregational way. But I now
will return from this digression to pursue the subject I left off for it.

THE conduct and Government of the Christians under the time of Persecution,
and before that of Constantine, differed very much from the manner which was
observed when the Emperors were Christians, and when they assembled together,
both more publicly, and in greater numbers, enjoying their full liberty. As a
Rigorous discipline under those Christian Emperors could not be practiced but
upon a small number, in great Towns, as Rome, Antioch, Alexandria,
Canstantinople, etc. Most of the persons, who could not be distinguished one
from another, in the Crowd and Multitude, and on whom they could lay nothing by
way of reproach, either entered into no discipline, and were neither
Poenitentes, nor Catechumeni, or else they passed for those who were called
fideles, and whom they never so much as questioned whether they were baptized
or not: For Saint Ambrose, who was looked upon as a very good man, and one of
the fideles that frequented the Religious Assemblies both in public and
private, was neither in orders, nor baptized, when the people of Milan took
him, and carried him away as a holy body to be a Bishop. Will they say that
after he was a Bishop, he passed through all the degrees of discipline, or
penitence, and that he was a Catechumen, and afterward a fidelis? which name
was given only to those, who were called Lay, or Secular persons. And the
example of Constantine the great, who was baptized, at the very point and
moment of his death, and that of Satyrus the brother of Ambrose, and of
Valentinian, whom that Father so highly commends, and who died before they were
baptized, are a very strong proof and argument for that which I here maintain.

NOW, those of the faithful who were so, rather in reality, than the name, did
not under those Christian Emperors, quit their good custom of converting
their houses, and their families into so many little Churches; they performed
there the same exercises, of Piety, both during their repasts, and out of them.

BUT I must here make one remark by the way upon the passage of Saint Paul to
Timothy, the 1 Epist 4 Chap. and 5 Verse. which I lately mentioned: that that
good practice of reading the holy Scriptures during their repasts, succeeded
both a good and an evil custom, among the Heathen of quality and condition,
according to the disposition of persons, and according to their manners: for
the debauchees during theirs, had, as Pliny the Younger tells us, their
Moriones, and their Cynaedos, qui inerrabant Mensis, to pass away the time, and
please the Company. But those who were serious and more composed, as Cicero,
Cratippus, Seneca, Pliny the Elder, Euphrates, and Spurinna, had their
Anagnostes, who read to them the Golden Sentences of Pythagoras, and of the
other Sages of Greece* It doubtless therefore thus came, that the Heathen
families which were of the disposition of these latter, being come over to
Christianity, as was that of Cornelius the Centurion, Publius the Proconsul,
Philemon, and Lydia, took this good custom, not only to have a Church in their
house, but to practice there all the Religious duties as well during their
repasts as out of them.

THIS comes very near to the Idea of the Congregational way, which is to be
considered in two respects, either when their Pastors, and their people retire
and withdraw from the crowd of the world, I mean, from the Worldlings, to live
continually in the contemplation, and meditation of the works of Creation, of
Providence, and of Redemption, in the devotion, and elevation of the Soul to
God: or else, when those same persons do form to themselves Religious
assemblies, distinct from the national Church, and Parochial assemblies; in a
word, when they are distinct from the Ecclesiastical Government, which is of
the same extent, as that of the Civil, that is established by Laws; though, in
this last respect, their separation be not an absolute and entire abandoning of
the profession of the doctrine, and life of those who follow the Religion of
their Country; but of those who condemn that carriage, that doctrine and
Discipline, which retained the most of the Apostolical. It Is a separating of
the good Seed from the Chaff, whereof there is but too much in parochial
Assemblies, where one is as much, if not more, a Christian, by the chance of
birth, of place, and of custom, than by any inward principle, or design
fratned: for otherwise the people of the Independent Church, and their Pastors,
are no more backward, than the Episcopal men or the Presbyterians, to
participate with them in the Ministry of the parochial Churches, provided they
do not force them there to practice such things as they do really believe from
their Consciences, to be contrary to the word of God, and provided also that
they permit them to believe, that if the Churches reformed from Popery, where
all sorts of persons are received, are the true Churches of Jesus Christ, in
which Salvation may be had, they ought to have no less good and charitable
opinion of the Independent Churches which are come out from them.

FOR these reasons, all disinteressed persons, that have a zeal for all the
true Worshippers of Jesus Christ indifferently, in what way of communion
soever, whither Episcopal, or Presbyterian, or Congregational, may easily be
persuaded, that this last retains more of the Apostolic, because it is not
only the Cream and best of the others, and a part of that good Seed that has
the least of chaff in it; but also because it has more goodness, love, and
Charity, in the esteem of those who follow it, for the way of communion with
others, and of those who are of it, then the others have for the Congregational
way. It Is very rarely seen that any one of the Congregation does not love all
good men, of what Communion soever they be, and that they do not speak of them
as of the true Churches of Jesus Christ; whereas even the more sober, and
honester party of the Episcopal men, and some of the Presbyterians, are so
strongly prepossessed with prejudices against those of Congregations, that they
are in their account no better than Hypocrites, Schismatics, and men of
strange Enthusiasms.

A Learned Lawyer having cast his eye upon the matter contained in this
Chapter, assured me, that one Mr. Hubbart a grave Barrester, in a Cause between
Colt and Glover plaintiffs on the one part, and the Bishop of Gloucester
defendant on the other, makes it out, that the Assemblies in the Primitive
Church were Congregational. He has also acquainted me with an Ordinance of
Canutus KING of England, in the year one thousand and sixteen, which began
thus, hae sunt sanctiones* for the establishment of peace and Justice, where it
is clear that beside the Ecclesiastical National Government, established
according to the Model of the civil, the Towns were full of little private
Congregations, which assembled together voluntarily in the Towns, and which the
King permitted, whilst neither Justice, nor the public peace, were
interrupted. He pressed me likewise mightily to insist upon the definition which
the Church of England made of the Church in its Confession of Faith made in the
year, 1562. Article the XIX. because it is absolutely conformable to that which
the Congregational Churches give of theirs, to be, as I have already a little
touched, an Assembly of persons together in one place, to attend upon the
hearing of the word of God, and upon the Administration of the Sacraments.

CHAP. VIII. Of the great Benefits and Advantages that come from the
Establishment of the Congregational way in the World.
THUS you see we are insensibly fallen upon the conformity of the carriage and
government of the Congregational assemblies, with that of the Primitive
Christians, for their smalness of number, and for the way and manner of gaining
souls to Jesus Christ, by Prayer, by Exhortation, and by Preaching, which they
do to a few persons, or a few Families; as when their Elders inculcated into
them every day, and line upon line, the necessity of leading holy and exemplary
lives: so that the Christian people made far greater progress in
Sanctification, by the means and helps of those Elders, than when they assisted
at public assemblies, where the severities of discipline, and the degrees of
penitence, through which but very few persons went, seemed to retain more of
the affected devotion, of pride, and of worldly pomp, than of sincerity, and
where the fruit of the Bishop's preaching, was like to that, of which S.
Chrysostom speaks in one of his Homilies, which resembles the water that is
thrown in Buckets upon a great number of Bottles, which have a strait Neck, and
where there goes in but a few drops, whereas the fruit of the exhortations
which are made in private to a few, is the effect of him, who having taken the
bottles, will fill them by degrees one after another. Beside that, it is
impossible, that a Bishop, or other person, who shares out all his time between
his Chamber-studies, and preaching in public, and who has some thousands of
persons under charge, it is impossible, I say, that he can suffice, and attend
upon the Instruction of all those Auditors, and of every one of them in
particular, which is most easy to be done by the way that the Pastors of
Independent Churches take, whereof every Congregation is not, at the most,
above two hundred persons, and who are also eased and helped by their
Coadjutors in the work of the holy Ministry, so that this kind of
Congregational way, seems to be the accomplishment of the Prophesy concerning
the Covenant of Grace which God was to make in the lest times with his people,
where there shall be no more need to have recourse to the Bishop, or to his
Curate for receiving instruction, because every person, who is in the Covenant
of Grace (as the greatest number of those who compose those Congregations do
belong to that Covenant,) shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, and
the Pastor himself shall go to visit his sheep and take a particular care of
them: So likewise this is the way of the Pastors of the little flock of Jesus
Christ to whom he will give the Kingdom.

THERE are also other Considerations which confirm me absolutely in this
opinion that God, in a more especial manner, approves of the Congregational
way: One is, that, most an end, in all others, the Ministers are influenced by
worldly interest, by ambition, and the desire of ruling, that its Establishment
could never be made without noise, and without the opposition of the Magistrate
and the people: for they have been always against this erection of a National
tribunal Independent on the Magistrates, who never had given their consent to
it, till after the advocates and pleaders for this national tribunal had been
indefatigably buzzing into their ears these fair and specious Remonstrances;
that it was the voice of God, and of Jesus Christ that the world should be
governed by two Collateral powers. This is what the Decretals made the Kings
and the people to believe in the ninth age, and they strongly insisted that the
Bishop of Rome was to be at the head of the Ecclesiastical power, and to
prescribe laws to them by the Ministry of his Clergy for the regulating of
Religion, and for the Affairs of the Church. And this is what Calvin also made
those to believe, who left the Church of Rome, when he erected a Tribunal for
the matters of Religion, in which the Magistrates should not be seen in the
quality of Magistrates, but only as Members of the consistory: But yet a
Tribunal that should be as much invested with Incontestability, and with a
power not to appeal from it, as that of Rome is with Infallibility And this is
what Calvin carried by main force, not only against the will of the Magistrate,
and of the people of Geneva, but against the practice of all Churches, and
against the Judgment of all the Divines of his time.

BUT it has not been so with the Establishment of the Congregational way, to
which the people have had as great an Inclination, and natural forwardness as
the Pastors themselves. Which has been seen in England for above this forty
years. For of more than sixscore persons, who made up the Assembly of
Ministers, there was above a hundred of them for the Presbyterian Government,
and about eight or ten for the Congregational way, and two only, Coleman, and
Lightfoot, for the opinion of Erastus, Yet nevertheless, when it came to the
Execution and practice, there was not one of ten thousand people that would
submit to the Presbyterian Government. And one of them, who was the most
Eminent, confessed to me, that being Pastor of the greatest Parish in London,
he was never able to establish in it a consistory, nor find any that would be
of it but a pitiful Scotch Tailor. This difficulty was not seen as to the
Congregational way, for whereas only the Pastors were for the Presbyterian way,
there were proportionably, as many people as Ministers, who joined in the
Assemblies of the Congregational way. Which they did with more heat and fervor
than the Parliament would have had them; in so much that they were forced to
publish a Declaration, by which they exhorted the people to put off the
gathering of Churches, till the Parliament had made a more public regulation
thereof. As to the opinion of Erastus, though it was not approved in the
Assembly but by two Divines, it had notwithstanding the applause of most of the
Magistrates, of the learned and more illuminated, who were not of the Gown;
which discovers.

1. THAT Interest is the Tool, and Engine that moves most men in the world;
and that, if the Magistrates were for an Intendance, which the Presbyterians
would take away from them; these were no less in love with, and eager of it.

2. THAT it is very probable, that the Advocates of the Congregational way were
sincere, whilst their number had a just proportion of Ministers, Magistrates,
and People that were much for it.

I proved in the sixth Chapter of my Jugulum causae, that of these two truths,
the first was put beyond all peradventure, that Totus Mundus exercet
histrionem, that the greatest men do often times mix some grain of wordly
interest with that of Heaven, adding not the Vtile to the honestum, but the
honestum to the Vtile; espousing, or quitting their Opinion according as they
are actuated by the moving principle of sua cuique Vtilitas, as Tacitus speaks.
For they resemble Pope Pius II d. who, being a Cardinal submited the Pope to
the Council, but he changed his Opinion, as soon as ever he came to be Pope
himself. Much about twenty years since, the Learned Dr. Stillingfleet preferred
the Presbyterian Government to the Episcopal; but now he has had several fat
benefices bestowed upon him, and he is advanced to the Deanery of S. Paul,
Episcopacy is most excellent, both in his esteem and opinion, and in his
writings.

THIS way is so much the more excellent, just, and reasonable, as it has a
Compatibility with the Government of a National Church, which makes but one
entire body with that of the Republic, as under the legal Economy; whereas
the Government of a National Church, distinct and Independent upon that of the
Republic, is not compatible with any government, neither with that of the
Magistrate, nor with that of the Congregational Churches; though the government
of this latter might be compatible with all kinds of Government, if it would be
suffered; for a multitude of small Congregational Churches is as much
compatible with the Civil State, as is a multitude of Families; because neither
the one nor the other do form to themselves a body by their deputies which
establishes a Tribunal distinct from, and independent on that of the Civil
State; whereas the Popish, Episcopal, and Presbyterian Government, erects a
Tribunal in every Territory independent on all others. Calvin gave the first
Model of it in Geneva; Volui, says he, ut Judicium Ecclesiasticum disticium
esset a Civili: and he makes these two Tribunals so independent, one on the
other, as hotly to maintain, that he would rather suffer death or banishment,
than permit the appeals of Consistorial Sentences to the Magistrate.

TO be short, the Congregational way has this advantage over all the other
establishments of Religion, both the National, Popish, Episcopal and
Presbyterian Church: these cannot subsist but with a subordination of
Consistories, Colloquies, Provincial and National Synods; things which are not
practicable, but under Secular Powers, either which may approve them, or else
may tolerate them; whereas the Congregational way subsists not only under good
Emperors, as were Constantine the Great, and Theodosius the first, but also
under the Pagan Dioclesians, and under an Arrian Constantius: for what
persecution soever may be raised against this way, nothing hinders, but that a
Minister who watches over a small flock, may go to visit the Members from house
to house, to administer spiritual pasture, and food to them, for their
nourishment and growth in grace. To conclude, the excellence of this way
appears in this, that it is far less exposed to persecution than any other, and
that the Presbyterian, and the Episcopal, do fall into it when the Magistrate
is contrary to them.

CHAP. IX. That the most Judicious Divines of France and other places, without
any thoughts of it, do naturally fall into the Hypotheses of the Congregational
Churches. Of the Judgment which ought to be made of their Confession of Faith,
of their discipline, and conduct.
I Could also streng hen all that I have said by the testimony of our new
Doctors, by that of Mounsieur Rivet, Mounsieur Mestr^zat, Monsieur Pajon,
Monsieur Claude, and others, showing that they undesignedly fall into the
Opinion and Judgment of the Independants in laying down.

1. THAT there is no other visible Church* of Divine right, than that which is
assembled together in one place, to attend upon the preaching, and hearing of
the word, upon prayer, and the participation of the Sacraments: and it is in
this manner that the Confession of the Church of England, Article XIX, defines
the Church.

2. THAT such a Church is Independent either on other Churches, or on Synods;
that it may very well take from one or other, advice and Counsel, but it ought
not to submit to their Commands.

3. THAT no person can be forced to be a Christian, nor to join with one
Church, rather than with another.

4. THAT this Church has liberty to do its own business its self; or to
connect into one body, in the same manner as the Churches of France have done;
that it has the liberty to retire from that connection, or confederacy, as the
Churches of Metz and Sedan have done.

5. THAT this Church to which the Christian is joined, is obliged to seek, and
to preserve a strict communion of Faith and Charity with the other Churches,
but yet has a liberty of having a separate discipline.

6. THAT this church ought to receive the fraternal admonitions of the other
Churches, and of their Synods, in the same manner as a Synod of Africa acted
upon the dissension which happened between Innocent the first, Bishop of Rome,
and the Church of Alexandria, as Barlaam recites it.

I could also find these maxims in the Writings of the English Divines, and
show that in treating of the nature of the Church, or of any other matter of
divinity, they have kept the language of the Independants, or at least have
approved of their practices. The Learned Jackson, Chap. 14. of the Church,
says, that for these two causes one may lawfully frame Congregations distinct
from others, to have a separate Communion.

1. WHEN they impose such practices as are contrary to Faith and Charity.

2. WHEN they forbid ways that are apparently most edifying, and tend more to
the increase and strength of Piety and Salvation, than those which are now in
use.

Dr. Stillingfleet assures us in page 109. of his Ireni^u^n, that when in one
and the same Territory, Judgments and Churches are different the one from the
other, a Christian ought to join to that which retains most of the Evangelical
purity. He is bound to adhere to that Church that retains most of the
Evangelical purity. And in page 116. he says that a Christian is obliged to
separate from Churches, although Orthodox in the essential matters, in case
they retain some mixture of corruption in the practice. His Words are, a
mixture of corruption as to the practice. I could find the opinion of this
Learned Doctor in several places up and down Monsieur Claude his Book, where
having laid down to us for a principle, that the power of the Keys, and that
of binding and loosing, only is reposed in the faithful people of God, he draws
this Conclusion from it, that private Churches ought to get to themselves such
Members as they know to be more particularly the faithful, and to remove from
it the worldly persons to whom God has not affixed that power of binding and
loosing, nor committed the management of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven.

I could ascend as far as Luther and Melancton to justify the separation, even
from Churches that have not any error in their Doctrine. Luther, in cap. 4.
Geneseos. Etiamsi praeterea nihil peccatum esset in Doctrina Pontificia, justas
tamen fuisse causas cur ab Ecclesia Romana nos sejungeremus.

BUT the Independants have reasonably outvied Luther, and the other Doctors,
for they hold though the Church of Rome should not have any defects either in
Doctrine or Discipline, yet they were not to be condemned for separating from
Rome, and for being independent on the Romish Church and her Synods, more then
to find fault with the Church of Sedan, which is separate from that of Metz, in
regard of any dependence one upon the others, or upon the Synods that were
common with them. In a word, it is a thing as natural, and as reasonable, for a
Church to divide it self into two other Churches, which may each do their own
business, separately, as for one family to be divided into two others, whereof
each has the liberty to govern themselves according to their own way and fancy.

THUS you have in all this discourse, if I am not much mistaken, the
Justification of the carriage and government of the Congregational way, and
very clear and full proofs of their conformity with the Ancient Christians: As
also their Confession does evidence that which they have with the Apostolical,
in a more plain, free, expressive, and incontestable manner than any of the
confessions that are collected in the Corpus, or Syntagma Confessianum, so far
are they from being the work of persons distracted, and Enthusiasts, as some of
our Divines have fancied, that you might altogether, with as much reason, put
among the productions of Fools and mad men, the three most excellent and
consummated pieces according to the Judgment that Alexander More has made of
them, the Epistle of Calvin before his Institutions, that of Thuanus before his
History, and the Preface of Casaubon in his Edition of Polybius.

'TWILL, no doubt, be expected that I should add the order which is observed
and practiced in the Independent Churches to their confession which ought to
follow: but as they profess a perfect harmony among themselves: so likewise
they do not believe this same absolute necessity, as to that which concerns
discipline: for excepting some few Apostolical, and perpetual Rules which admit
no change according to times and places, concerning the equality of Pastors*
that choice that every Church is to make of its Pastor (in which Monsieur
Mestrezat and Monsieur Claude make the true ordination to consist) the solemn
benediction of that Pastor by fasting and prayers, and the refusal they make of
their Ministries and of their Members, which some call Excommunication, and
deposition; excepting, I say, these acts, their order is to do all things
decently, and in order, in the Church, as Saint Paul requires. But they are
governed as all other Societies; and as they explain themselves in the first
Chapter of their confession of faith, Article VII. in these words. There are
some circumstances in the Government of the Church, and in divine Worship*
which are common with all the actions of men, which are practiced in all
societies, and which might ^o be regulated by natural light, and Christian
prudence, according to the general rules of the word of God, which are always
to be observed.

THIS is all the discipline which the Independ^nts practice* then Government is
that of well order d R^publicks, that cannot possibly be too exact for the
regulating of manners; but which have but very few Laws for that of Polity:
they are far from that Maxim* in p^ssima republica pluri ne leges.

BUT how ^ise soever their carriage and government be, how sound and Orthodox
their Doctrine, and how exact and scrupulous their ^ives; yet they cannot
escape the tyr^^ny of those little sincere judgments, which the most learned
and grave persons have made of them: so that it need be no surprise at all, if
the Doctors of Rome, how illuminated soever and sincere they have seemed to be,
have had for so many Ages, and have still to this day so great an Aversion for
our Religion, how holy soever it is, and have passed judgments so little
favorable of it, as to draw, from our Morals, consequences, that are as far
from purity and truth, as they are from our intention; This, I say, need be no
surprise at all to us, since that Amyrauld, Daille, and so many others of their
gown have not passed any less sinister judgment of a generation of men as holy
as any in the World, I mean, of the Independants, no more than of their
carriage, government and Doctrine.

AS to their carriage and Government, whether in private, or in the Church, I
do not believe there are any better regulated, more Wise, more Prudent, more
Illuminated, nor more Religious. As to their Doctrine, their Confession of
Faith shall Witness what it is, since that of all those that have appeared in
the World of that Nature, it is a piece the most Perfect Pure, and Orthodox:
And in which it may well nigh be said the Christian Religion may be found
complete, though there should only be remaining that single piece in all the
Booksellers Shops in the World.

CHAP. X. Of the Wise and Prudent carriage of the Independants, and of their
way to get further off the Church of Rome than any other, and to condemn all
the ways of Reconciliation with it, and the Churches that hold any Communion
with Rome, that the endeavor to come near it is damnable and pernicious, as is
sufficiently seen in the present posture of the affairs of England.
THOSE, who shall approve of the wise conduct of the Congregational Churches,
in the composing of a Confession that has so much conformity with the purest
Churches of Jesus Christ, will be easily persuaded that neither Wisdom, nor
Prudence have been wanting to them, when with that conformity of Faith, that
there is between them and the Churches that are at greatest distance from
Popery, they have preserved to themselves their liberty, as to matter of
discipline, to do their business a part independantly one on the other, and on
all other Authority beside that of Jesus Christ, without making use of that way
of Reconciliation which has been practiced in all Ages by the means of
conferences and Synods, which have rather sharp'ned and exasperated spirits,
and perpetuated quarrels, than any ways appeased and hushed them; and whereof
all the advantage that can be hoped, is at most to make such an accord, as it
may be, dissembles, or disguises, or else suppresses the truth.

THIS is no more than what appeared in the Colloquy of Poissy, where the
greatest defenders of Transubstantiation, and those who combated and opposed it
as a vile Monster of Rome, concurred together upon the Article of the real
presence in the Eucharist. And this is what appeared also in the Overture of
Reconciliation which was made in the year 1578. in the Synod of Saint Foy
with the Lutherans by the means of a formulary or president of such a
profession of Faith as should be general and common with all Churches as they
proposed to draw up: but that Overture could only tend to a Reconciliation as
difficult as that of finding a Medium between Transubstantiation, and the
Opinion of our Churches which is contrary to it. Certainly our Churches were
never able to draw back from the purity of our Doctrine, nor from the sincerity
with which they express it without being at the same time guilty of great
prevarication: And moreover, the Lutherans would never have yielded to go off
from their engagement to Luther, and his Consubstantiation. If both had
complied, and met at half way, it would have been a most wretched peace, quae,
as Saint Austin speaks* fit dispenaio veritatis.

THE present posture of the Affairs of England is a very clear and convincing
proof, that the Endeavor of those Reconcilers, how good soever their designs
were, is ruinous both to Church and State. There has been an attempt for above
this last Age to get into a Neighborhood, and Vicinity with Rome, thinking to
sweeten the spirits and tempers of those of its communion, to draw them over to
ours, or at at least to make but one Communion of two. In the beginning of the
Reformation there were several of the Ceremonies retained, and fifty years
afterward others of them were introduced, they have attempted to bring in
Images, and so to pass from thence to worshipping of them. Every where the
Altars are new set up on purpose, no doubt, to make there the Sacrifice of the
Mass to Smoke; which is apparent by the bowings and cringings to those Altars,
or at least to the places where they are set, (or as some will have it be) to
the East. The Ordination of Romish Pastors is held for good, and for that of
the true Church of Jesus Christ; and on the other hand, that of the other
Reformed Churches, because they were not Episcopal is rendered void and null,
and because they had not the ^ark of the beast upon their forehead, whereat
Monsieur Claude is extremely offended: Nay, they have gone to that extremity,
that one Henry Dodwell has newly published a large Book, where he labors to
prove, and establish this maxim, that there where there is no Episcopal
Ordination, there is no true Church, no Minister of Jesus Christ, no Sacrament,
and no Salvation. They have lest out those expressions that are a shock and
offense to Rome, that the Pope is the Antichrist, the man of sin, and the Son
of Perdition, the Doctors of the Church of England, as Thorndike, Tailor,
Bramhal, Patrick, Sherelock, etc. have sweetened the Doctrines of Rome, to make
them relish and go down the better with the Protestants. In a word, to
complete the design they had to testify their kindness for Rome, they have
persecuted them most who are got at greatest distance from it. They have made
the Image of their persons, and of their devotion to tread the Stage, to render
them both odious, and ridiculous. They have laden them with calumnies, in the
same manner as the Pagans of old clothed the Christians with Bears skins and
Lions skins to stir up the rage of Mastiff Dogs against them; they have treated
them with the Appellations of Schismatics and Rebels, who have been concerned
deep in the late Conspiracy, a thing that gives one a horror to think of: And
the mildness and most gentle treatment is that of Fanatics, Enthusiasts, and
Medlars that perpetuate the division between the English, and the Romish
Church, and hinderers of their coming together. To conclude, as Tacitus says,
proximorum odia sunt acerrima, their aversion and hatred are so great against
the Presbyterian, Puritan, and Independent party, that these words are very
frequently in their mouths, and it is their discourse both as they walk along
the Streets, and set at their Tables, that they would rather be Papists than
Presbyterians. It Is then a thing much to be wondered at, that whilst the
Prelatical party have so much love and kindnsss for Rome, and so much aversion
for Calvin* and our Churches in France, as to raze them out of the number of
the Churches of Jesus Christ, to reject the ordination of their Pastors as
Null, and to tear in pieces with calumnies the puritanical party only for this
reason, because it has a veneration for our Churches, and for the Memory of
Calvin; it is, I say, a very suprising thing, and much to be wondered at, that
our Pastors in France. (at least the greatest part) should make their Court to
that Episcopal party, and call those faithful people in England, Enthusiasts,
Fanatics, and Hypocrites, who separate from the Doctrines, Customs,
Practices, and Lives of those that Persecute them. But yet a People, who, by
the Purity of their Doctrine, the holiness of their Lives, and their Conformity
with Calvin, and his Disciples, keep off, and retard the Introduction of
Paganism in England, and the Judgments of God upon the Nation. Certainly it,
is a very surprising thing, that the Fat of the Prelates Kitching, and the
luster of their Hierarchy should so dazzle the eyes of our great men in France,
as to postpone in their esteem, the best, the most holy, and the most numerous
Party of the People of England, to that which glitters and dazles most, and
which now have the uppermost seats in the Synagogues.

BUT that Church which will have all or nothing, shows more heat and vehemence
against these Reconcilers, than against those that protest against all
Reconciliation with Rome: which imitates the Lion in the Apologue that devoured
the Ass for desiring to share with him.

THE Church of Rome, which is said to be Infallible, is an immovable Rock; the
Reformed, at least the English Church, is a floating Boat upon the Water which
is fastened to that Rock by a Rope; now he that thinks to draw it to him, will
be much deceived, for he will but pullhimself nearer to the Rock. It Is true,
that neither the whole body of the Clergy of England, which set at the helm of
Affairs, nor any of them has been concerned in the late attempt upon the life
of our most gracious King, but it is true also, that the Papists had never been
brought or tempted to think of such a thing, if they had not been strongly
persuaded, that the life of the King was the only Impediment, why those, who
had already come over three parts of four of the way to Rome, had not finished
the rest of their Journey to them.

CHAP. XI. A continuance of the same matter concerning the wise carriage of
those Churches that are for their way Congregational, when they condemn all
manner of speaking like to Rome, and all practices, that do any whit savor of
theirs: and the six Maxims on which the Pope and his Church are founded: a
Confirmation of that by a History taken out of the Life of Joseph Hall.
IT IS then with good reason that the Independants condemn all the Overtures of
Peace and Reconciliation, and believe that they have been attempted in vain
from time to time between the Catholics, and the Arrians; the Greeks, and the
Latins; the Protestants and the Papists; the Lutherans, and the Calvinists, the
Episcopal, and the Presbyterians; and these from the Congregational men: they
condemn, I say, all these Overtures of Peace and Reconciliation, unless the two
parties that are both under Error, and that are both at an equal distance from
the truth, be reduced to a Medium that may bring them to some Establishment:
without this, they are very much persuaded that to compose all the differences
which are in matters of Religion, there is no other method than theirs, which
is that every Christian makes himself of that Assembly which is according to
his Opinion; and that the Church of which he is a Member do not persecute those
who are otherwise persuaded.

THEY are not then led by any extravagancy of Reason, when they put among the
Ideas of Plato these six maxims, with which the World is so strongly possessed.

1. THAT a Civil State ought to tolerate but one Religion.

2. THAT all the Churches collected in that State ought to associate and join
themselves into one body, which may be of the same extent as the Civil State.

3. THAT that body Ecclesiastical is distinct in Jurisdiction, and Independent
on that of the Republic, and that there ought to be no appeal from
Consistories, and Synods to the Magistrate.

4. THAT this Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is exercised by virtue of a divine
right positive and perpetual, and by the power of the Keys, and of that of
binding and loosing given by Jesus Christ, either to the Church* or to its
Pastors.

5. THAT the Churches ought to be all united by the same bond of Faith and
Discipline under the same Ecclesiastical Governnours, and to be obedient to
their Laws, their Commands and their Censures,

6. THAT to compass this Union, every party of different persuasion and
Judgment in matters of Faith and Discipline ought to abate something of their
rigor, and their right, and come one part of the way to a Reconciliation: that
is to say, that every party ought to recover an insidious peace, to abandon the
truth he believes he has on his side, or to enervate the force of it.

THESE maxims, which are those of Rome, have been and will be the cause why
there will never be in the World, neither Church, nor Reformation without some
mixture of corruption. The Felicity of being freed from these, is only to be
found in the Independent Church.

ABOVE all, they find the 5 th. maxim to be unreasonable, wicked, and
tyrannical^ principally when they press to an Uniformity of Discipline all the
Inhabitants of a Territory or Kingdom, under one and the same Sovereign, about
which both the greatest number of people, and the most illuminated are divided,
and do not find one clear, constant, and perpetual truth, in the Sacred
Scriptures to press the Uniformity of it, nor the necessity of that way that
they find as to what concerns Faith. Theodosius the II. had his reason better
grounded, when he commanded all his Subjects to believe according to the Faith
of Damasus of Rome, and Peter of Alexandria, then if he had commanded them an
Uniformity in Discipline, which he did not do, and which he could not execute:
For he could not be ignorant that as there was but one Faith, to which every
faithful soul ought to adhere* and to be verily persuaded that his was the
true, it was not without reason that he rather commanded the belief of that
Faith, than the practice of a discipline, since that the one was expressly laid
down in the holy Scripture, and the other was not.

IT IS after this manner the Independent Churches argue. They believe, with
Theodosius, that the Subjects of an Empire are obliged to embrace the same
Faith, supposing it be that of Jesus Christ, but they are not obliged to
practice one certain discipline, which is not found in the holy Scripture.

THE first maxim was that of Dioclesian, who alone did shed more Christian
blood than his Predecessors all together had done. It cannot be practiced
without Fire and Sword, and it is as full of Impiety and of Paganism as
Excommunication. Titus Livius lib. 39. tit. 9 puts among the Roman Laws, Ne qui
Romani Dei, neque alio more quam patrio colerentur: and ne quis in publico
sacrove loco novo aut externo ritu sacrificaret. The Scythians caused
Anacharsis to be put to death for having a Worship a part, which he had learnt
in Greece. And Mecaenas exhorted Augustus to punish those who would not conform
themselves to the Religion of the Country. Dio. lib. 52 (...).

BUT yet this maxim was not so much practiced when the Government was more
popular, and when Altars were erected to strange Gods, and to some unknown:
for, after they had subdued Nations, they also brought their Gods in triumph.

I met with the Defeat and overthrow of the fifth maxim, in a discourse at the
beginning of a Treatise of that excellent Knight, to whom I Dedicated my
Fasciculus, as an Answer to some questions that were put to him, by thoughts
much agreeing with mine, before ever we had any communication of them together*
which he also confirms by those of a Learned Divine, whose name is
Chillingworth, and whose Authority is so much the more considerable, and
weighty, as being a Church of England man. There are, say they, but two ways
to make all Christians to enter into one and the same communion; either in
taking away the diversity of Opinions that divide them, which is impossible
without a Miracle and unless God had established and set up a visible Judge to
whom their differences should be referred; or else being all persuaded that
this diversity of Opinions ought not to hinder their communion, and their
Union, in things wherein they do agree, and where charity, complaisance and
condescension ought to have place, without any ones being deprived of their
Opinion, or that one should persecute the other that differs from his.

DOCTOR Jeremy Tailor, who was a strong man for the English Hierarchy, by
reason whereof he was made a Bishop in Ireland, and who was extroardinarily
illuminated and Learned, agreed in the same Sentiment with Dr. Chillingworth,
and has published a great Book, whose Title is, the Liberty of Prophesying
against the wicked and unreasonable carriage of those who rigorously impose set
Forms of Faith to others, and who Persecute and ill-use those who are not of
their Opinion in matters of Religion.

ALSO the Independants have endeavored not so much to establish the goodness
of the Congregational way in sound clear minds, because they are soon convinced
of it by the description they make of it, as to disabuse them of those maxims
which are but so many illusions, though most commonly it is easier to refute
Errors, than to establish Truth; as Cicero very well says. Vtinam tam facile
possem vera probare, quam falsa convincere.

NOW the tyranny of these maxims, which are as much that of the Protestants as
of the Papists, is the cause why the transition of the Romish Religion to the
reformed is but imperfectly done in France, Germany, England, and elsewhere,
how little complaisance soever we have had for Rome, and for an affinity with
her, it has cost us very dear: we have thought we ought not to go from one
extremity to another at one leap. As we fell from the Impanation to
Transubstantiation so likewise have we gone from Transubstantiation, to
Consubstantiation its Neighbor; then we have retained the real presence in the
Sacramental Supper, which has some agreement, and is conciliable with those
three illusions of words. It Is said indeed, that this presence was spiritual,
but at the same time it was clothed with the flesh, when they kept at the
beginning of the reformation such ways of expressing themselves which have
been a great Shock to Bullinger* and many other great men of his time: That we
were nourished in this Sacrament with the substance of the flesh, and with the
blood of Jesus Christ. Which has given occasion to the Bishop of Candom, to
Mounsieur Arnauld, and to Father Maimbourge to put this Interrogatory to us, if
you speak as we do, why do you not believe as we do? Especially the Bishop of
Condom has made use of it, and they have given him reason to triumph over us as
much in that, as he has done as to the eminent Authority that is established
in our Churches with as much incontestability as if it were Infallible. The
Missionary Pean says, that it is a Gallimauphrey of the Protestants to speak
of being nourished with the substance of Jesus Christ, and with his flesh, and
not to believe Transubstantiation. A Learned English Dr. named John Hales has
written a Learned Treatise upon this Subject, where he condemns this way of
Reconciliation that says one thing, and believes another, and that turns again
to Rome, and he exhorts his Brethren to condemn rather the use of it than to
justify it. He says also that Martyn Bucer was the first of the Reformed that
made use of this way of speaking.

IT must be confessed, that as the weakness of those great lights of
Reformation Bucer, Calvin, and Reza, was very great, when they explained those
Scriptures concerning the Lords Supper, by a Comment that was more obscure than
the Text, nor has it been less great in those that have come after them, when
they have explained the words of Jesus Christ in S. John VI. concerning the
fleshly eating, to the Sacramental and Spiritual eating, and when they have
made long comments upon the words of Calvin to sweeten and smooth the harshness
of them, instead of condemning them: this obstinacy in adhering to errors, has
brought in the pretended infallibility into the Church of Rome, and the
Incontestability into the Reformed Churches. Inter caetera mortalitatis
incommoda hoe est, errandi necessitas, and erroris amor, Seneca.

NOW these ways of speaking which simbolize with those of Rome, and which give
it occasion to insult, and triumph over us, makes me remember what I have read
in the Memoirs and specialties that Joseph Hall has made of his Life, and
absolutely convinces me of this truth, that it has been so unlikely that they,
who have believed they might gain upon Rome, by retaining some of their ways
and modes of speaking, or their practices, should have succeeded therein, that
on the contrary She has been so much the more set and hardened against us, and
have gone so far in it, as to make us, and their Religion far more reasonable
than ours. He says, that in his journey to the Spadan Waters for his health,
he had before a great company of persons of quality, both Papists and
Protestants, a very hot dispute with a Sorbonist, a Prior of the Carmelites,
who maintained that the Kneeling practiced in the Church of England, at the
receiving of the Eucharist, strongly showed that she believed Transubstantion;
for that kneeling and the belief of Transubstantiation were things inseparable,
and always went hand in hand together; and since the one had never been
believed in the Church without the practice of the other; and since it was a
distraction of reason, and a wicked practice to carry their adorations to
Elements that were only Bread and Wine, this kneeling of necessity must be a
natural consequence of the belief of Transubstantiation: Bishop Hall adds, that
as the company was divided in their judgments and that several of them joined
with those of Rome, in condemning this kneeling, unless it was a consequence of
Transubstantiation, more than two thirds of the company were so heated against
the poor Bishop, that he had not the liberty to speak, nor to stand up in
defense of the Church's Opinion: For if they had given him time to speak, he
had alleged the Rubric of the Church of England, which undeceives the
Communicants from the thoughts that they might possibly have that that Kneeling
or Adoration is carried out to the Bread and the Wine: But beside, that there
is not of a hundred Communicants one who reads the Rubric, it might have
happened that those who were so violent against Bishop Hall, would have
pleasantly stopped his mouth with the Apologue which Beza writ in a Letter to the
good Archbishop Edmund Grindal, who seeing that he was offended at this
kneeling, after Transubstantiation was banished, endeavored to cure him of the
scandal he had taken, making him to know that the Rubric of the Church of
England, would give him enough wherewith to be satisfied: Upon which Beza
returned him this story. A Lord having built his house near to the high way,
where he left a great stone that he had no occasion for just in the road,
several persons coming by in the night stumbled at it, and did hurt themselves,
and often complaints being made to him about it, and entreaties that he would
take it out of the way, he was very obstinate a long while, and was resolved
not to meddle with it; but being wearied by the continual solicitations that
were made to him, he bethought himself to set over the stone a Lanthorn with a
light Candle in it, to warn people of it; but that Admonition proving
troublesome too, one of his friends came and gave him this good Counsel; Sir,
if you would be at quiet, take away both stone and Lanthorn together. The stone
of stumbling is this kneeling at the Sacrament, and the Rubric is for a light
and Declaration, to signify to the Communicants, that this kneeling is not
done to the bread and wine, but to Jesus Christ. If you take away both, you
will take away the scandal, and the remedy to the scandal: You will bring back
the way with which Jesus Christ instituted the holy Supper, who gave it not
kneeling, but in the posture of those who take their ordinary repasts at their
Tables, so that Jesus Christ never required any Genuflexion either at the time
or place.

THESE two stories hit (as we generally say) two birds with one stone. For they
may relate to that neerness of assinity with Rome, which I have already spoken
of above, and which I have showed has rather sharpened and embittered the
Spirits and tempers of those of that communion, to plot against the sacred
person of the KING, and against his Government, than it has any ways sweetened
them: and moreover, they discover that those who go furthest off from the
Doctrines and practices of Rome, who renounce all reconciliation with Her, as
the people of the Congregational way do, have most conformity with the blessed
Peacemakers of whom Jesus Christ speaks, and whereof the Character of the
Children of God which he gives them upon this respect, carries them so much the
farther from all thoughts of Rebellion.

CHAP. XII. An Apology for the Author of the Conformity of the congregational
Churches with that of the Ancient Primitive Christians: That a disinteressed
person, such as he, is the most sit to write about these matters. Of the
Obligation he has to the Bishop of Condom for the light he has given him.
I Think my self here obliged to add an Apology as to my own account, for what
I have said as to the Independent Churches. I do imagine I shall be accused at
first for having made the description of the congregational way, not according
as it is in effect, but in that manner as Xenophon did the Cyropaedia to be the
perfect model of a Prince. They will say that any other interest than that of
the inward knowledge I have of the goodness, truth and holiness of the
Congregational way, ought to have excited me to commend it so as I have done.
That I commend what I do not approve in the bottom of my heart, since I do not
join my self to it. They will say likewise that I have had no other design than
to gain my own Sentiments credit, with which they say I am most fondly in Love,
in adjusting them to those of the Independants; and because I condemn
Ecclesiastical power, and Excommunication, which I have undertook to possess
the World with the belief of, that so they should banish the use of it. To
which, I answer, that though I should join my self to their Assemblies, it
would be no argument that I should approve of all the things they did, and all
they believed, as they cannot conclude by my not joining to their
Congregations, that I have not the Congregational way in greater and higher
esteem than any other. As I am a Frenchman, and by the grace of God of the
reformed Church, I join to the Church of my own Nation, to which I am so much
the more strongly invited by the holiness of the Doctrines, and lives of our
excellent Pastors, Monsieur Mussard, and Monsieur Primerose; and because they
administer the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper in the same manner as Jesus
Christ did it with his Disciples; not having any thing to give me offense in
their conduct, unless that they are not absolutely undeceived of the practice
of our Pastors in France, of excommunicating in the Name and Authority of Jesus
Christ, and of interposing the same sacred Name, and the same sacred Authority
to excommunicate as St. Paul made use of to deliver the Incestuous person over
to Satan; though they cannot find this Authority of excommunicating in all the
Bible, nor justify it, unless they elude that harshness of expression by this
way of sweetning, that their only intention is to declare that those sinners of
whom they make the number, take the Lord's Supper to their Condemnation, if
they do not repent beforehand.

AS for other accusations, although I believe that of all Establishments of
Religion, that of the Independent Churches is the most Apostolical, yet I do
not believe it is infallible, and I cannot approve of all they say, nor all
they practice concerning discipline nor concerning the use of the
Ecclesiastical power, and excommunication; though this usage be not in all the
same, nor in all the Churches; because some among them do retain it jure
societatis, and vi, and virtute paoti and federis eniti. However it is, both of
them make use of Ecclesiastical power and excommunication very innocently, for
they do not set up a National Tribunal, Independent on the Magistrate, and they
Attribute to their Synods no other Authority, than that of persuasion, both
from wise and experienced persons. Moreover, from the manner that they express
themselves in the VII. Article of the first Chapter of their Confession of
Faith, one may conclude, that beside the Jurisdiction which works upon hearts
by the word, they acknowledge no other than that which is taken by a natural
right, and that wisdom and prudence has not been wanting to them, by their
having in a joint consent agreed in one and the same Doctrine, because it is of
divine and perpetual right, but in not having established any thing
determinatively to be a perpetual rule upon an Arbitrary and changeable matter,
and of humane right, as is the discipline of the Churches, and the Authority of
the Pastors in their conduct and government.

BUT although they should have retained some usage of the Ecclesiastical power
and excommunication, which are so many Relics of Rome that have accomplished
the Mystery of iniquity, and brought the Pope into the world, they would be no
less privileged than St. Paul, and the other Apostles, who, after they had
received the holy Ghost in greater measure than all the holy men that had been
before them, yet they always retained some leven of affection to the Mosaical
Ceremonies. If the Christians that came from Paganism, have always kept some
pollution of it, it ought not to be any great surprise to see the purest
Churches in the World, yet not thoroughly cleansed from all the Impurities of
Rome.

FOR these considerations, I feed my self with the hopes that the Ministers of
the Independent Churches, who are too much illuminated long to remain in the
belief and use of this illusion of Ecclesiastical power, which has brought
Episcopacy, that is the first step of Ascension to the papacy, and after that
Excommunication and Infallibility; and that they would put in practice instead
of excommunication, that denuntiation which S. Paul recommended to his Disciple
and son Timothy, it is that in case any disorderly, or wicked person of the
Congregation, cannot be persuaded to change his opinion, and life, and
voluntarily to leave the Communion of the Church, it should be published aloud
in the face of the Church, and the faithful should be exhorted to shun his
company: and in case that he persevere in such refractoriness, he ought to be
expelled by force, as well from the Table of the Lord, as from the Church. And
this is what may be practiced by a natural right, and de jure societatis
without any need of making such expulsion of credit by the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven, and by the power of binding and loosing. In short, I hope they will
be persuaded by this consideration that the benefit which comes by the
Ecclesiastical power and Excommunication will never recompense the pernicious
effects that they have produced.

NOW I believe that these three considerations, that I am a Physician, that I
am a Frenchman, and that I do not join to any one certain Congregational
Assembly as a Member of it, will give more Authority and credit to the relation
I have made of their government and conduct, and make it less the suspected,
than if I were of their Number, of their Nation, and a Divine by Profession:
For if I were qualified in three ways, I could not speak as a person
disinteressed, but as having a personal inclination to the way I should have
espoused: And that is the weakness of all those who plead for their own cause,
as we learn from S. Austin, and Optatus Milevitanus, who were of this opinion,
that a sincere Pagan or Heathen, whether a Physician, a Sophister, a
Philosopher, or belonging to the Magistracy, were more competent Judges in
matters of Divinity, and differences among Christians, than persons of the
Priesthood, and Sacerdotal function.

AS S. Paul could not elect a more disinteressed person to gain the Christian
Religion credit, in the minds of men, and to write his Gospel, as he calls it,
and the Acts of the Apostles, than S. Luke the Physician, to whom the world is
more obliged than to a thousand S. Chrysostomes, and S. Austins, and to all the
persons of the Sacred Order, without so much as excepting the very Apostles
themselves: I believe that the same Judgment ought to be made of me, and that
my quality of a Physician ought to give stronger impressions of the goodness of
the Congregational way in the minds of men, than would that of a Divine, of a
Minister of the Gospel, or any other person engaged by profession either to the
Episcopal, Presbyterian, or even to the Congregational way. As Reason and Grace
in the hopes of glory are the three Ressorts or principles which have always
moved and governed me in all the course of my life, and in all my Writings: so
have they been always less violent by the prejudices and interests in the
profession I make of a Physician, than if I had been either a Divine, or a
Lawyer.

I ought here also to acknowledge my Obligation to the Bishop of Condom; not
only for the first hints of this truth; that the Congregational way is of all
the Establishments of Discipline and Government the most conformable to reason,
to the holy Scripture, and to the practice of the Apostles, and the Primitive
Christians: but for having absolutely confirmed me in this truth: though the
design of that Bishop has not been to put the Congregational way above the
Romish; but only to discover, (and this he has done by Arguments that come
very near to demonstration) that going upon the hypothesis of the necessity of
seting up a Tribunal in the Church, and of the submission of the people to that
Tribunal, as being the only Rampi^r of the Orthodox Faith, and the only means
of Uniting Christians, preserving peace and good order among them; it is
incomparably more reasonable that such submission should be made to an
infallible Tribunal, than to One that is subject to Error; and that upon this
ground, of all the Ecclesiastical ways in the World which acknowledge that every
Ecclesiastical Tribunal, either supreme, or subordinate, that every Council,
either Ecumenical, or Topical, is fallible and subject to error, the
Congregational way which refuses all manner of submission to a Tribunal subject
to error is the most reasonable and the most just.

CHAP. XIII. The Explication of one difficulty which runs throughout the whole
precedent discourse.
AS it was in my thoughts to finish this discourse by the word Finis, a Learned
Presbyterian coming in, and having apprehended my design, put one objection to
me against the defeat and overthrow I pretend to make of the necessity of a
Tribunal in the Church* he said that since that Tribunal which requires the
people to submit themselves to it is as much set up in an independent Church,
as in a National, and since both presuppose that that Tribunal is subject to
error, the submission of the people is altogether as reasonable to the
Tribunal of a National Church, as to that of a Congregational. I confess there
is some weight in this objection, which Monsieur Jurieu has not thought of, but
which nevertheless is easy to be answered according to the principles I lay
down.

1. THAT all manner of Government, Presbyterian, Congregational, National,
Episcopal, Hierarchical, Papal, is of the same nature with that of the
Magistrate.

2. THAT the submission required, and given to all manner of Ecclesiastical
Government is of the same nature with that which is required and given to a
Civil and Political government, the Ressorts of which are not the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, nor the power of binding and loosing, but the will of the
strongest, and most numerous that has so ordained it.

3. AND consequently that the Censures of excommunication and deposition, being
of the same nature with the Law of the Magistrate, the validity of which is not
in the Justice, nor equity of the thing, but in the will of those that decree
and ordain it, they ought to be accounted as a Civil punishment.

THESE three considerations destroy that erection of an Ecclesiastical
Tribunal, which is equal with the Civil in one and the same Territory, since
both being of the same nature, it would be a pure piece of Gallimaufrey and
hotchpot to offer to establish two Civil Governments in one and the same
dominion or Territory, which should be independent one on the other.

ALSO this difficulty is easy to be overcome according to the principles of
the Independants. The Inconvenience of an Excommunicated or deposed person
unjustly by his Congregation is not great, so long as it does not extend beyond
his Jurisdiction, and that of a hundred Congregations in one Territory, it is
impossible but that at least there might be one to recompense the Justice of
his cause; which is not a thing feasible, if he be struck by a National
Judgment, unless he leaves his Country. And since the person oppressed is in
the liberty of framing to himself a Congregation Independent on all the
Churches of the world, though it be but of seven or eight persons, his
innocence and legitimate right will easily furnish him with the means to do it.
I add further, that a person who is sensible he is guilty of disorders; can
easily conceal them in the crowd of a National Church, (which he cannot so well
do in a small number of persons,) and commonly prevent the Censure of his
Congregation, and not expect that they should excommunicate him and drive him
out of it which is done in that manner as St. Jerome, and Bishop Godeau would
have the Heretic* of whom S. Paul speaks in the 3 of Titus 11. knowing that he
that is such, (i. e. an Heretic) is subverted and sins, being condemned of
himself:) To do, when he excommunicated himself* and saved his Church that
trouble.

IT must not be forgot that tho there is no Government so perfect wherein one
cannot find some faults, and some Inconvenience, yet it is certain there is
found less in the Congregational way, whereas you may find almost an infinity
in that of the National, whereof a thousand persons that deserve the censure of
the Church, there is not one of them that undergoes its because its discipline
is like to spiders Webs, where the Fly's are taken, but the Birds pass through;
and where it is impossible in a Town or a Church of many thousands of
Christians, that one Bishop or Pastor can possibly have an exact inspection
over them: whereas in a Congregational Church composed but of a few persons,
and those all culled out of the multitude who fun after Vanitics and Vices, one
has but little or no use of excommunication and deposition, and where Avarice,
Ambition, Heresies, and quarrels do not enter as in National Churches.

THESE considerations give me to hope that the learned and illuminated of the
Congregational way will agree and join with my principles or Hypotheses, to
establish the true nature of their Jurisdiction, and to undo with case the
difficulty of the objection: although according to their principles it
resembles the Foils, which touch the person, but do not wound it: For in case
of a wound, they have a thousand remedies to heal it presently; whereas there
is no remedy either against Infallibity in the Church of Rome, or against
incontestability in a National Church.

CHAP. XIV. Remarks upon the Fault that some may find in the Title of this
discourse.
I Will finish these conderations by the discussion and explication of the
Title of this discourse, to which some have excepted, because they find there
is not one Ecclesiastical Government, even of those which differ most from one
another, that do not pretend to this Conformity, as indeed they have either
more or less: for there is not one of them, no not even of those that are the
farthest off from the Doctrines and Government of the Ancient Christians, and
that have but very little agreement one with the other, there is not one, I
say, but what has in something a conformity with them. Every way of Government
boasts of their retaining this conformity with the Ancient Christians: I my
self pretend to this glory in favor of the Congregational way. Not long since
a Learned Minister of Rouen published a Book entitled, the Conformity of the
discipline of the Churches of France to that of the Ancient Christians: Beside,
though the discipline of the Church of England has not any agreement with that
of the Churches of France; and it is impossible that two disciplines so
disagreeing to each other, should have both of them much conformity to the
discipline of the Ancient Christians yet it has so happened that a Famous
Divine in his preface to his English Translation of the Novelty of Popery,
maintains very zealously the same thing in favor of the Discipline of the
Church of England, as Monsieur Larroque has done in favor of those of France.
If I were, says he, to speak to Frenchmen, I would endeavor to convince them
fully, that we retain in England more of the Primitive and Apostolic
Government than all the other Churches in the world. Dr. Floyd, and Dr.
Tillotson say the same thing. But I believe that this conformity is much what
like to that which is between Jesus Christ, and St. Francis. For I do openly
maintain that of all the Establishments of Religion, That of the Church of
England is widest from the discipline and practice of the Ancient Christians.
But he is not the only person has spoke after this manner, England is full of
Books upon the subject of the Conformity of its Hierarchy, and of its Episcopal
Government to that of the Ancient Christians. The Bishops Bilson, Andrews,
Hall, Morton, and Pearson, find it in Clemens Romanus, and in Ignatius; some of
the Doctors of Rome, meet with it in Denis the Areopagite: but unless this
Conformity be restrained to the times of the Apostles, to which I find more
footsteps in the Congregational way, than in any other, I believe we are all in
an error as to what concerns our conformity to the Doctrine, Discipline and
Life of the Ancient Christians. Above all, the disagreement is found in the
life, which was heretofore much more exact and exemplary, than in these last
times it is; the Devotion of our days is but cold and languishing in comparison
of theirs. It was in that, that their glory did consist, whereas ours is in
having a greater knowledge, and a more full and ample illumination into the
mysteries of Faith, than the first Christians had; also to be better versed at
this day in the knowledge of the Apostolical conduct, of the nature and
Government of the Church, of its Authority, and of that of its Pastors, who
were the Christians that immediately succeeded the Apostles:

I will finish where I began; and that shall be by the force of those
prejudices, wherewith all Christians, as well Protestants as Papists are
anticipated and prepossest, when they generally imagine that the Primitive
Church was more Orthodox, and pure in Doctrine, than that of the following
Ages, because of their nearness with the times of the Apostles: but I am as
much persuaded of the contary, as of any thing in the world. It Is said that God
never built a Temple, near to which the enemy of our Salvation has not built a
Chapel, but than it was a Chapel both greater and more spacious than the
temple it self: For during the time whilst God built a little Temple wherein
he had circumscribed the twelve Apostles, and a small flock of faithful people
who conformed themselves to the purity their Doctrine, and the holiness of
their lives, a number incomparably greater of false Apostles, false Doctors and
false Brethren, separated from them. For even in the first three hundred years
of Christianity, all or the most part of sincere persons, and also of Fathers,
had a great deal of false allay mixed among their gold. This is what we learn
from Eutychius, who lived in the first Ages of Christianity, from whom we have
the History of the Church in Arabyck published by Mr. Seldom, and Mr. Pocock,
and whom they recommend for an Author of an irreprochable fidelity. There he
tells us, that Constantine the Great sent to all the Churches of his Empire
Letters to let them understand that they were to make choice of the most
Religious Bishops, and those that were most learned in the Mysteries of the
Christian Faith; and that they then immediately set themselves to obey the
Orders of the Emperor, and that two thousand and forty eight Bishops came to
the Town of Nice, whereof near two thousand, how pious and sincere soever
otherwise they were, were either most ignorant, or most erroneous in the
knowledge of the Christian Religion. For they were either Manichees, or
Murcionites, or Montanists, or Valentinians, or Samosatenians, or Arrians; and
in that great number of Bishops, there were but three hundred and eighteen who
had an affection for, and engaged themselves to, the Orthodox Faith, which was
that of Alexander Bishop of Alexandria.

THIS Relation according to Eutychius is much more probable than after that
manner as it is reported by Eusebius, by Socrates, by Baronius, and by Monsieur
Claude: For what likelihood is there that that number of Bishops convoked from
all places of Europe a great part of Africa, and also of Asia, Phaenicia,
Greece, Maceaonia, Thessalia, Palestine, Arabia, Pamphilia, Bythinia,
Capadocia, Thrace, Cilicia, Pontus, Persia, and Scythia, should amount but to
three hundred and eighteen Bishops? There is also less likelihood that those
three hundred and eighteen Bishops should appear so sharp and so divided among
themselves, as to put out Libels of accusation one against another, and that
during their Session, they made a cruel War within themselves. These
Accusations might be true as to the other Bishops, who were as much divided in
affections, as in Judgments, but not of these three hundred and eighteen, who
because they were all Orthodox, and Children of peace, and well united in their
affections, such as were Alexander, Spiridion, and Paphnutius, were chosen by
Constantine, and Alexander out of the multitude of Heretics, Factious, and
contentious persons. Beside, the unanimity of these three hundred and eighteen
Bishops in the composing of the Faith of the Council, having but four Bishops
that refused subscribing to it, plainly shows that their spirit was not that of
contention nor animosity one against another, but of peace and concord.

IF the Book of that excellent Author Eutychius the Patriarch of Alexandria had
appeared with all its Truths, and had been seen by all those that had eyes and
would use them, during the lives of Monsieur Salmasius, Monsieur Blundel, etc.
they had been yet more strongly persuaded than they were, that all those
circumstances so distant from, the relation that Eutychius makes of them,
savours as much of Romance, as those three Crosses, which Helena, Mother of
Constantine, found, or as the donation of that Emperor to Silvester.

CERTAINLY the providence of God did clearly appear in the choice of those
three hundred and eighteen Bishops. 'Twas an Act of God, and not man, when he
raised up the good Bishop of Alexandria to recommend them to Constantine, and
when he inclined the heart of that Prince to hearken to his Counsel. For if the
Emperor had let himself been overruled at the beginning of that Counsel by any
other Bishop, as he did at the end of his Life, the first Establishment of
Faith and Religion, had been that of Arrianisme; whereas the orthodox Faith
taking the first possession, under the first Christian Emperor, this served
most powerfully to gain it credit, and to make it pass, and transmit it to
posterity.

I would ask here by the way those that deprive the Sovereign Magistrate of the
Intendance, of regulating by a Sovereign Authority in all places, either of an
Empire, or a Territory, the matters of Religion, and give him no other
Authority than that of a private person, I would ask those, I say, what
expedient a good Bishop, such as this of Alexandria could be able to find out
to authorize the Faith that was contrary to that of Arrius, in case God had not
inclined the heart of Constantine to establish it by his commands in all the
places of his Empire?

I ought not to forget here one circumstance in our Author that extremely
fortifies the right of the Magistrate, especially if he be Orthodox, to the
Sovereign Intendance in the Government of the Church, and which moreover
strongly proves that the Rules, Canons, Censures, and Anathemas of Councils,
are only Councils, and the declarations of wise and experienced men, before the
Magistrate has given them Authority by his Sanction. In short, this passage of
Eutychius is the accomplishment of the prophecy of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 6. 2. Know
you not that the Saints shall judge the World? that is to say, know you not
that God will one day establish Faithful Magistrates, who shall be governors
in chief of the Church; he says than that the choice of three hundred and
eighteen Bishops being made, Constantine entered into their Assembly, and after
he had saluted and harrangued to them, he laid his Scepter upon the Table, his
Ring, and his sword and said to them, I give you the power of regulating the
affairs of the Church; that done, the Fathers humbly thanked him for the
Authority which he was pleased to fortify them with, and rendered him his
Scepter, his Ring, and his Sword.

IT IS true, if Constantine had been an Arrian, his erroneous opinion had done
as much mischief, as the contrary opinion to that of Arrius, and wherewith he
was possessed, did good by its Establishment: but it is true also, that if the
Sovereign of an Empire has no other authority in the Church than that of a
private person, it will never be possible, and it can never happen, that an
Orthodox Prince will be able to establish the true Religion by his Commandments
in all the places of his Empire. It Is true, by this Sovereign Authority of the
Magistrate, Error and Impiety may as well be established by Laws, as truth
and piety: but it is true also, that when the Sovereign Magistrate, either has
no part, nor is interessed in the affairs of Religion, as during the three
first Ages of the Church, nothing could keep the Bishops, as were those two
thousand and forty eight of whom Eutychius speaks, from divinding into many
erroneous parties, and the Orthodox party to be always the least in number, and
this cannot happen, when God gives to the Church, such Princes as resemble
Constantine the Great, Theodosius, and Martian.

IT happens notwithstanding that during such disorders, and such confusions of
diverse opinions, as were those of the two thousand and forty, that God
reserves always a small number of good Pastors, as were those three hundred and
eighteen, who form in a great Empire, such as was the Roman, several little
Congregations, all like to those of our Independants, whom God makes use of,
amidst the greater corruption and confusion, to keep and perpetuate to himself
an Orthodox and faithful people in the world.

IT IS true then, that whither God gives a Christian Magistrate, but a Heretic;
or whether he does not give any, if he be not possibly a Heathen, as during the
three first Ages, the inconvenience is great; but it is otherwise certain, that
when God blesses his Church with a Magistrate that favors the Orthodox and
true Worshippers of Jesus Christ, the condition of the Church of God is
incomparably more happy, than under any other establishment of Religion or of
the State. For although persecution ought to unite Christians by a holy, and
the same Faith, and by a life correspondent to it, yet it has not that
Efficacy nor that virtue to produce those two good effects which commonly
follow under the Reign of good Princes, as David, Hezekiah, Josiah,
Constantine, Theodosius, etc. under whom the people are united well otherwise,
and kept in good order, and in the profession of one and the same, and a good
Religion, which they are not under persecution. For even the Church is not
without disorders, and violent shakings under the best and most Orthodox
Princes, which happens by their Indulgence, who keep not up that Authority they
ought to take in the government of the Church, and who delegate it to the
Clergy, and permit them to exercise by a pretended power derived from Jesus
Christ, Independent on the Magistrate, and who, in short, raise up Bishops to
such a greatness and wealth, as to have credit enough to partake and share the
Sovereignty, and to dispute the moiety of it with him, who of right is the
Sovereign of the whole, leaving him the temporal Sovereignty, and reserving to
themselves the spiritual as they call it.

BUT these matters I discourse of in my Book, not yet Printed, entitled, An
Essay toward a true Ecclesiastical History. One Theophilus of Alexandria* and
his Successor Cyrillus, were equal, and went check by jole in Authority with
the Emperor, and had built an Empire in that of their Sovereign. For even
those and their Successors had built several of them, when a Pope was set up
among them, who subjugated them all, and made them all agree, to set up but one
Catholic Church; for before there were in the same Empire many Catholic
Churches which mutually destroyed each other. Donatus acknowledged no other
Church in the World than his own: That made Theophilus also of Alexandria do
so, who persecuted St. Chrysostom to the uttermost, and who treated him as an
Heretic, a Schismatic, and calling all those that adhered to him, Johannites.
The same may be said of the concurrence of Meletius, of Flavian, and Paulinus,
for the Bishopric of Antioch, who shared the Empire and the Church into two
Catholic Churches.

I leave sincere persons to Judge, what integrity of Faith those Prelates could
preserve during not only the three first Ages, but also those following.

ALL the Christian Antiquity, put aside that of the Holy Scripture, cannot
produce such pieces that may come in competition with the Institutions of
Calvin, or with the confession of the Congregational Faith; the first Centuries
of the Christian Church swarmed with Heresy and Heretics; The most Orthodox
as Irenaeus, Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Clement, Denis of Alexandria, Origin,
Cyprian, Eusebius, Arnobius, Lactantius, etc. who opposed those heresies, were
not themselves exempt, and they had all some touch or other of one of the
Heresies of Montanus, of S^b^llius, Samorzites, Pelagius, Apollinaris, and
Eutiches. St. Austin, that Miracle of Nature and of Grace, had also his Errors.
However he was the first that well established the Doctrine of free Grace* for
those who preceded him, have spoke of it most an end, as Pelagius has done,
without any ones taking particular heed to it, or opposing it, because they
never treated of that matter thoroughly, and searched into the bottom of it, and
have not made any express and particular book about it: this is what St. Austin
says. In lib. 1. in Julianum, cap. 2. tali quaestione nullus Pulsabatur,
pelagianis nondum ligantibus securius loqucbantur. They have all consecrated
their Errors to Immortality, because of their Ancientness; but as Cyprian tells
us, did. 8. c. 8. Consuetudo sine veritate est Vetust is erroris.

IT appears than by all I have here said, that if Interest, Custom, Obstinacy,
the love that every one has for their own particular Opinions, govern the
greatest part of Mankind in matters of Religion; we may say of prejudices, that
those are they which tyrannize over them; such as in our days is that of every
sort of the reformed, who imagine that their reformation, their Doctrine, and
their Discipline, come the nearest to the Primitive Church. This is what
Monsieur Claude maintains most confidently of our reformation in France: But as
I agree with him, that it is the purest in the World, I do not agree with him
that it has any conformity with the Ancient Primitive Church, except he means
the Apostolical, and not that which was immediately after the Apostles. For
even so the conformity of the Congregational way with the Christians after the
Apostles is not as to the Doctrine, but only as to the outward discipline and
way of Government.

FINIS.
THe Reader is desired to take notice, that the Author for some reasons, since
the Printing of the Contents, has thought good to leave out the last Chapter
there mentioned.

ADVERTISEMENT
There is lately Published of this Authors, a Book Entitled Moral Reflections
on the number of the Elect, etc. Price 6 d.

FAULTS ESCAPED.
PAge 2. line 33. Dele the father. p. 3. l. 10. read confederate discipline. p.
5. l. 18. r. there being but the first Nicene Council. p. 6. l. 8. r.
heretical. p. 6. l. penul. r. inconvenience. p. 16. l. 26. r. nor, l. 33. r.
the Romish Church. p. 11. l. 9. r. that it is not of so long duration. p. 11.
l, 16. Justice, r. Justesse. p. 11. l. 21. r. with as much rigor and severity
to submit to a Tribunal subject to Error, as those of Rome to one that is
infallible. p. 12. l. 7. r. sent the Plantif. p. 12. l. 25. r. veneration. p.
12. l. 29. government r. conduct. p. 13 l. 2. have r. has.


