THE Duke of Norfolk's CASE: OR THE DOCTRINE OF PERPETUITIES Fully set forth
and Explained.

Printed Anno Dom 1688.

printer's device, featuring the head of a native American or Indian in a
feathered head-dress, surrounded by fruits, leaves, and flowers, including
roses

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THis Case, in all its parts, has been Collected with all the Care imaginable,
by several good Hands; and what grand agitation it received, is not unknown to
any that know Westminster Hall: It may be recommended to the World for Public
use, upon that score alone: For what can be more reasonably thought to please,
and take with Men of Judgment in any Profession, than to peruse the Skill and
Arts, that have been curiously, and with as great integrity, made use of by men
of the most Famous Reputation in what they profess? Besides too, if thou do
but consider the great Deliberations, and the mighty Cautions that have been
always used by all Persons concerned in the Conduct, Debate, and Judgment of
this Cause, till after many Debates and Hearings at the Bar, it came to receive
its final Judgment in the highest Court of the Kingdom, before the Lords in
Parliament, assisted by all the Judges of England, Thou will certainly
conclude, That no unkind acceptance ought to demur upon this Case. Here is
variety of Learning manifest in the sundry Conceptions of Great and Learned
Men; but the Nicety lies chiefly upon the Doctrine and Explication of that
abstruse Notion in Law, called Perpetuities, concerning which, the Sage
Opinions (introductive to this Case) of the great Council will better instruct
thee (that were prudently taken by both Parties before the Cause commenced) and
undoubtedly serve and answer the True Ends of a Preface infinitely beyond what
thou can expect from me. Their Opinions in Private are always delivered with
as much Candor and Caution as their Arguments at the Bar. And the one may be
truly said to be of as great use to the Public (when their Opinions can be
had), if the Cause be Meritorious, and will bear it, as the other. Reader, it
will be wholly impertinent to hold thee here; and I should run my self upon an
absolute necessity (if I should detain thee longer from the fruition of those
delicacies I present thee) of troubling thee with my impertinent Complements,
for presenting thee with a needless and impertinent Epistle; Wherefore enter
in, see it thy self, and peruse it for thy profit and satisfaction.

Farewell.
THE Duke of Norfolk's CASE.
A. Bargains and Sells to L. the Barronies of Gr. and 20 Martii. 1647.
Br. for 10 Months.

A. Grants the Reversion of those Baronies to 21 Martii 1647.
R. and D. and their Heirs to the use of A. for life. Remainder to E. the Wife
of A. for life, Remainder to R. and D. etc. for 200 years upon trusts, to be
declared by another Deed of the same date, Remainder to H. H. his second Son
and the Heirs Males of his body, Remainder to C. H. his third Son, and the
Heirs Males of his body, Remainder to E. H. his fifth Son, and the Heirs Males
of his body, Remainder to A. H. his sixth Son, and the Heirs Males of his body,
Remainder to B. H. and the Heirs Males of his body, Remainder to the right
Heirs of A.

L. Attornes Tenant to R. and D. etc.
A. makes another Deed, declaring the Trust of the Term 21 Martii 1647.
for 200 years reciting it, and the uses in the last-mentioned Settlement says
in the reciting part, That it is intended that the Term should attend the
Inheritance, the Profits be received by H. H. and the Heirs Males of his body;
and for default of such Issue, such other persons, who according to the
limitation of Uses, should have had them if no such term had been, so long as
T. H. Eldest son of A. or any Issue Male of his body shall live. But in case T.
H. die without Issue of his body, in the life of H. H. not leaving his Wife
ensient with a Son, or that after the death of E. H. by failure of Issue Male
of T. H. the honor of A. should descend on H. H. then H. H. and his Heirs to
be excluded of the Trust, then the Indenture witnesses, that the Term shall be
upon the Trusts and under the restrained Limitations and Proviso's
after-mentioned, viz. If T. H. or any Issue Male of his body be living in trust
for H. H. and the Heirs Males of his body, until by the death of T. H. without
Issue Male, and not leaving his Wife ensient with a Son, or after his death, by
failure of Issue Male, the honor of A. descends to H. H. and in case the
Honor shall not descend to H. H. that after the death of H. H. the Trust shall
be for the Heirs Males of H. H. and for default of such Issue in trust, to
permit such other persons and their Issue Male respectively, to whom the
Freehold or Inheritance is limited by the former Deeds, to take the profits,
as if no such Lease were. And in case the Honor of A. descend upon H. H. then
the Trust for H. H. and his Issue Male to cease.

And then as to the Barony of Gr. in trust for T. H. and the Heirs Males of his
body, Remainder to T. H. and the Heirs Males of his body, Remainder to F. H.
and the Heirs Males of his body, Remainder to B. H. and the Heirs Males of his
body, Remainder to H. H. and the Heirs Males of his body, Remainder to the
right Heirs of A. the Father.

And as to the Barony of Br. as to one third part of it in trust for E. H. and
the Heirs Males of his body, Remainder to F. H. and the Heirs Males of his
body, Remainder to B. H. and the Heirs Males of his body, Remainder to T. H.
and the Heirs Males of his body, Remainder to H. H. and the Heirs Males of his
body, Remainder to the right Heirs of A. And as to another third part of the
Barony in trust for F. H. and the Heirs Males of his body, with like Remainders
to the other Brothers, ut supra; Remainders to the right Heirs of A. And as to
the other third part in trust for B. H. and the Heirs Males of his body, with
the like Remainders to the rest of the Brothers, ut supra.

A. died in 1652.

E. the Wife of A. died in 1673. and then the term of 200 years commenced.

D. the surviving Trustee at the request of H. H. assigned 20 November. 1675.
the term to one Marriot.

Marriot assigned the term to H. H. 1 Dec. 1675


H. H. by Bargain and Sale enrolled, sells to M. to make him 24 October. 1675.
Tenant to the Precipe for suffering a Recovery.

The use of the Recovery declared to be to H. H. and his 25 October. 1675.
Heirs.

T. H. the eldest Son of A. died without Issue or having ever Nov. 1677.
been married.

Query.
If the Trust to H. H. be good, and the other Trusts limited to the other
Brothers on the Contingent, in case T. H. died, whereby the Honor of A. should
descend to H. H. be good or void, relievable or not relievable in a Court of
Equity, the Term being surrendered?

I am of opinion, that the Trusts to all the Brothers of H. H. Sergeant P --
ton' s opinion 26 Dec. 1677.
in his term are void, and no ways relievable in Equity: For if these
Limitations, being made after T. H. shall die without Issue Male of his body,
were good in their Original Creation to the Brothers of H. H. it must be by the
attendancy of the term upon the Reversion of the Estate which was so intailed,
and then when their Estates in remainder were docked by the recovery which H.
H. suffered, and the Trusts that attended on them were likewise destroyed, and
can never survive the Remainder on which they depended, no more than they could
have stood alone in their Original Creation.

I conceive that the Trust for the term is appointed to wait Serj. M -- d' s
opinion 28 Dec. 1677.
upon the Inheritance in the forepart of the Deed, though seeming contrary to
the latter part is not so, but both may be reconciled (that is to say) shall
wait upon the Inheritance upon such Contingencies as hereafter is expressed,
being the Trust is limited and in the same order, only the Contingencies of
the death of T. H. without Issue, etc. prout.

The Trust of the term limited to H. H. and the Heirs Males of his body, with
Remainders over as this Case is, I think is a good Trust, and will go
accordingly, so long as there is no charge made, though regularly a Term for
years cannot be entailed, yet it may be made to wait upon the Inheritance that
is intailed.

But when it is so limited, it is not properly an Intail within the Statute de
bonis, but governable partly in Equity, and partly in Law.

H. H. to whom it is so intailed may dispose of it, and thereby bind his Issue
without Fine and Recovery, as I conceive. And the Term so limited Intail, shall
be subject to his Debts against the Issue Intail, as I also conceive.

By the Recovery suffered by H. H. all the Intails are barred, and consequently
the waiting of the Term upon the Inheritance destroyed, because the Inheritance
it self is changed; but the bare surrender of the Trustee could not have that
operation if nothing else had been in the Case.

But the greatest question in this Case, I conceive, will arise upon the death
of T. H. without Issue and the other Contingencies, because the Trust of the
term is not limited to H. H. absolutely, but to cease upon those Contingencies,
and then to be altered; yet seeing the main intention of the Settlement was to
make the Term wait upon the Inheritance, as by the recital of the Deed, and
when it changes is limited by way of Inheritance.

Therefore I conceive that H. H whilst he was owner of the Inheritance and
trust of the Term, suffered a Recovery, the Contingent trust of the Term to the
others are destroyed.

In Law they have no Relief, because the Estate for years is surrendered, and I
conceive the Chancery will not support such leaping Limitations of a Term for
years, especially when it cannot take effect in toto, as the contingent
Limitations are, and the Remainders in that case will be void.

M -- d.

I am of opinion that the Term being limited to H. H. and Sir William Jone' s
opinion 20 Jan. 1677.
the Heirs of his body under other Limitations than the Inheritance was, the
whole term vested in H. H. and the Limitations thereof to the other Brothers
were void: For a Trust of a Term cannot be intailed unless it be to attend an
Inheritance; and the limitations of the Trust differing from the limitations of
the Inheritance, it is all one as if the Trust of the Term was limited, without
respect to any Inheritance, in which Case the limitations of the Term to the
other Brothers would be clearly void. Next I take it to be clear, that taking
the Trust of the term to be attendant to the Inheritance of the Recovery,
having barred the Remainders of the other Brothers as to the Inheritance, the
Trust of the term must needs be wholly in H. H. and that the other Brothers can
never claim the same in Equity: For since the Inheritance (as intendant to
which they could only be entitled to any part of the Trust of the term) is
vested wholly in H. H. and no remainder left in the Brothers, there can be no
Remainders in any of them of the Trust of the term; but as the whole
Inheritance is now in H. H. so does the whole Trust attend that Inheritance.

W. Jones.

I am of opinion, that the now Duke of Norfolk and Earl Sir William Jones' s
opinion 30 Oct. 1680.
of Arundel, have a good Title to the said Baronies. First, in Law it is clear,
that the Term is surrendered; and so if any Title remain to the younger
Brothers, it can only be in Equity. And Secondly, I think there is no Title in
Equity, as to which it may be insisted upon, that if the Limitations of the
Trust of the term were at first good; yet seeing they are chiefly to attend the
Inheritance, and that Inheritance by the Recovery is changed and made a Fee
Simple, and this before the Contingency in the limitation of the Trust of the
Term happened, whereby the limitations of the Trusts are changed, and the
younger Brothers cannot have the Term in the same plight, nor during the same
Estate, as were at first designed. I say, from these Considerations it may be
concluded, that the limitations of the Trust of the Term are destroyed; but
that which I do most rely upon, is, that the first limitation of the Trust of
this Term under this Contingency, was altogether void; as to which, the Case is
no more than that a Term of 200 years is granted in trust, that H. H. and the
Heirs of his body shall receive the Profits, until by the death of T. H. and
the failure of Issue-Male of his body, the Honor of A. shall come to H. H. and
in case the Honor of A. shall descend to H. H. then the Trust for him and the
Issue-Male of his body to cease; and then it is limited respectively to the
younger Brothers, and the Heirs Males of their respective bodies; I conceive
these limitations to the younger Brothers are void. First, it will be agreed,
that the limitation of the Trust of a Term to one and the Heirs-Males of his
body, and for want of such Issue to another is void. As to the Second, I think
it as clear, that if a Trust of a Term be limited to one, as long as John a
Styles has Issue of his body, and that John a Styles die without Issue of his
body, then to another that Remainder is void: Likewise that which seems to make
the doubt in this present Case is, that the Contingency must happen within a
Life ( viz.) the Honor of A. descend to H. H. which must be to him in his
lifetime, or not at all. To which I answer, that though a Contingency be remote
in it self, and not likely to happen within a Life, the time within which it
ought to happen, or not at all; does not alter the case, and therefore in Child
and Bayly's Case, reported in 2d of Coke, and by Jones and Palmer, the failure
of Issue was limited to be within a Life ( viz.) a Term was devised to one and
his Assigns, and if he die without Issue of his body living, at the time of his
death, then to another: this was adjudged no Remainder unto that other; and
though 'twas objected that the Contingency must happen within the compass of
life, or not at all, yet no regard was given to that. This Case seems to me in
reason to be the same with ours. I do observe, that no Case can be found,
whether limitation either by way of Trust or Devise of a Term has been allowed
to take effect upon a failure of Issue, or after death of the party to whom the
first Estate was limited without Issue. And as in Child and Bayly's Case the
Judges say, as I have often heard them say in other Cases (that if Matthew
Maning's Case was now to be adjudged, it would not be so adjudged; and that
case is) a Term is demised to one for life, and after his death to another,
which is allowed good, and that they would not go a step farther so. I say, in
this Case it must go further than Manning's Case, or any other Case that
adjudged to make it void.

William Jones.

The Case is new, and without any express President, and Serj. M -- d' s
opinion 20 Nov. 1680.
therefore not capable of so certain a determination as would be expected, in
case advice were to be given, whether a Purchaser should deal in the buying of
a Lease or not.

Yet though there be no President in point, yet suchlike Cases have been
determined as guide my Judgment and Opinion to be ( scilicet) that as this
Case is circumstantiated, Charles has not, nor can have a right to the Trust
of the Term, the Reasons and ground of my Opinion is as follows.

First, The Trust of the term for years in gross, and separate from an
Inheritance, cannot be intailed in Possession or Remainder; but yet where there
is a Term for years in being, if the Inheritance of the Land be intailed with
Remainders over, there the Term may be limited to wait upon the Inheritance,
according to the several Intails; and such limitation is good, so long as
nothing intervenes to interrupt or disturb it.

But I conceive is not capable of such Privileges of Intail as Inheritance is,
for the Intail is confirmed by the Statute of Westminster. 2d de bonis; but the
attendance of the Term upon the Inheritance intailed, is not within the Statute
de bonis, etc. but is a Creature of the Chancery, and in several Cases may be
destroyed and barred, though no Fine and Recovery or other bar be made of the
Inheritance.

I conceive such case if the Tenant intail Alien without Fine or Recovery for
valuable Consideration, the Issue Intail shall avoid the Inheritance, the
Chancery shall never help him to avoid the Lease.

In this particular Case it is clear, that neither Charles nor any in
Remainder, can recover this Term at Law, but only by suit in Chancery; and in
Chancery shall never recover where the limitation of such a Term in being is
not supportable in Common Law, which in this Case it is not, as I conceive; for
take the Case without the Contingency, that Henry was Tenant Intail, Remainder
to Charles Intail, etc. the Recovery suffered by H. would have barred Charles
and the rest of the term, as well as of the Inheritance.

But the sole Objection here is, that the trust of the term to Henry is
expressed, that it shall determine quo ad Henry and his Issue, in case Tho.
Duke of Norfolk dye without Issue, living Charles, as in this case he did.

The strength of this Objection lies in this: First, That the Cessor of the
Trust is to be upon the death of a Stranger without Issue ( scil.) on Tho. Duke
of Norfolk, on whom the Lands were not Intailed. And secondly, The term is not
to cease, but upon the death of Tho. Duke of Norfolk without Issue in the life
of Henry.

As to the first, it will make no difference in Reason and in the pollity of
the Law, where the Cessor is limited on the death of a Stranger without Issue,
or of the Tenant Intail without heir of his body. For first,

In both Cases the possibility is remote and not regarded in Law, where a term
is so limited, and so were the resolutions in Child's and Bayly's Case, and
diverse others.

This would be a way to set up a perpetuity, as strongly as that it was limited
upon the death of the Tenant in tail without Issue.

Put the case there be Father and several Sons A. B. and C. and the Father is
seized in Fee of the reversion of Lands, after a Lease of 200 years he settles
the Inheritance upon his eldest Son in tail, with Remainders in tail to his
other Sons; and this Lease being in Trustees for him at the same time, causes
the Lease to be settled in Trustees in Trust for the Sons, to wait on the
Inheritance in Trust accordingly, provided that the second Son dye without
Issue in the life of the Father or Son, the Trust of the eldest Son to cease.

I conceive this would not be maintained in Equity, if the second Son should
not alien by Fine and Recovery.

As to the Second Objection, that the Cessor is on the Death Mic. 17. Jac. R. B.
of Tho. without Issue in the Life of Henry, whereby the Contingency is reduced
to happen in the Life of one person ( viz.) Henry, and not at large ( viz.) of
the death of Tho. without Issue, I conceive no difference made thereby, and it
is in effect the point adjudged in Child and Bayly's Case which was thus:
French a Termer for 76 years demises to his Wife for Life, Remainder of the
Term to W. his Son and his Assigns, Provisee, That if his Son W. dyed without
Issue of his body then living, That T. his Son should have the Term or Interest.

Adjudged then in B. R. which was three years after affirmed Mic. 20. Jac.
in the Exchequer Chamber by Hobart, Winch, Denham, Hutton, and Jones, that the
Demise to Tho. was void.

In that Case the Contingency did expect during the life of W. only as here it
is on the life of H. and the Reasons of their Judgments both in the Kings Bench
and Exchequer-Chamber, in effect of all the Judges of England at that time, was
because it might tend to make a perpetuity, and that this new-invented way of
Intailing of Terms in no sort to be favored in Law.

In Child's Case 'twas limited, if William had no Issue at the time of his
decease; in this Case, if Tho. had no Issue at the time of Henry's death.

Put case it had been limited, that Tho. had dyed without Issue in thirty or
forty, or any number of years, or if it had been limited that Tho. had dyed
without Issue in the Life of Henry, and five or six more persons, it might have
been so limited as well as to one Life, and the Law is the same.

It is more Contingent when the Cessor is limited to be upon the death of Tho.
without Issue in the life of Henry, then it had been if Tho. had dyed without
Issue generally; for he may dye without Issue, though he dye not without Issue
in the life of Henry.

First, the sum of this is, if such limitation of a Term as this is, be not
good at Law, the Trust of a Term cannot be good in Chancery.

Secondly, the general scope of the Settlement of the Term was, that the Term
shall wait on the Inheritance Intail, which now cannot be, because it is
altered.

Again, if the Law should be otherwise, that Charles have the whole Term, then
those in Remainder shall be utterly defeated of it, and shall not go to Charles
his Son and Heir, but to the Executors, which was never intended by the Deed.

M -- d.

I conceive, that notwithstanding the late Judgments in Opinions and
Considerations for the younger Brothers. Sir J. C --.
Chancery have been, that if a Term of years be limited by way of Trust, or
otherwise, to any person and his Heirs Males, with Remainders over, or other
limitations to any other persons, those Remainders and Limitations are void,
and the whole Term shall be to that person and his Executors and
Administrators, to whom it was first limited in Tail; yet this Case is
different from all those Cases, by reason this was only a Temporary Provision
as to Mr. Henry Howard, until that Contingent of the death of the Duke of
Norfolk should happen, and then absolutely to cease as to Mr. Henry Howard. And
then the Trust of the Term is declared to be for the preferment of the younger
Sons, as is above expressed; and albeit that Marriot has in plain breach of
Trust by his Assignment, enabled the now Duke to destroy the Term in point of
Law; yet the Chancery may subject the Lands during the Remainder of the term to
the Trustees for the younger Children, as agreeable to the intention of the
Deed of Trust, and to all Honesty and Equity, and that Equity I take is in no
sort barred by the Fine, if a Bill be exhibied in time.

J. C.
8 Jan. 1677.
I concur with this Opinion, because it is no absolute Trust, Sir R. S.
not so much as for the life of Henry, but a limited Trust upon a Contingent,
which as in its Creation it might, so in Fact, it did happen in the lifetime
of Henry; and consequently there is no room for any Construction to be made,
that the Trust of the whole term vested in Henry against the express limitation
thereof.

R. S.

I conceive, first, that if by Act executed my Lord of Arundel Mr. Offley.
had created this term to my Lord Dorchester, and the rest of the Trustees in
trust for Henry Howard in tail, and after his death to the Brothers in tail,
that had been a perpetuity, and not good for a term; though as to that, there
is a difference taken in Tatten and Mollenex Case, More 809, 810. in Chancery,
by the Lord Chancellor, and the Judges assistant; which seems to be
reasonable, that the first party that is the Cestique Trust against his Issue,
may dispose of it, but not against him in Remainder; for Equity preserves it as
to the Remainder, so then if it had been to Henry Howard and the Issues of his
body, the Remainders to the Brothers: Though Henry Howard could, as to his
Issue, dispose of it, yet as to his Brothers it stood good, if that Resolution
holds good, and the Books says it was grounded upon presidents in that Court
too. But this case differs where the course of Equity is against it; therefore,
first there is only by this Conveyance a reception of the profits in Henry
Howard and the Issue Male of his body, until the Dignity of Arundel come to
him. And it is not in trust for him and his Issue Male; so as he has not the
entire trust in him, as the other Sons have by the penning of the Deed.
Secondly, it is not absolutely in trust in him and his Issue Male, but temporary
in them, upon the falling of the Dignity of Arundel sooner or later, and he is
not a Cestique trust within any of the Statutes proceeding in the Statute of
Uses, but has but a limited pursuance of the profits; but the trust vests
completely in the Brothers after. Thirdly, then the Marquess of Dorchester
assigns the term to Marriot, and he assigning to H. H. whereby he has in
strictness of Law extinguished it, whereby there is a wrong and deceit done to
the Brothers, he is bound in equity and good Conscience, to make them
recompense and satisfaction for this wrong; and it appearing that H. H. was
privy to this, with a design to extinguish it, and that extinguishment turning
to his advantage, he is likewise compellable in Equity to answer it out of his
Estate, either by creating a new Term in this Land, or by some other way,
according to the Resolution of the Judges in my Lord of Ormon's Case, Hubbard
350.

I have seen the Opinions of Mr. Attorney General, Serj. Sir W. Ellis.
Maynard, and Serj. Pemberton, whose Opinions I do much value, and have great
esteem for. Mr. Attorney says, that the Term to H. H. and the Heirs of his
body, under other limitations than the Inheritance was, the whole Term vested
in H. H. and the Limitations thereof to the other Brothers are void, I conceive
the whole trust of the Term is not limited to H. H. but part of the Trust, so
long as Thomas the deceased Duke shall have Heirs Males of his body, and until
the Earldom comes unto him; so as the Trust is but a qualified and limited
Trust in H. H. so as this Trust to H. is now ended by way of limitation to H.
H. and then there is a new Trust springs and arises to the younger Brothers,
not by way of Remainder of a term, but the Trust to H. H. being ended and
determined, I conceive a new one may well arise and spring up to the younger
Children, admitting it were a trust of a term in Gross, it is not a Remainder,
but a future Contingent grant and a limitation to them, as it is in Pell and
Browns Case.

Secondly, If it be to attend the Inheritance, then he conceives clearly, the
Recovery having barred all Remainders, the Term and the trust of the Term is
also barred. If this Trust had been to wait upon all the Estate as they came in
possession, it had been the stronger; but as this Case is, I conceive the Trust
will wait upon the Estate of H. H. for so long as Tho. lives, and has Heirs
Males of his body, and until the Earldom come unto him, and the Trust of Henry
determines, and then a new Trust springs up to the younger Children, which is a
future contingent trust, so as a common Recovery can bar this Trust, so long
only as they did wait upon the Estate of H. H. which is now determined by a
collateral Limitation, and the Recovery cannot enlarge the Trust to H. H and
make that to continue which in its Creation was to end when such a Contingent
happens, which has now happened if H. H. had not suffered a common Recovery, he
had had an Estate-tail, yet no Trust, this is a future contingent Trust to the
younger Children, which cannot be barred by a common Recovery.

W. Ellis,
8 Martii 1677.
1. The Surrender or Grant of the Lease for 200 years to Serj. M -- d for the
Brothers.
Henry, nor the extinguishment of the legal Interest of the term, does not
prejudice the equitable Trust of the term, so long as the Lands comes not into
other hands ( viz.) of a Purchaser, without notice of the Trust, which is not
in this Case.

2. An Intail cannot be made of a term in Gross, as if a Lease for 1000 years
be made in trust for J. S. and the Heirs of his body, with Remainders over, J.
S. may dispose of the whole term, and such disposal is good against his Issue
and those in Remainder; and if he die without such disposition made by him, his
Executors shall have the benefit of the Trust, and not his Issue or the
Remainder.

3. But a Term may be limited to attend and wait on the Inheritance by way of a
trust, as if a long term of years be the Reversion in Fee, if the Reversion be
purchased in Fee, or settled in tail, the term may be settled to the use of the
Fee or Tenant intail; and in that case, if the Tenant intail die, or the Tenant
in Fee die, the Heir or Issue shall have the benefit of the trust, and not the
Executors, etc.

4. But in that Case, if the Tenant in Fee die in debt, and no other sufficient
Assets to pay the debt, in that case the Executor shall be preferred before the
Heir, although the debt be such as the Heir is not bound or liable unto.

5. And I conceive, that in that case, if the Tenant intail, that has the
Equity of a term waiting on it, do purchase the term and alien, or obtain the
Trustee of the term to make an alienation of the term, it shall bind the Issue
intail and him in Remainder, though the Alienation be by Deed without Fine or
Recovery, because the term in Law is well aliened without Fine, etc. And the
Statute of Westminster. 2d de bonis extends not to a Case of a term.

6. Yet it is true, this does not absolutely determine the Case in question
upon three accounts.

First, It is a new Case not yet brought in question.

Secondly, Because here is a springing and a new trust by accident subsequent,
and alters the Trust, and changes the Intail of the term to other persons, from
Henry to the younger Children, and on such accident takes away the Trust wholly
from Henry the first Tenant in tail.

And Thirdly, the Change seems to be grounded on great reason; for the Lord
Maltravers being in such condition as he was in, there was great reason to
disable him and provide for the younger Children, as is done by Case; and if
Henry should come to be Earl, and have addition of Estates, that the other
younger Children should also have accession of Estate to them, and so it is by
this Deed of trust provided.

But notwithstanding these reasons, and this difference of the Case in these
circumstances from other Cases already resolved, and the contrary Opinions that
I have seen, I am rather of the opinion, that in this Case the younger Brothers
are bound by the Recovery suffered by Henry, than convinced that they are not
bound; for I find that the Reasons given e contra, touch not my doubt fully.

The Reasons of my Opinion are ( viz.)

1. For the Recovery suffered, and the time when it was suffered (to wit)
before the Lord Maltravers dyed; for till he dyed, Henry was Tenant in tail,
and had power by a Recovery to bar and dispose of the whole Inheritance, as
well of his his own Estate tail, as of those in Remainder: The term of years
was but accessory to serve and attend the Inheritance which was principal.

2. And the only reason that made such intailing or limitation of the term
good, was, because it was to wait on the Inheritance, first to Henry in tail,
and so successively to the other Brothers; or else, as it is abovesaid, the
limitation had not been good: And when that reason fails, and the cause why it
was a good limitation cease and is taken away, the effect of it does likewise
cease.

3. The change of the term into thirds, does not change the Estates tail of the
younger Brothers, and cannot stand with the intention of the Deed of Trust: For
I think it clear, if Charles, admitting he come to the Inheritance as owner, or
if in the life of Henry he could get a Tenant of the Freehold of all, or any
part of the Land to join with him, should then suffer a Recovery, it would bar
Edward, Francis, and Bernard, of so much of the third part whereof such
Recovery should be suffered, viz. of the whole Inheritance, and a third of the
term and the residue (to wit) the other two parts would respectively cease, and
be intailed as to the term, and be wholly in the respective disposition of
Edward and the rest, and go to their Executors, not to their Issues or the
Remainders.

And yet upon long consideration of the Case, there is another, and a further
ground of my doubt of what has been said ( viz.) not only because it is a new
Case, and concerns a Great and Noble Family, but on another and further
ground observed and insisted upon by such great Opinions, contrary to what I
have above observed ( viz.) that it is not only a springing and contingent use
to the younger Brothers, respecting them but because the Original Trust to
Henry, viz. that the Trust to him and his Issue is, as to him and them, under a
Limitation; and that not so long as he the Tenant in tail shall have Issue, but
so long as the Lord Maltravers shall have Issue Male, and on that reason the
Case is more doubtful.

M -- d.

1. I agree, that if a man have a term for a 1000 years, and Sir W. Ellis.
he grants and demiseth this to one and the Heirs Males of his body, the
Remainder to another and his Heirs, that this term cannot be intailed, nor a
Remainder limited upon it; and that upon the death of the party to whom the
term was so given, it shall go to his Executors as a Chattle, and not to his
Heirs Male.

2. I do conceive it will not be denied by any, that if there be a long term
for years, for a 1000 years, more or less in trust, and a man purchases or
settles the Inheritance to the use of himself for life, the Remainder in Tail,
the Remainder in Fee, and declare that the trusts of the term shall wait upon
those Estates, and fall in with them. But that this trust of the term shall go
along with all the Estate, and shall not be merged in any of them, and this
trust shall not go to an Executor, but shall go along with the Estate, and if
the tenant in tail dye without Issue, it shall go along with the next Remainder
man in tail, and after his death without Issue, it shall go to him in Fee
simple, and attend all the Estates in Remainders, be they never so many. And
this, I conceive, is the common course in Chancery to incorporate such trusts
to go with all the Estates. This is not an absolute Trust for Henry and the
Heirs Male of his body, but a limited and qualified Trust as long as Duke
Thomas's elder Brother lived, and has Heirs Males of his body, and until the
Earldom of A. does come unto him; so as by the death of Duke Thomas without
Issue, the Trust to Henry, which was but a limited Trust, is now determined and
vanquished as to Henry.

As this was a contingent trust in Henry, but in Case Tho. was alive, and had
issue when the term was to begin, so the continuance and duration of the trust
of the term, was but to last until the Earldom came unto him; and it is the
stronger, for that this trust ends in Henry by way of Limitation.

Query.
How long shall Henry and his Issue have this Trust?

Answ.
Until Thomas die without Issue Male, and the Earldom of A. come unto him, both
which has happened, so as the trust for Henry and his Issue is ended by way of
limitation, and is now disposed over to others, as it may well be so, as this
is a new Trust that by a contingent subsequent Declaration takes away the Trust
from Henry, and settles a new Trust in the younger Children; and it is to be
considered, that Henry is to have the Trust of this term, not so long as he
shall have Issue, but so long as the Lord Maltravers shall have Heirs Male, so
as that makes it a collateral Limitation or Determination of the said Estate.

4. The Equity and Justice of this Trust carries much weight with me, and that
condition the Lord Maltravers was in: It was fit to settle the Trust in Henry,
so long as the Lord Maltravers had Heirs Male of his body, and if they failed,
and that the Earldom of A. and great accession of Estate to come to Henry, it
was a great reason that the younger Children should be provided for and taken
notice of.

And it will not be easy to blow off and overthrow a Trust in a Court of
Equity, contrary to the express mind and intention of him that made it, for the
provision of they younger Children, especially it being made with so much
Justice and Reason, wherein he has both a respect for his Honors Family and
younger Children.

Obj.
There is no Objection against all I have said, which seems prima facie to carry
weight with it; and that is, when the legal interest is come to Henry, and he
is Tenant intail in possession, and suffers a common Recovery, and bars all the
Remainders Intail.

Query.
How can this trust which is an Accessory follow Estates?

Answ.
To which I answer first, If the Trust had been to follow and wait upon the
Estate, this Objection had been the stronger; but this trust is not absolutely
to wait upon Henry's Estate, but so long as Duke Thomas has Heirs Male of his
body, and until the Earldom of A. come to him, both which are happened, he
continues still Tenant Intail, and yet this Interest is determined in the
trusts.

Secondly, this is a future contingent Interest that now is happened to the
younger Brothers, which cannot be barred, and it may be resembled to Pell and
Brown's Case, 2 Cro. 590, 591.

A man demiseth his Land to his second Son Thomas and his Heirs, and if he die
without Issue, leaving William his elder Brother, then William should have it
in Fee; it was adjudged that this was a Fee Simple in Thomas the second. And
though regularly one Fee cannot descend on another; yet this being a future
contingent Interest that the Devise of the Fee Simple to William his eldest Son.

Another great Question was, Thomas the second Son suffered a common Recovery,
whether this did not bar the future contingent possibility of William?

And it was adjudged it did not.

Now here is as much a future contingent possibility of a Trust, as there was
of an Estate and more, and therefore there is much reason that the future
contingent possibility of a Trust should not be barred by a common Recovery, as
in that Case. And as to that which is said, that an Accessory cannot be without
a substance, and the Estates of the younger Children is to succeed, and yet
they have no proper Estate, for Henry is now Tenant, so as this is a personal
trust for the younger Children independent of their Estates; and if so, then
clearly this Recovery cannot bar their Estates.

Another reason why a Court of Equity should help and interpose in this Case,
may be, because the Estate for years was conveyed by Marriot in breach of the
Trust, which a Court of Equity ought to maintain and support as much as they
can.

First, Because Marriot and the now Duke are not Purchasers for a valuable
Consideration.

Secondly, They came in with privity and had notice of the Trust.

And I conceive may and will, notwithstanding these Acts, make good these
Trusts for the younger Children; and if this be a new doubtful Case, certainly
I conceive it is the surest and safest way for a Court of Equity to make good
the intention of him that made it, and to preserve the Trust for the younger
Children.

William Ellis
26 Feb. 1677.
De Termino S. Hill. Anno Reg. Car. 2d Regis XXXIII and XXXIV Anno Dom. 1681.
Martis 24 die Jan. in Curia Cancellarii.
Howard, versus Le Duc de Norfolk, and al.
THis day being appointed for Judgment in this Cause, the three Judges
assisted the Lord Chancellor at the hearing, viz. the Lord Chief Justice
Pemberton, the Lord Chief Justice North, and the Lord Chief Baron Montague,
came into the Court of Chancery, and delivered their Opinions Seriatim,
beginning with the Lord Chief Baron Montague, and so upwards; after whom the
Lord Chancellor also delivered his Opinion: The sum of all the Arguments, as
near as could be taken, were as follows.

The Argument of the Lord Chief Baron Montague.
Charles Howard is Plaintiff, and the Duke of Norfolk and others are
Defendants. The Plaintiff by his Bill seeks to have Execution of a Trust of a
term of 200 years of the Barony of Grastock, which was made by Henry Frederick
Earl of Arundel, and upon the Bill, Answers, Deeds, and other Passages in this
Cause contained, is this:

Henry Frederick Earl of Arundel by Lease and Release of the 20th and 21th of
March, 1647. did settle the Barony of Grastock and of Burgh, and several other
Lands to himself for Life, then to the Countess Elizabeth his Wife for life,
and then there is a term created for 99 years (which we need not mention in
this Case, because it is determined) and after the death of the Countess, there
is a term for years limited to my Lord of Dorchester and other Trustees for 200
years, under a Trust to be declared in a Deed of the same date, with the
Release and the limitation of the Inheritance, after this term of 200 years, is
first to Henry Howard now Duke of Norfolk and the Heirs Males of his Body, then
to Mr. Charles Howard the now Plaintiff, Brother of the said Henry, and so to
all his Brothers successively intail Male, with the last Remainder to the Earl
of and his Heirs, then by a Deed 21 of March 1647, the Earl declares the Trust
of the term of 200 years, reciting first the uses of the former Deed, and
therein says, it was intended that the said term should attend the Inheritance,
and the Profits of the Barony of should be received for 200 years by Henry
Howard now Duke of Norfolk and the Heirs Males of his body, so long as Lord
Thomas eldest son of the said Earl of Arundel, or any Issue Male of his body
should be living; but in case he should die without Issue Male in the life of
Henry Howard, not leaving his Wife ensient with a Son, or in case after the
death of Thomas without Issue Male, the Honor of the Earldom of Arundel should
descend to Henry Howard, then he and his Issues to have no benefit of this term
of 200 years, but it was to descend to the other Brother Charles Howard the now
Plaintiff as hereafter is mentioned; and then comes Now this Indenture
witnesses, and therein the Earl declares that it should be under the
Limitations after specified ( viz.) if Thomas Lord Howard had any Issue Male or
Heirs Male of his body (living Henry Howard) then the Trustees should have the
commencement of the term in trust for the said Henry Howard and the Heirs Males
of his body, till such time as the Earldom should come to Henry Howard, by the
death of Thomas without Heirs Males of his body, and after to the other
Brothers successively, and the Heirs Males of their bodies; and then does
divide the other Manors with cross Remainders to the five Brothers, then the
Case goes on thus, the Earl of Arundel dies in time in 1652, Elizabeth the
Countess dies in 1673, then in 1675, my Lord of Dorchester the surviving
Trustee, assigns the Term to one Marriot, he assigns it to the now Duke of
Norfolk, and the Duke the 24th of October. 1675, by Bargain and Sale makes a
Tenant to the Precipe, and then a Recovery is suffered, and the Uses of that
Recovery 25th of October are declared to be to the Duke and his Heirs. Then
Thomas Howard the former Duke died without Issue, having never been married,
and that is in the year 1677, whereby the Honor came to the now Duke, and so
the Plaintiffs Bill is to have execution of the Trust of the term of the Barony
of to the use of himself and the Heirs Males of his body. This I conceive was
opposed by the Counsel for the Defendant upon these grounds.

1. That by the Assignment made by Marriot to my Lord Duke Henry, the Term was
surrendered and quite gone.

2. The second ground was the common Recovery suffered, which they say barred
the remainders which the other Brothers had, and so also would be a bar to the
Trust of this term.

3. And the other ground was, that the Trust of a term to Henry and the Heirs
Males of his body, until by the death of Thomas without Issue, the Earldom
should descend upon him, and then to Charles, is a void Limitation of the
Remainder.

As to the first, that by the assignment of Marriot to Henry Howard, the whole
Term was surrendered; and being so surrendered, has no existance at all that I
find, but was barely mentioned, and I think cannot be stood upon; for this the
term by the surrender is gone indeed and merged in the Inheritance, yet the
Trust of that term remains in Equity; and if this Trust be destroyed by him
that had it assigned to him, this Court has full power to set it up again, and
to decree the term to him to whom it did belong, or a recompense for it;
therefore I think that stands not at all as a point in the Case, or as an
objection in the way.

As to the next thing, the common recovery now suffered by the now Duke, that
does bar the remainders to the other Brothers: And so also the trust of this
term, that I conceive, to be so in case this can be interpreted to be a term to
attend the Inheritance; and indeed in the reciting part, the Deed does seem to
say, that it was intended to attend the Inheritance. But by that part of the
Deed which follows after ( now this Indenture witnesses) there it is
limited, that the term should be to Henry Howard and the Heirs Males of his
body, until such time as the Honor of the Earl of Arundel by his elder
Brothers death without Issue, should come to him; then to the Plaintiff, which
does convey the Estate of the term in a different Channel, from that in which
the Inheritance is settled; and taking this Deed altogether, it does limit this
term in such various Estates, that it can no way be construed to be a term
attending the Inheritance; and then, I conceive, the recovery does not bar the
trust, for the recovery would bar the incident to any Estate, as this would do
here, if it attended the Inheritance; but being only a term in Gross, and a
collateral thing, I conceive the recovery has no operation to bar the trust in
the term. Then the Case singly depends upon the third point whether the Trust
of a term thus limited to Henry Howard and the Heirs Males of his body, until
his Brother die without Issue, whereby the Honor came to him with such
contingent Remainders over, be a good Limitation, this is the Question and so
in short the Case is but thus: A Term of Two Hundred years is granted in trust,
that Henry Howard and the Heirs Males of his body shall receive the Profits
until Thomas die without Issue Male of his body, and then to Charles Howard,
and the Heirs Male of his body: And in this case, I am of Opinion, that these
Limitations to the younger Brothers upon this Contingency, are absolutely void
in the first Creation, and are gone without the Surrender; and that upon this
Recovery Henry Howard, now Duke of Norfolk, ought to have the trust of the
whole Term.

The Expositions of Devizes of Terms, or the Dispositions of the Trust of
Terms, have proceeded by many steps to higher degrees than was at first thought
of by the makers. It would be too long to give a distinct History of it; but it
is so plain, that it is now a resolved and decreed thing and settled, therefore
it were in vain to tell you the steps taken toward it. That the devize of a
Term, and the limitation of the trust of a Term to one and the Heirs of his
body is good, though Burgesses Case was only for Life, the Cases are very full
in it. On the other side, where there is a limitation of a Term to one and the
Heirs of his body, there a positive Limitation of the Estate over, after his
death without Issue, that I think also is as fully declared to be void. I shall
not cite Cases at large, but only those Points and Expressions in them which
are peculiar and pertinent to this purpose: there is Jinkins and Kennish's
Case, I think it was in the Exchequer, there it was said, it was such a total
Disposition of the term, to limit it to one and his Heirs Males, that it would
not admit of a Limitation over, but adjudged to be void. So in my Lord Rolls
Abridgments, 1 Part Tit. Devise fol. 611. 11 Car. 1. Leventhorp and Ashby's
Case B. R. It is said, that the Remainder of a Term to C. after it is limited
to B. and the Heirs Males of his body, is a void Remainder; and fol. 613. he
puts down the reason why the Remainder is void, because the Limitation to one
and the Heirs Males of his body is a full disposition of the Term. And if such
Limitations over were permitted, it would create perpetuities, which the Law
does abhor.

Sanders and Cornishes Case Croke fol. 230. There it is resolved, that the
Devise of a Term in such a manner with Limitations after one another, to make a
perpetuity, cannot be good: For, says the Book, to limit a possibility, and to
limit the Remainder of a term, after a dying without Issue, stands not with the
Rules of Law. Now to bring this Case within these Rules, that if there be the
Trust of a term to a man and the Heirs of his body, no Limitation can be over.
I say then, if this Estate be so limited to my Lord Duke by the name of Henry
Howard, the other will follow when there is a Limitation Intail, (though it
cannot be properly styled Intail of a Term, yet it is a Disposition of that
Term as long as the Tail lasts) then there can be no Limitation over. And as to
that I think, as the Deed is penned, it may well be stood upon, that here is an
Estate given to Henry and the Heirs Males of his body: For though the Deed
says, until by the death of Thomas without Issue, the Earldom of Arundel shall
descend upon him, yet the first Limitation, I think, shall stop at the Heirs
Male of his body, and the Remainder over shall be then void. But I will not
stand upon that, because I think I shall not need it, but admit (until by the
failure of the Issue of Thomas the Earldom come to him) makes it not an Estate
to Henry and the Heirs of his body directly, yet it gives an Estate to him and
the Heirs of his body, as long as Thomas has any Issue of his body, and that I
count to be all one as to the Operation of Law; for each of the Estates must
determine upon the persons dying without Issue, which is too remote a Condition
to limit the Remainders of a Term upon. And this until he die without Issue,
and as long as he shall have Issue, are terms Synonimous in my Opinion; and so,
it being a Limitation to him and his Heirs of his body, as long as Thomas
lives, and has Issue of his body, it cannot be limited over, and the rather
upon comparing the former part of the Deed, where there is an expression, that
it was intended the Estate should remain in my now Lord Duke, so long as Thomas
lived, or had any Issue of his body. Therefore, I say, there being in my
opinion no difference as to operation of Law, between the Limitations to a man
and the Heirs of his own body, and to a man and the Heirs of his body, during
the life of another and the Heirs of his body, there can be no difference in
the resolution. It is as possible a disposition of the Term during the
continuance of an Intail as the other, and therefore no Remainder can be
limited over.

But now the doubt in this Case, that is made, arises upon this point, that
this Limitation over to the Brothers, is upon a mere Contingency, and whether
that be good, I think, is the main Question. And truly upon the reasons of
Child and Baily's Case, I cannot think it is a good Limitation; that Case has
been so often reported, that I need not put it at large. In short, this it was;
A Devise by A. of a Term to William his eldest Son and his Assigns; and if he
die without Issue, then to Thomas his youngest Son: there the Judges of the
King's Bench did first deliver their Opinion, that this was a void Limitation to
Thomas. And after it came into the Exchequer-Chamber, and there, by the Opinion
of ten Judges, it was affirmed, and the reasons of the Judgment are not what
was alleged at the bar in this Cause; but they went upon the ground, because
thereby a perpetuity would ensue; and that which was observed by one of the
Council, that the Term was given to him and his Assigns, was only an Answer to
a Case put in the argument upon Child and Baily's Case, which was the Case of
Rhetoric and Chapel, Hill. 9 Jac. R. 889. B. R. which was cited by my Lord
Chief Baron Tanfield, against the resolution of Child and Baily's Case, to
difference it from the Case then before them. And though it was urged in Child
and Baily's Case, that it was given upon a Contingency to the younger Son,
which would soon be determined, and end in a short time; yet that weighed not
with the Judges, but that they ruled it to be a void Limitation; and I met
lately with a Judgment in the Common Pleas, which crosses that Case of
Rhetoricks and Chappell's, it was Hill. 31 and 32 Car. 2. Reg. 1615, Gibson's
and Sanders's Case; Matthews possessed of a long Term of years, having Issue a
Son and three Daughters, makes his Will, and devises his Chattel-Leases to his
Son, and if that Son die before Marriage, or after Marriage without Issue, that
then they should go to the Daughters. The Son does Marry, and dies without
Issue, the Daughters his Executrixes, against whom an Action of Debt is brought
upon a Bond, they plead no Assets; and upon a special Verdict, the Question
being whether this were Assets in their hands, it was adjudged it was.

In the report of that Case, there are many expressions of the Courts
unwillingness to extend these Devises and Dispositions of Terms, further than
the Judges had gone already. The authority of this Case does much strengthen
the authority of Baily's Case, because it does thwart and oppose the Judgment
in Rhetoric and Chappell's Case.

There was also started at the Bar in Pell and Browns Case, that a Fee upon a
Fee, arising upon such a proximate Contingency, as might happen in so short a
time as a Life, was a good Limitation. It is very true, that Case is so
adjudged; but I think there might be such reason of difference urged between
the disposition of a Fee-Simple, and of a Term; for a Term may be qualified as
to a man and his Heirs until a marriage take effect; but the qualifying of a
disposition of a Term cannot be, because when once a Term is given, the
qualification comes too late.

I do think that there have been Cases in this Court, where a Term has been
limited to one and the Heirs Males of his body, upon a Contingency, to happen
first with Limitations over, if that Contingency do not happen, that has been a
good Limitation. As thus; if it be limited to the Wife for life, and then to
the eldest Son, if he overlive his Mother and the Heirs Males of his body, the
Remainder over to a younger Son there, if the eldest Son die in the life of the
Mother, the Limitation to the second Son may be good. But if there be an
instant Estate-tail created upon a Term, with Remainders over, though there be
a Contingency as to the expectations of him in the Remainder, yet there is such
a total disposition of the Term, as after which no Limitations of a Term can
be. For that Objection out of Pell and Brown's Case, there is no such sure
Foundation to build upon in the point of a Term, because that Case it self has
been controverted since that Judgment given, in a Case between Jay and Jay, in
styles Reports, 258 and 274, Trinit. 1651, fol. 258. It Is thus, A man seized in
Fee devised it to one and his Heirs; and if he die during the life of his
Mother, the Remainder to another and his Heirs.

There is no Opinion given; but Rolls Chief Justice said, a Limitation of an
Inheritance after an absolute Fee-simple, is not a good Limitation, because
this would be to make a Perpetuity, which the Law will not admit; but if it be
upon a contingent Fee-simple it is otherwise; but fol. 274, where it is spoken
to again by Latch; he argued that it was not a good Limitation; and though he
does cite and confess Pell and Brown's Case to be adjudged quite contrary to
what he argued, yet he tells you, that the Judges did find such Inconveniences
arising upon it, that the Court was divided upon a like Case; and says further,
that within nine years after that Judgment, 21 Jac. it was made a flat Query
in the Sergeants Case; and adds moreover, that it has been ever since
disputable, and cites a Case and gives you a Roll, but not the Parties names,
Mich. 37 and 38 Eliz. C. B. Roll. 1149, wherein says the Book, after solemn
Arguments both at Bar and Bench, it was adjudged quite contrary to Pell and
Brown's Case; but admit that Case to be good Law, where will you stop, if you
admit the limitation of a Term after an Estate-tail, where shall it end? for if
after one, it may as well be after two; and if after two, then as well after
twenty; for it may be said, if he die within 20 years without Issue, and so if
within 100, and there will be no end; and so a Perpetuity will follow. It was
said at the Bar, it will be hard to frustrate the intention of the Parties: To
that I answer, Intention of Parties not according to Law are not to be
regarded. It was the Intention in Child and Baily's Case, that the younger Son
should have it; and so in Burgesses Case, it was the Intention the Daughter
should have it; and so in Gibsons and Sommers's Case, it was intended for the
Daughters, yet all these Intentions were rejected; and therefore as to that, it
is not at all to weigh any thing in the Case.

It has also been objected, but then here is a contingency that has actually
happened upon Thomas's death without Issue, and so the Honor is come to Henry, I
say the happening of the Contingency is no ground to judge.

The Limitation good upon it was not good, if the other Limitation had stood
out, and that I conceive is our Case. So then for that I think these
expositions have gone as far already as they can; for my part I cannot extend
it any further, and therefore I conceive in this Case, the Plaintiff has no
right to this Term, but the Decree ought to be made for the Defendants.

The Argument of the Lord Chief Justice North
I Shall not trouble your Lordship to repeat the Case again, for it has been
truly opened by my Lord Chief Baron, nor shall I trouble you with any long
Argument, because I think there is but one point in the case, and that a short
one: The only point is this, Whether this contingent Trust of a Term limited
to Charles, upon the dying of Thomas without Issue Male, whereby the Honor did
descend to Henry, be good in point of Creation and Limitation; for the other
two points will not trouble the Case: For as to that point of the Recovery, in
case this being not a good Limitation in point of Creation, it will make
nothing in the Case, for it is gone without the Recovery. In case it be good in
point of Creation, the Recovery will do nothing; for that supposes it to go
along with the Inheritance: And if this take effect, then it will suffer no
prejudice by the Recovery. Then for the assignment of Marriot to the Duke, that
signifies nothing in the Case; it does indeed show, that if your Lordship
shall decree this Cause for the Plaintiff, then he has committed a breach of
Trust; but if for the Defendant, then it is of no weight at all. If the Law be
for the Plaintiff, then he must answer for this breach of Trust, and so must
the Duke; for it is a surrender to a person that had notice of the Trust. So
that the Question is barely upon that single first Point, whether it be a good
Limitation upon the Contingency to Charles, this which they call a springing
Trust. My Lord, I take the Rules of this Court, in cases of Trusts of Terms, to
be the same with Rules of Law in Devises of Terms: For I conceive the Rules of
Law to prevent Perpetuities; are the policy of the Kingdom, and ought to take
place in this Court, as well as any other Court. So I take it then, that the
Trust of a Term is as much a Chattel, and under the consideration of this
Court, as the Term it self; and therefore I cannot see, why the Trust of a Term
upon a voluntary Settlement, should be carried further in a Court of Equity,
than the Devise of a Term in the Courts of Common Law. It is true, where there
is a long Term in being upon Mortgage, and as a security which is determined,
it is of great convenience that it should be kept on foot to protect the
Inheritance; and so it will lie still to wait upon the Inheritance, and
thereupon in many Descents it will go from Heir to Heir, and that upon a
particular consideration, to attend and protect the Inheritance: But for a mere
Chattel to go from Heir to Heir, is not the same case; nor do I see any reason
why this Court should carry such a Chattel any further, than Devises of terms
are carried at Common Law.

Now let us see, and a little consider, what those Rules are, and how they are
appliable to this Case: In both cases a Term may be limited for life to one,
with Remainders over, though in the bare consideration of Law, an Estate for
life is a greater Estate than a Term for years; but in case of an Estate-tail
there can be no such thing; therefore in Burgesses Case, the Trust of a term is
limited to A. for life, the Remainder to his Wife for life, the Remainder to
the first, second, and other Sons successively, and the Issue of their bodies:
and for default of such Issue, to the Daughters of A. and their Issue, the
Remainder to the right Heirs of A. A. had no Son at that time living, nor
after; but the Remainder over was to the Daughter of A. in being. It was
strongly urged, that the Daughter should have the Trust vested in her, and that
the Trust for the Daughter should close with the Estate for life till A. should
have a Son. But because there was a Limitation to the first Son of A. and the
Issue of his body, and the Remainder of the Daughter was but to take place,
after that Son died without Issue, and so the others, though it was not to a
Son then in being. But his Estate was in contingencies which did never happen,
yet the Court did not allow of any such thing, as any Remainder that the
Daughter should have, but made a Decree for the execution of the Devisee; so
that it is clear, there can be no direct Remainder of the Trust of a term upon
an Estate-tail.

The Question then is, whether there can be any contigent Remainder for this,
for this Case depends upon that consideration; i. e. it is limited upon a
Contingency, if such a thing should happen in the life of a man, and so it is a
springing Trust and good that way. My Lord, I take it in this case, where there
can be no direct Remainder, there can be no contingent Remainder, though it
happen never so soon: Therefore, if a Term be limited to one and his Heirs of
his body, and he die without Issue of his body within two years the Remainder
over, there can be no such Remainder limited at all, and therefore no
contingent Remainder; for this Remainder is limited at the end of an Intail,
and that is so remote a consideration, that as the Law will not suffer a direct
Remainder upon it, so upon a Contingency neither.

Now in this Case there is only this difference, if the Estatetail in this
Term had been limited to my Lord Maltravers, as it is here to Henry Howard and
the Heirs of his body; and if he die without Issue in the life of Henry, etc.
then the Remainder over, then it had been clear the Contingency had been
limited upon the expiring of the Intail; and though it be said that it expires
within the compass of the life of a man, yet that helps not in this Case at
all, as I conceive; for I will put a case upon a Fee-simple (upon Pell and
Brown's Case.) A man limits an Estate in Fee-simple to a man and his Heirs, and
if he die without Heirs during the life of J. S. then to J. D. this is void,
and the Lord shall have it by Escheat, and that (though it be brought within
the compass of the life of a man) shall never be a good Limitation: And if that
Case of Pell and Brown had been, that a man devised Land to a man and his
Heirs, whereby it would appear, that it was intended the Devisee should have
had a Fee-simple, with a Remainder over upon a Contingency. I take it this
could not be good by way of executory Devise, because a man's dying without
Heirs, which to lose his Fee-simple he must do, comes not under the intention
of the Law as of a Contingency. An Estate for life, in the judgment of the Law,
is of longer duration than a Term for years; and the Rule in Child and Baily's
Case is firm, that the expiring of the Limitation of a Term in Tail within the
life of a man, will not make good a Limitation of the Remainder over, which I
hold to be a good Rule, and the reason of it, I conceive, will reach to this
Case: For what is the difference? here is a Contingency indeed; but it is to
have an Estate-tail expire within one Life, which I take to be the same case.
Suppose the Term had been limited to Henry and the Heirs Males of his body, so
long as Thomas shall have Heirs Male of his body, that would sure have cut off
the Remainder; and what is the difference? For it does depend upon Thomas dying
without Issue, whereby the Earldom should descend, then when it is limited to
Henry and the Heirs Males of his body. And if Thomas die without Issue in the
life of Henry, then over this can no more abridge it, than if he had said, if
Henry die without Issue during the life of another man.

So that, I think, the whole Term is swallowed in the Estatetail upon this
consideration, and there can be no Remainder of it, no executory Devise, nor
any springing Trust to Charles upon this Contingency; and, my Lord, upon that
reason, I think this Settlement fails, and is disappointed as to the younger
Brothers.

If it had been limited to Henry for Life only, and no further, then let the
Contingency have been what it would, that were to happen in his life, if
complicated with several ascendents, yet it should be good in Remainder,
because the Law does allow a Remainder directly upon an Estate for Life; and so
it would also in Contingency if that were to happen during the continuance of
the particular Estate: But I take this to be a step further than any of our
Resolutions in Law have gone yet, and therefore I cannot see reason to extend
the Exposition any further; but am of opinion it fails in point of Limitation,
and ought to be decreed for the Defendant.

The Lord Chief Justice Pemberton's Opinion.
I Need not trouble your Lordship with opening the Case, the truth is, it is in
short no more than thus: My Lord Duke of Norfolk's Father, the Earl of Arundel,
having created an Estate for 200 years, and settled the Inheritance by one Deed
Intail to himself for life; and after to his Lady for life; and then to his Son
and the Heirs Males of his body; and for default of such Issue, to the other
Son Charles, and the Heirs Males of his body, with several Remainders over.
Then by another Deed, he does declare the Trusts of this term of 200 years,
which being to Henry and the Heirs Males of his body, till my Lord Maltravers
die without Issue Male, and the Earldom descend to my now Lord Duke; and after
the determination of that Estate, if he shall die without Issue Male, then to
come to Charles and the Heirs Males of his body, whether this be a good
Remainder to Charles is the Question. For as to any thing of the Recovery or
the Assignment, I shall put it quite out of the Case, and do not think it will
have any influence upon the Case as it lies before us. And indeed I do first
think that the Earl of Arundel did certainly design, that if my Lord Maltravers
should die without Issue Male, whereby the Honor of the Family should come to
my Lord Duke that now is, Charles should have this Estate; and his intentions
are manifest by creating this Term, which could be of no other use but to carry
over this Estate to Charles a younger Son, upon the elder Sons dying without
Issue. And I do think truly that this was but a reasonable Intention of the
Father; for there being to come with the Earldom a great Estate that would so
well support it, it was reason, and the younger Sons might expect it, that
their Fortunes might be somewhat advanced by their Father in case it should so
happen. It was a reasonable expectation in them; and truly I think it was the
plain intention of the Earl. And there is no great question but it might have
been made good and effectual by the limitation of two Terms; For if one Term
had been limited to determine upon the death of Thomas without Issue, and that
to be for the now Duke of Norfolk, and another Term then to commence and go
over to Charles, that would certainly have been good, and carried the Estate to
Charles upon that Contingency; but as this Case now is, I do think that this
way that is now taken is not a good nor a right way; for I take this Limitation
to Charles to be void in Law. And as to that, I know there is a famous
difference of limiting Terms that are in Gross, and Terms that attend the
Inheritance. As to Terms that are in Gross, I think it will be granted (because
it has been settled so often) they are not capable of limitation to one after
the death of one without Issue; for so are all the Cases that have been cited.
I think further, it is as clear, that upon Terms attendant upon an Inheritance,
there may be such a Limitation, to wit, that a Term that waits upon an
Inheritance after the death of one without Issue, may go over to another: But
then it is capable of such a Limitation in that Case, with this restriction;
that is, if the Inheritance be so limited; for though it be attendant ever so
much upon the Inheritance, yet that attendance cannot make it capable of
another Limitation than that Inheritance is capable of: For if I have an Estate
in Fee-simple, and have the Trust of a term attendant upon that, and I will let
the Estate of Inheritance descend to my Son, I cannot in this case (though the
Term be attendant) limit it, that if my Son die without Issue, that Term shall
go over; it is not capable of any Foreign Limitation whatsoever; for as to
that, it is a Term in Gross, it has not the quality of a Term attendant upon
the Inheritance at all; for first, it would fail of an Inheritance, and a
Freehold to support it, and further than a Term can be supported with a like
Estate of Inheritance; It will fail to be a Term attendant upon the
Inheritance. Now here the Estate of Inheritance is limited to Henry and the
Heirs Males of his body, with Remainders to Charles and the Heirs Males of his
body. Now thus the Term is capable of a Limitation to Henry and the Heirs Males
of his body. And for want of such Issue, to Charles and the Heirs Males of his
body, because it has an Inheritance, on which it depends, to go along with it
and support it. But to take this out of its right Course and Channel, and put
another Limitation upon it: That upon the dying of Thomas without Issue,
whereby the Earldom shall descend, this shall go over to Charles; alas it
cannot be, because it has no Freehold or Inheritance to support it.

And then besides, it could not have that reason that the Law intends for its
permitting such Limitations to Terms attending the Inheritance; for I take it,
the reason why Terms are admitted to be attendant upon the Inheritance, and to
be capable of Limitations to go along with the Inheritance, is their relation
they have to the Inheritance; and because it is for the benefit of the
Inheritance, and that I conceive was the only reason that at first guided
these Judgments of the Court of Chancery, that these Terms should be admitted
to wait upon the Inheritance to protect it when Mortgages were made in former
times by Feoffments, upon condition of payment of money, we hear of none of
these Terms. But in the latter part of Queen Elizabeth's time, and since, the
way of limiting Terms in Mortgages came up in use, and then upon the buying of
Inheritances came in the Trust of these terms; and they that purchased were
advised to keep those Terms on foot, to protect their purchased Inheritance.

I must look upon this indeed as a new Case of Novel invention; for in truth I
think, in truth, it is Prima Impressionis, and none of the former Cases have
been exactly the same: For this Term here does partake somewhat of a Term in
Gross, and somewhat of a Term attendant upon an Inheritance; and if there
should be such a Limitation admitted, such a foreign Limitation as this is, (I
call it Foreign, because it is not that which goes along with the
Inheritance.) If that be allowed, we know not what inventions may grow upon
this; for I know men's Brains are fruitful in inventions, as we may see in
Matthew Manning's Case. It was not foreseen nor thought when that Judgment was
given, what would be the Consequence when once there was an Allowance of the
Limitation of a Term after the death of a person, presently it was discerned,
there was the same reason, for after twenty men's lives as after one; and so
then it was held and agreed, that so long as the Limitation exceeded not Lives
in being, at the creation of the Estate, it should extend so far. That came to
grow upon them then; and now if this be admitted, no man can foresee what an
ill Effect such an ill Allowance might have there, might such Limitations come
in as would incumber Estates and mightily entangle Lands.

This is certain, such an allowed Limitation would add a greater check to
Estates, than ever was made by Limitations of Inheritance: For when an Estate
of Inheritance was limited to a man and his Heirs Males of his body, with
Remainders over, and a Term was limited accordingly to wait upon the
Inheritance. In that Case, he that had the first Estate-tail, had full power
over the Term, to alienate it if he pleased; for it is not an Estate within the
Statute De Dominis, and I doubt not that had a great Influence upon the Judges,
when they made the difference between Terms for years in Gross, and Terms
attendant upon the Inheritance. For Terms in Gross, they could not be aliened
in such a Case; but Terms attending upon the Inheritance, though under such
Limitations, the parties could alien them.

But now if this Limitation in question were good, then Henry could not part
with it, because it is to him and his Heirs Males of his body, under a
collateral Limitation of his brothers dying without Issue, and the Earldom
descending to himself, and then his Estate was to determine, and so it would
fetter that which if it had been a Term attendant, etc. would have been
alienable.

I have seen the time often when they have refused to carry Cases further than
the Precedents have been in former times; and peradventure it would be
dangerous if we should do so here; and it seems to me to be an odd kind of
Estate, as this Limitation makes it; and if such a construction as the
Plaintiff would have should be made, it would bring it under a great
uncertainty. To take this Estate as it stands in Henry and the Heirs Males of
his body, it is by this Limitation made, and so indeed, I think it is a Term
that waits upon the Inheritance: But if this that is contended for be admitted
to be a good Limitation upon the Contingency of Thomas's dying without Issue
Male, then the Estate in Charles would be a Term in Gross, for it has no
Inheritance to attend upon. Then suppose Henry had died without Issue Male in
Charles's lifetime, then it is a Term attendant upon the Inheritance again. If
Charles die in the life of Henry, it goes to the Executors. If Henry in the
life of Charles, it goes to the Heirs.

Therefore I think that this Estate being limited in another way, and being it
would endure a strain further than any yet has been attempted, and it being to
commence upon Thomas's dying without Issue Male, and not attendant upon any
Inheritance, it is such an Estate as the Law cannot allow of, but void in
Limitation and Creation; and so I take it the Plaintiffs Bill ought to be
dismissed.

THE Lord Chancellor NOTTINGHAM'S ARGUMENTS.
The First Argument.
THIS is the Case. The Plaintiff, by his Bill demands the benefit of a Term for
two hundred Years, in the Barony of Greystocke, upon these settlements.

Henry Frederick late Earl of Arundel and Surry, Father of the Plaintiff and
Defendant, had Issue, Thomas, Henry, Charles, Edward, Francis and Bernard; and
a Daughter, the Lady Katharine: Thomas Lord Maltravers, his eldest Son was Non
compos Mentis, and care is taken to settle the Estate and Family, as well as
the present circumstances will admit. And thereupon there are two Indentures
drawn, and they are both of the same date. The one is an Indenture between the
Earl of Arundel of the one part; and the Duke of Richmond, the Marquess of
Dorchester, Edward Lord Howard of Eastcricke, and Sir Thomas Hatton, of the
other part: it bears date the Twenty first day of March, 1647. Whereby an
Estate is conveyed to them and their Heirs; To these uses; To the use of the
Earl for his life.

After that to the Countess his Wife for her life, with power to make a Lease
for 21. Years, reserving the ancient Rents.

The remainder for 200. Years to those Trustees, and that upon such trusts, as
by another Indenture intended to bear date the same day the Earl should limit
and declare; and then the remainder of the Lands are to the use of Henry, and
the Heirs Males of his Body begotten, with like remainders in Tail to Charles,
Edward, and the other Brothers successively.

Then comes the other Indenture, which was to declare the Trust of the Term for
200 Years, for which all these preparations are made, and that declares that it
was intended this Term should attend the Inheritance, and that the profits of
the said Barony, etc. should be received by the said Henry Howard, and the
Heirs Males of his Body so long as Thomas and any Issue Male of his Body should
live, (which was consequently only during his own life, because he was never
likely to Marry) and if he dye without Issue in the lifetime of Henry, not
leaving a Wife privement Enseint of a Son, or if after his death, the Dignity
of Earl of Arundel should descend upon Henry; Then Henry or his Issue should
have no farther benefit or profit of the Term of 200 Years. Who then shall? But
the benefit shall redound to the younger Brothers in manner following. How is
that? To Charles and the Heirs Males of his Body, with the like Remainders in
Tail to the rest. Thus is the matter settled by these Indentures; how this
Family was to be provided for, and the whole Estate governed for the time to
come.

These Indentures are both sealed and delivered in the presence of Sir Orlando
Bridgman, Mr. Edward Alehorn and Mr. John Alehorn, both of them my Lord Keeper
Bridgman's Clerks; I knew them to be so.

This Attestation of these Deeds is a Demonstration to me they were drawn by
Sir Orlando Bridgman.

After this the Contingency does happen: for Thomas Duke of Norfolk dies
without Issue, and the Earldom of Arundel as well as the Dukedom of Norfolk
descended to Henry now Duke of Norfolk, by Thomas his death without Issue:
presently upon this the Marquess of Dorchester, the surviving Trustee of this
Estate, assigns his Estate to Marryot, but he does it upon the same Trusts that
he had it himself: Mr. Marryot assigns his interest frankly to my Lord Henry,
the now Duke, and so has done what he can to merge and extinguish the Term by
the signing it to him, who has the Inheritance.

To excuse the Marquess of Dorchester from cooperating in this matter, it is
said, there was an absolute necessity so to do; Because the Tenants in the
North would not be brought to renew their Estates, while so Aged a person did
continue in the Seigniory, for fear, if he should dye quickly, they should be
compelled to pay a new Fine. But nothing in the World can excuse Marryot from
being guilty of a most wilful and palpable Breach of Trust, if Charles have any
Right to this Term: so that the whole contention in the Case is to make the
Estate limited to Charles, void, void in the Original Creation, if not so, void
by the common Recovery suffered by the now Duke, and the Assignment of Marryot.
If the Estate be Originally void, which is limited to Charles, there is no harm
done; but if it only be avoided by the Assignment of Marryot, with the
concurrence of the Duke of Norfolk, he having notice of the Trusts, then most
certainly they must make it good to Charles in Equity, for a palpable Breach of
Trust of which they had notice. So that the question is reduced to this main
single point, Whether all this care that was taken to settle this Estate and
Family, be void and insignificant; and all this provision made for Charles and
the Younger Children to have no Effect.

I am in a very great strait in this Case: I am assisted by as good advice, as
I know how to repose my self upon, and I have the fairest opportunity, if I
concur with them, and so should mistake to excuse my self, that I did errare
cum patribus; but I dare not at any time deliver any Opinion in this place,
without I concur with my self and my Conscience too.

I desire to be heard in this Case with great benignity, and with great excuse
for what I say, for I take this question to be of so universal a Concernment to
all Men's Rites and Properties, in point of disposing of their Estates, as to
most conveyances, made and settled in the late times and yet on foot, that
being afraid I might shake more settlements than I am willing to do, I am not
disposed to keep so closely and strictly to the Rules of Law as the Judges of
the Common Law do, as not to look to the Reasons and Consequences that may
follow upon the determination of this Case.

I cannot say in this Case, that this Limitation is void, and because this is a
point, that in Courts of Equity (which are not favored by the Judgments of the
Courts of Law) is seldom debated with any great Industry at the Bar; but where
they are possessed once of the Cause, they press for a Decree, according to the
usual and known Rules of Law; and think we are not to examine things. And
because it is probable this Cause, be it adjudged one way or other, may come
into the Parliament, I will take a little pains to open the Case, the
Consequences that depend upon it, and the Reasons that lie upon me, as thus
persuaded, to suspend my Opinion.

Whether this Limitation to Charles be void or no, is the Question. Now, first,
these things are plain and clear, and by taking notice of what is plain and
clear, we shall come to see what is doubtful.

1. That the Term in Question, though it were attendant upon the Inheritance, at
first, yet upon the happening of the Contingency, it is become a Term in gross to
Charles.

2. That the Trust of a Term in gross can be limited no otherwise in Equity,
than the Estate of a Term in gross can be limited in Law: for I am not setting
up a Rule of Property in Chancery, other than that which is the Rule of
Property at Law.

3. It is clear, That the legal Estate of a Term for Years, whether it be a
long or a short Term, cannot be limited to any Man in Tail, with the remainder
over to another after his death without Issue; That is flat and plain, for that
is a direct perpetuity.

4. If a Term be limited to a Man and his Issue, and if that Issue dye without
Issue, the remainder over, the Issue of that Issue takes no Estate; and yet
because the remainder over cannot take place, till the Issue of that Issue
fail, that remainder is void too, which was Reeves Case; and the reason is,
because that looks toward a perpetuity.

5. If a Term be limited to a Man for life, and after to his first, second,
third, etc. and other Sons in Tail successively, and for default of such Issue
the remainder over, though the contingency never happen, yet that Remainder is
void, though there were never a Son then born to him; for that looks like a
perpetuity, and this was Sir William Backhurst his Case in the 16. of Modern
Reports, 115.
this King.

6. Yet one step further than this, and that is Burgis's Case. A Term is
limited to one for life, with contingent Remainders Modern Reports, 115.
to his Sons in Tail, with remainder over to his Daughter, though he had no Son;
yet because it was foreign and distant to expect a Remainder after the Death of
a Son to be born without Issue, that having a prospect of a perpetuity, also
was adjudged to be void.

These things having been settled, and by these Rules has this Court always
governed it self: But one step more there is in this Case.

7. If a Term be devised, or the Trust of a Term limited to one for Life, with
twenty Remainders for Life, successively, and all the persons in esse, and
alive at the time of the Limitation of their Estates, these though they look like
a possibility upon a possibility, are all good, because they produce no
inconvenience, they were out in a little time with an easy interpretation, and
so was Alford's Case. I will yet go farther.

8. In the Case cited by Mr. Holt, Cotton and Heath's Case, a Roll. abr. tit.
devise, 612.
Term is devised to one for 18. Years, after to C. his eldest Son for Life, and
then to the eldest Issue Male of C. for Life, though C. had not any Issue Male at
the time of the Devise, or death of the Devisor, but before the death of C. it
was resolved by Mr. Justice Jones, Mr. Justice Crook, and Mr. Justice Berkley,
to whom it was referred by the Lord Keeper Coventry, that it only being a
contingency upon a Life that would be speedily worn out, it was very good; for
that there may be a possibility upon a possibility, and that there may be a
contingency upon a contingency, is neither unnatural nor absurd in it self; but
the contrary Rule given as a Reason by my Lord Popham in the Rector of
Chedington's Case, looks like a Reason Co. 1. 156.
of Art; but, in truth, has no kind of Reason in it, and I have known that Rule
often denied in Westminster Hall. In truth, every Executory Devise is so, and
you will find that Rule not to be allowed in Blanford and Blanford's Case, 13.
Jac. 1. part of my Lord Rolls, 318. where he says, If that Rule take place, it
will shake several common Assurances: And he cites Paramour's and Yardley's
Case in the Commentaries where it was adjudged a good Devise, though it were a
possibility upon a possibility.

These Conclusions, which I have thus laid down, are but Preliminaries to the
main Debate. It is now fit we should come to speak to the main Question of the
Case, as it stands upon its own Reason, distinguished from the Reasons of these
Preliminary; and so the Case is this.

The Trust of a Term for Two Hundred Years is limited to Henry in Tail,
provided if Thomas die without Issue in the life of Henry, so that the Earldom
shall descend upon Henry, then to go to Charles in Tail; and whether this be a
good Limitation to Charles in Tail, is the Question; for most certainly it is a
void Limitation to Edward in Tail, and a void Limitation to the other Brothers
in Tail: But whether it be good to Charles is the doubt, who is the first taker
of this Term in gross; for so it is (I take it) now become, and I do under
favor, differ from my Lord Chief Justice in that point; for, if Charles die,
it will not return to Henry; for that is my Lord Cook's error in Leonard
Loveis's Case: for he says, That if a Term be devised to one Co. 10. 87.
and the Heirs Males of his Body, it shall go to him or his Executors, no
longer than he has Heirs Males of his Body; but it was resolved otherwise in
Leventhorp's and Ashby's Case, 11. Car. B. R. Rolls Abridgment, Title Devise,
fol. 611. for these Words are not the Limitation of the time, but an absolute
disposition of the Term.

But now let us, I say, consider whether this Limitation be good to Charles or
no. It has been said.

Obj. 1. It is not good by any means; for it is a possibility upon a
possibility.

Answ. That is a weak Reason, and there is nothing of Argument in it, for there
never was yet any Devise of a Term with Remainder over, but did amount to a
possibility upon a possibility, and executory Remainders will make it so.

Obj. 2. Another thing was said, it is void, because it does not determine the
whole Estate, and so they compare it to Sir Anthony Mildmay's Case, where it is
laid down as a Rule, that every Limitation or Condition ought to defeat the
entire Estate, and not to defeat part, and leave part not defeated; and it
cannot make an Estate to cease as to one person, and not as to the other. But,

Answ. I do not think, that any Case or Rule was ever worse applied than that
to this; for if you do observe this Case, here is no Proviso at all annexed to
the legal Estate of the Term, but to the equitable Estate, that is built upon
the legal Estate unto the Estate to Henry, and the Heirs Males of his Body, to
attend the Inheritance with a Proviso, If Thomas die without Issue in Henry's
life, and the Earldom come to Henry, then to Charles: which does determine the
Estate to Henry and his Issue; but the other Estate given to Charles does arise
upon this Proviso, which makes it an absurdity to say, that the same Proviso,
upon which the Estate arises, should determine that Estate too.

Obj. 3. The graet matter objected is, It is against all the Rules of Law, and
tends to a perpetuity.

Answ. If it tends to a perpetuity, there needs no more to be said, for the Law
has so long labored against perpetuities, that it is an undeniable Reason
against any settlement, if it can be found to tend to a perpetuity.

Therefore let us examine whether it do so, and let us see what a Perpetuity
is, and whether any Rule of Law is broken in this Case.

A perpetuity is the settlement of an Estate or an Interest in Tail, with such
Remainders Expectant upon it, as are in no sort in the power of the Tenant in
Tail in possession, to dock by any Recovery or Assignment, but such Remainders
must continue as perpetual clogs upon the Estate: such do fight against God,
for they pretend to such a stability in human Affairs, as the nature of them
admits not of, and they are against the Reason and the policy of the Law, and
therefore not to be endured.

But on the other side, future Interests, springing Trusts, or Trusts
Executory, remainders that are to emerge and arise upon Contingencies, are
quite out of the Rules and Reasons of Perpetuities, nay, out of the reason upon
which the Policy of the Law is founded in those Cases, especially, if they be
not of remote or long consideration; but such as by a natural and easy
interpretation will speedily wear out, and so things come to their right
Channel again.

Let us examine this Rule with respect to Freehold-Estates, and see whether
there it will amount to the same Issue.

There is not in the Law a clearer Rule than this, that there can be no
Remainders limited after a Fee simple, so is the express Book: Case 19 Hen. 8.
in my Lord Dyer; but yet the nature of things, and the necessity of commerce
between Man and Man, have found a way to pass by that Rule, and that is thus;
either by way of Use, or by way of Devise: Therefore if a Devise be to a Man
and his Heirs, and if he dye without Issue in the life of B. then to B. and his
Heirs: this is a Fee simple upon a Fee simple, and yet it has been held to be
Good.

My Lord Chief Baron did seem to think, that this Resolution Cro. Mich. 18 Jac.
590
did take its Original from Pells and Brown's Case; but it did not so, the Law
was settled before; you may find it expressly resolved 19 Eliz. in a Case between
Hind and Lion, 3 Leonard. 64.
3. Leonard. Which, of the Books that have lately come out, is one of the best;
and it was there adjudged to be so good a limitation, that the Heir who pleaded
riens peer descent was forced to pay the Debt, and it had the concurrence of a
judgment in 38 Eliz. grounded upon the Reason of Wellock and Hammond's Case
cited in Beraston's Case, where it is said, Crook, Eliz. 204. in a devise it
may well be, that an Estate in Fee shall cease in one, and be transferred to
another: all this was before Pells and Brown's Case, which was in 18 Jac. It is
true, it was made a Question afterward in the Sergeants Case; but what then?
We all know that to be no Rule to judge by; for what is used to exercise the
Wits of the Sergeants, is not a governing Opinion to decide the Law. It was
also adjudged in Hill. 1649. when my Lord Rolls was Chief Justice, and again in
Mich. 1650. and after that indeed in 1651. it was resolved otherwise in Jay and
Jay's Case: but it has been often agreed that where it is within the compass of
one Life, that the Contingency is to happen, there is no danger of a
perpetuity. And I oppose it to that Rule which was taken by one of the Lords
the Judges, That where no Remainders can be limited, no contingent Remainder
can be limited, which I utterly deny, for there can be no Remainder limited
after a Fee simple, yet there may a contingent Fee simple arise out of the
first Fee, as has been shown.

Thus it is agreed to be by all sides in the Case of an Inheritance; but now
say they, a Lease for Years, which is a Chattel, will not bear a contingent
Limitation in regard of the poverty and meanness of a Chattel Estate. Now as to
this point, the difference between a Chattel and an Inheritance is a difference
only in Words, but not in substance, nor in Reason, or the Nature of the thing:
for the owner of a Lease has as absolute a power over his Lease, as he that
has an Inheritance has over that. And therefore where no perpetuity is
introduced, nor any inconveniency does appear, there no Rule of Law is broken.

The Reasons that do support the springing Trust of a Term as well as the
springing use of an Inheritance, are these.

1. Because it has happened sometimes, and does frequently, that Men have no
Estates at all, but what consist in Leases for Years: Now it were not only very
severe, but (under favor) very absurd, to say that he who has no other Estate
but what consists in Leases for Years, shall be incapable to provide for the
Contingencies of his own Family, though these are directly within his view and
immediate prospect. And yet if that be the Rule, so it must be; for I will put
the Case; A Man that has no other Estate but Leases for Years, Chattels real,
treats for the Marriage of his Son, and thereupon it comes to this agreement:
These Leases shall be settled as a Jointure for the Wife, and provision for the
Children: says he, I am content, but how shall it be done? Why thus; You shall
assign all these Terms to John a Styles, in Trust for your self and your
Executors, if the marriage take no effect; But then, if it takes effect, to
your Son while he lives, to his Wife after while she lives, with Remainders
over. I would have any one tell me whether this were a void limitation upon a
Marriage settlement; or if it be, what a strange absurdity is it, that a Man
shall settle it if the Marriage take no effect, and shall not settle it if the
Marriage happen:

2. Suppose the Estate had been limited to Henry Howard and the Heirs Males of
his Body, till the death of Thomas without Issue, then to Charles, there it had
been a void limitation to Charles: if then the addition of those words, If
Thomas dye without Issue in the life of Henry, etc. have not mended the matter,
then all that addition of Words goes for nothing, which it is unreasonable and
absurd to think it should.

3. Another thing these is, which I take to be unanswerable, and I gather it
from what fell from my Lord Chief Justice Pemberton; and when I can answer that
Case, I shall be able to answer my self very much for that which I am doing.
Suppose the Provisoe had been thus penned, And if Thomas die without Issue
Male, living Henry, so that the Earldom of Arundel descend upon Henry, then the
Term of 200 Years limited to him and his Issue, shall utterly cease and
determine, but then a new Term of 200 Years shall arise and be limited to the
same Trustees, for the Benefit of Charles in Tail. This he thinks might have
been well enough, and attained the end and intention of the Family, because
then this would not be a Remainder in Tail upon a Tail, but a new Term created.

Pray let us so resolve Cases here, that they may stand with the reason of
Mankind, when they are debated abroad. Shall that be reason here that is not
reason in any part of the World besides? I would fain know the difference, why
I may not raise a new springing Trust upon the same Term, as well as a new
springing Term upon the same Trust; that is such a chicanery of Law as will be
laughed at all over the Christian World.

4. Another Reason I go on is this; That the meanness of the consideration of a
Term for years, and of a Chattel Interest, is not to be regarded: for whereas
this will be no reason any where else; so I shall show you, that this Reason,
as to the Remainder of a Chattel Interest, is a Reason that has been exploded
out of Westminster Hall. There was a time indeed that this Reason did so far
prevail, that all the Judges in the time of my Lord Chancellor Rich, did 6
Edvardi 6 deliver their Opinions, That if a Term for Years be devised to one,
provided, Dyer, fol. 74.
that if the Devisee die, living J. S. then to go to J. S. that remainder to J.
S. is absolutely void, because such a Chattel Interest of a Term for Years is
less than a Term for Life, and the Law will endure no limitation over. Now this
being a Reason against Sense and Nature, the World was not long governed by it,
but in 10 Eliz. in Dyer, they began to hold Dyer, f. 277
the Remainder was good by Devisee; and so 15 Eliz. seems too, and 19 Eliz. it
was by the Judges held to be a good Remainder; and that was the first time that
an executory Remainder Dyer, f. 328 Dyer, f. 358.
of a Term was held to be good. When the Chancery did begin to see that the
Judges of the Law did govern themselves by the reason of the thing, this Court
followed their Opinion, the better to fix them in it, they allowed of Bills by
the remainder Man, to compel the Devisee of the particular Estate, to put in
security that he in Remainder should enjoy it according to the Limitation. And
for a great while so the practice stood, as they thought it might well, because
of the Resolution of the Judges, as we have shown: but after this was seen to
multiply the Chancery Suits, then they began to resolve that there was no need
of that way, but the executory Remainder Man should enjoy it, and the Devisee
of the particular Estate should have no power to bar it. Men began to presume
upon the Judges then, and thought if it were good as to Remainders after
Estates for Lives, it would be good also as to Remainders upon Estates Tail:
That the Judges would not endure, and that is so fixed a Resolution, that no
Court of Law or Equity ever attempted to break in the World. Now then come we
to this Case, and if so be where it does not tend to a perpetuity, a Chattel
Interest will bear a Remainder over, upon the same Reason it will bear a
Remainder over upon a Contingency, where that Contingency does wear out within
the compass of a life, otherwise, it is only to say, it shall not, because it
shall not: For there is no more inconvenience in the one than in the other.

Come we then at last, to that which seems most to choke the Plaintiffs Title
to this Term, and that is the resolution in Child and Baylie's Case: For it is
upon that Judgment, it seems, all Conveyances must stand or be shaken, and our
Decrees made. Now therefore I will take the liberty to see what that Case is,
and how far the Opinion of it ought to prevail in our Case.

1. If Child and Baylie's Case be no more than as it is reported by Rolls,
part. 2. fol. 129. then it is nothing to the purpose: A Devise of a Term to
Dorothy for life, the remainder to William, and if he dies without Issue, to
Thomas, without saying, in the life of Thomas; and so it is within the common
Rule of a Limitation of a Term in Tail, with Remainder over, which cannot be
good.

But if it be as Justice Jones has reported it, fol. 15, then it is as far as
it can go, an Authority: For it is there said to be, living Thomas. But the
Case, under favor, is not altogether as Mr. Justice Jones has reported it
neither; for I have seen a Copy of the Record upon this account; and, by the
way, no Book of Law is so ill corrected, or so ill printed as that.

The true Case is, as it is reported by Mr. Justice Crook; and with Mr. Justice
Crooks Report of it, does my Lord Rolls agree, Cro. Hill. 15. Jac. 459.
in his abridgment, Title Devise, 612. There it is, a Term of 76 Years is
devised to Dorothy for life, then to William and his Assigns all the rest of
the Term, provided if William die without Issue then living, then to Thomas;
and this is in effect our present Case; I agree it. But that which I have to
say to this Case is.

First, It must be observed, that the Resolution there, did go upon several
Reasons, which are not to be found in this Case.

1. One Reason was touched upon by my Lord Chief Baron, That William having the
Term, to him and his Assigns, there could be no Remainder over to Thomas, of
which Words there is no notice taken by Mr. Justice Jones.

2. Dorothy the Devisee for life, was Executrix, and did assent and grant the
Lease to William, both which Reasons my Lord Rolls does lay hold upon, as
material, to govern the Case.

3. William might have assigned his Interest, and then no Remainder could take
place, for the Term was gone.

4. He might have had Issue, and that Issue might have assigned, and then it
had put all out of doubt.

5. But the main Reason of all, which makes me oppose it, arises out of the
Record, and is not taken notice of in either of the Reports of Rolls, or Jones,
or in Rolls Abridgment. The Record of that Case goes farther, for the Record
says; There was a farther Limitation upon the death of Thomas without Issue to
go to the Daughter, which was a plain affectation of a perpetuity to multiply
Contingencies. It farther appears by the Record, that the Fathers Will was made
the 10 of Eliz. Dorothy the Devisee for life, held it to the 24, and then she
granted and assigned the Term to William, he under that Grant held it till the
31 of Eliz. and then regranted it to his Mother, and dyed; the Mother held it
till the 1 of K. James, and then she dyed; the Assignees of the Mother held it
till 14 Jac. and then and not till then did Thomas, the younger Son, set up a
Title to that Estate; and before that time it appears by the Record, there had
been six several Alienations of the Term to Purchasers, for a valuable
Consideration, and the Term renewed for a valuable Fine paid to the Lord. And
do we wonder now, that after so long an acquiescence as from 10 Eliz. to 14
Jacob, and after such successive Assignments and Transactions, that the Judges
began to lie hard upon Thomas, as to his Interest in Law, in the Term,
especially when the Reasons given in the Reports of the Case, were legal
Inducements to guide their Judgments, of which there are none in our Case? But
then,

Secondly, At last, allowing this Case to be as full and direct an Authority as
is possible, and as they would wish, that rely upon it; then I say --

1. The Resolution in Child and Balie's Case, is a Resolution that never had
any Resolution like it before nor since.

2. It is a Resolution contradicted by some Resolutions, and to show, that that
Resolution has been contradicted, there is --

1. The Case of Cotton and Heath, which looks very like a contrary Resolution,
there is a Term limited to A. for eighteen years, the Remainder to B. for life,
the Remainder to the first Issue of B. for life, this Contingent upon a
Contingent was allowed to be good, because it would wear out in a short time.
But

2. To come up more fully and closely to it, and to show you, that I am bound
up by the Resolutions of this Court, there was a fuller and flatter Case 21
Car. 2. in July 1669, between Wood and Saunders. The Trust of a long Lease is
limited and declared thus: To the Father for sixty years, if he lived so long;
then to the Mother for sixty years, if she lived so long; then to John and his
Executors if he survived his Father and Mother; and if he died in their
lifetime, having Issue, then to his Issue; but if he dye without Issue, living
the Father or Mother, then the Remainder to Edward in Tail. John did die
without Issue, in the lifetime of the Father and Mother, and the question was,
whether Edward should take this Remainder after their death, and it was
Resolved by my Lord Keeper Bridgeman, being assisted by Judge Twisden and Judge
Rainsford, that the Remainder to Edward was good, for the whole Term had vested
in John, if he had survived; Yet the Contingency never happening, and so wearing
out in the compass of two Lives in being, the Remainder over to Edward might
well be limited upon it.

Thus we see, that the same Opinion which Sir Orlando Bridgeman held when he
was a Practizer, and drew these Conveyances upon which the question now
arises, remained with him when he was the Judge in this Court, and kept the
Seals; and by the way, I think it is due to the Memory of so great a Man,
whenever we speak of him, to mention him with great Reverence and Veneration
for his Learning and Integrity.

Object. They will perhaps say, Where will you stop, if not at Child and
Balie's Case?

Ans. Where? why every where, where there is any Inconvenience, any danger of a
perpetuity; and wherever you stop at the limitation of a Fee upon a Fee,
there we will stop in the limitation of a Term of years. No man ever yet said,
a Devise to a man and his Heirs, and if he die without Issue, living B. then to
B. is a naughty Remainder, that is Pells and Browns Case

Now the Ultimum quod sit, or the utmost limitation of a Fee upon a Fee, is not
yet plainly determined, but it will be soon found out, if men shall set their
Wits on work to contrive by Contingencies, to do that which the Law has so long
labored against, the thing will make it self Evident, where it is
Inconvenient, and God forbid, but that Mischief should be obviated and
prevented.

I have done with the legal Reasons of the Case: it is fit for us here a little
to observe the Equitable Reasons of it; and I think this Deed is good both in
Law and Equity; And the Equity in this Case is much stronger, and ought to sway
a man very much to incline to the making good this Settlement if he can. For,

1. It was prudence in the Earl to take care, that when the Honor descended
upon Henry, a little better support should be given to Charles, who was the
next Man, and trod upon the heels of the Inheritance.

2. Though it was always uncertain whether Thomas would die without Issue
living Henry, yet it was morally certain that he would die without Issue, and
so the Estate and Honor come to the younger Son: for it was with a careful
circumspection always provided, that he should not Marry till he should recover
himself into such estate of body and mind, as might suit with the honor and
dignity of the Family.

3. It is a very hard thing for a Son to tell his Father, that the provision he
has made for his younger Brothers is void in Law, but it is much harder for him
to tell him so in Chancery. And if such a provision be void, it had need be
void with a vengance; it had need be so clearly void that it ought to be a
prodigy if it be not submitted to.

Now where there is no perpetuity introduced, no cloud hanging over the Estate
but during a Life, which is a common possibility where there is no
inconvenience in the Earth, and where the Authorities of this Court concur to
make it good; to say all is void, and to say it here, I declare it, I know not
how to do it. To run so Counter to the Judgment of that great man, my Lord
Keeper Bridgman, who both advised this settlement; and when he was upon his
Oath in this place decreed it good. I confess his Authority is too hard for me
to resist, though I am assisted by such learned and able Judges, and will pay
as great a Deference to their Opinions as any man in the World shall.

If then this shall not be void, there is no need for the Merger by the
Assignment or the Recovery to be considered in the Case: For if so be this be a
good limitation of the Trust, and they who had notice of it, will palpably
break it, they are bound by the Rules of Equity to make it good by making some
Reparation. Nay, which is more, if the Heir enter upon the Estate to defeat the
Trust, that very Estate does remain in Equity infected with the Trust; which
was the Case of my Lord of Thomond; so also was the Resolution in Jackson and
Jackson's Case: So that to me the Right appears clear, and the Remedy seems not
to be difficult. Therefore my present thoughts are, that the Trust of this Term
was well limited to Charles, who ought to have the Trust of the whole Term
Decreed to him, and an account of the mean profits, for the time by past, and a
recompense made to him from the Duke and Marryot for the time to come. But I do
not pay so little Reverence to the Company I am in, as to run down their solemn
Arguments and Opinions upon my present Sentiments; and therefore I do suspend
the Inrolment of any Decree in this Case, as yet: but I will give my self some
time to consider, before I take any final Resolution, seeing the Lords the
Judges do differ from me in their Opinions.

De Termino Pasch. anno 34. Car. II. To. In Cancel. Sabbati 13 die Maij.
Howard Versus Le Duc de Norfolk.
THis Day was appointed for final Judgment in this cause, and it being called.

Mr. Sergeant M. moved. My Lord we depend upon your Lordship in that cause for
your Opinion.

Mr. S. G. My Lord, in the Case of Howard against the Duke of Norfolk, I do not
know whether I may have the Liberty to move this that I am going to offer. It
stands now in the Paper now for your Lordships Judgment, and therefore I speak
this, that I now offer with great submission, if your Lordship will please to
hear it. If you will please to allow my Lord of Arundel's Counsel the liberty
of offering any thing further in the Cause. Possibly it will not become them to
offer any thing that has been said, but if they may be permitted to argue some
new matter if they can find any. Therefore we that are for my Lord of Arundel,
desire the liberty of having some little time till Mr. Keck (who is of my Lords
Counsel, but at present indisposed, and has not yet been heard) can come, which
we hope will not be long. We hope it will be no prejudice to this Cause, which
has had so long an agitation, to stay a few days longer. A Weeks time sure will
break no squares.

Lord Chancellor, I did appoint the first Tuesday in the Term to deliver my
Opinion in this Case, for I desire to rid my hands of it. But Mr. Keck, who was
then at the Bar, did pray that he might argue it once more for the Defendant,
and my Lord Duke of Norfolk, having never been heard by Mr. Keck, I was willing
to hear him. For it was a Cause of moment and difference of Opinions, and there
are so many shorthand Writers, that nothing can pass from us here, but it is
presently made public, and though a Man does not speak in Print, yet what he
says shall be immediately put in Print; therefore because Mr. Keck desired it,
and to justify my own Opinion, though I had appointed the first Tuesday in the
Term, yet I gave till this day. It is but reason Mr. Keck should be heard, who
has not yet argued it, and if any Man can convince me I am in an error, or make
it appear to me, that I am mistaken in the Law, in the Opinion I have given,
which as yet I see no cause in the World to change, God forbid, but I should
hear them, but on the other side, this cause must not everlastingly be put off,
because my Lord Dukes Counsel are not here. Therefore I will give you a Weeks
time further, but upon this Day sevennight, come or not come, I will give my
Judgment in the Cause.

Mr. Serj. M. If your Lordship pleases to put it upon the other side, unless
they show cause, then the Opinion your Lordship has given to stand.

Lord Chancellor, If my Opinion (which is under the prejudice of being contrary
to that of the three Chief Judges) can be refuted, I am not ashamed to retract
any error I may be convinced of, but truly at present, I see no color to
retract it.

Mr. Serj. M. We pray then my Lord, that we may have this right done for us,
who are for Mr. Howard the Plaintiff, that they on the other side, will let us
know what particular points we must go upon, for if they come at large, we may
not perhaps be so well provided to answer them.

Lord Chancellor, I suppose they can say nothing to any point, but that which
is the main point in the Case the limitation of the remainder of a springing
Trust after the Entail of a Term, that is, to determine upon a contingency that
expired in the time of a Life; a point which was never argued for Mr. Howard at
the Bar, nor stirred by the Counsel.

Mr. Serj. M. I hope we for Mr. Howard, shall be heard to justify your
Lordships Opinion.

Lord Chancellor, What has been said here at the Bench on both sides, has been
taken in Shorthand, and made public, I know the Counsel on both sides has
seen it, or will see and look into it well, and if they can give me any
reasonable satisfaction that I am in the wrong, I shall easily recede from it.
But upon any thing yet offered, I am of the same mind I was. As to the Learned
Judges that assisted me at the hearing the Decree is mine, and the Oath that
Decree is made upon is mine, theirs is but Learned Advice and Opinion. And
therefore if they can satisfy my Conscience, that they are in the right, and I
not, well and good; if not, I must abide by that Decree I have made, according
to my Conscience. And I will repeat this to you, I go upon these Heads for my
Opinion, and I would be glad any body would answer them. I say it is against
natural Justice, to say that a Man who has no Estate but what consists in
Terms, shall be disabled from settling his Estate, so as to provide for the
contingencies in his Family, that are in immediate prospect. I say it is a
common Case. A Man that is less for Years, assigns his Term in Trust for
himself, until such a Marriage take effect, and after to himself for Life, to
his Wife for Life, with remainder in Tail to his Children. Is that springing
Trust upon the contingency of the Marriage good or not? If it be not good, then
what will become of a great many Marriage settlements: If it be good, then why
not in this Case as well as that. And I would fain know what difference there
is between the Case as it is at the Bar, and if it had been limited thus, If my
Lord Arundel had said, that if Thomas Die without Issue, Living Henry then the
Term for 200 Years in Tail should cease, and a new Term should arise upon the
same Trust for Charles, that it seems had been well enough; is there any sense
in the World that can lead a reasonable Man to conclude why there should not be
a new springing Term upon the same Trust. I cannot see any reason to run this
Case down upon the single authority of Child and Baylie's Case, which was such
a resolution, as never had its like before, nor since, but contradicted by
several resolutions as have been cited particularly, Wood and Saunders Case in
this Court in my Lord Bridgmans time. These are the grounds my present
apprehensions go upon, but I will hear Mr. Keck, if it may be in any reasonable
time, and give the respect to the Duke of Norfolk, that he shall not be
surprised, though withal, I must do Mr. Howard the Justice that he be not
eternally delaid.

Then the Day sevennight was appointed, but upon the continuance of Mr. Kecks
illness, it was put peremptorily for Judgment on the first Saturday in the next
Term.

De Termino Trin. Anno Regis Car. II. 34 in Cancel. Howard verse. le Duc de
Norfolk Sabbati 17 Junii. Anno Dom. 1652.
MY Lord, we have nothing to do in that Mr. Serj. M.
Cause, but to pray your Judgment.

Mr. S. G. My Lord we were in great hopes to have had other Assistances to day,
but it seems we are disappointed of them, That which I shall humbly offer is
but short. We are by your Lordships favor permitted now to offer something if
we can, to answer the objections which your Lordship made, and which were the
ground of your Opinion. We did apprehend them to be these, that Child and
Baylie's Case was not the same with this Case, and that the Case of Wood and
Saunders, is the last resolution of this Nature, and will rule this. We do my
Lord, humbly with submission offer these Reasons, why the first Case is the
same with this, and the other difference from it. Child and Baylie's Case, my
Lord, though it does differ in some Circumstances, yet it differs in no one that
does immediately concern the Limitation. For the Circumstances wherein they
Differ was the Length of the Term, being almost Expired, the Conveyances over
to several Purchasers, and at the end of the Term the resolution taken. But
though it differs in these Circumstances, yet these have no influence upon the
Limitation or the Construction of Law upon the Limitation. Now the Limitation
is the same there as it is here, for there it is to one for Life, and to his
Son during the whole Term, and if he die without Issue during the Life of his
Father and Mother, then the remainder over this remainder was adjudged void.
This is the same Case with ours, for in the Case the first remainder actually
vested in William the Son for it was to him and his Assigns during the whole
Term, and if he die without Issue Living Father and Mother, then over. This
remainder I say was adjudged void, he was actually seized of the whole
Interest, which being vested in him, could not be divested upon the contingent
Limitations over, upon his death without Issue living Father and Mother. It is
the same in our Case, the Duke of Norfolk has the Interest of this Estate by
the Limitation in Tail actually vested in him, and then it cannot be divested
by the rule of Child and Baylie's Case upon the Contingency of Thomas's dying
without Issue in the Life of Henry, which is during the Life of the now Duke of
Norfolk. And in this respect the Case of Wood and Saunders, is not the same. It
is a Limitation to the Father and Mother for Life, and for 60 years, if they so
long live, then to John the Son, if Living at the time of the Death of Father
and Mother, the whole Term. My Lord, this was not a vesting the Estate in John
the Son, but a Contingent Limitation, that he should take or not. If he were
Living at the time of the Death of Father and Mother, then he should take; If
not, he should not take. There was no Interest vested in him till the
Contingency happened, and so the Limitations will be different. And that is the
Ground that is drawn up in the Decretal Order of the Cause, because this was a
Contingent Limitation to John, and that never happening, it is all one, as if it
had never been limited, and amounts, putting the Contingent Limitation, which
never happened out of the Case, to no more than a Limitation to the Father and
Mother for Life, the remainder over, which is well enough. This is that I have
to offer, and I humbly submit it to your Lordship.

Mr. Serj. M. And so we do, and pray your Judgment.

Mr. R. I see they are pressing for your Lordships Judgment, and I know not
whether it will become me to interpose with any thing.

Lord Chancellor, Say, say, for this is a Cause that deserves patience.

Mr. R. No Man my Lord, can have any great encouragement to add any thing after
all the Arguments that have been made in this Cause, or can hope to offer that
which will be very material and new, but I desire to have leave to say this in
short. My Lord, there be two Deeds by which this settlement is made, as a
provision for the second Son of this Family, and the younger Children, and
therein it does perhaps appear, that if the Bulk of the Estate, and the Honor
should come to the second Son, then the settlement of this part that is made
upon the second Son, was intended to come to the now Plaintiff, and the younger
Children. This is the Intention of the two Deeds. By the first Deed the Estate
of Freehold and Inheritance is limited in Tail. By the second Deed the Trust is
declared of the Term for 200 Years that is limited to Henry, and so over. And
therein it differs from the Case of Wood and Saunders; For the Trust of the
Term does vest in Henry, till the Contingency happen, but in Wood and Saunders
Case, there it is limited to the Father and Mother for 60 Years, if they lived
so long, then to John and his Heirs Males, in Case he survive his Father and
Mother, and the Trust to be assigned to him accordingly, and if he die without
Issue in the Life of the Father and Mother, then to Edward his Brother. No Man
can say that ever any thing here did vest in John; For it was but limited to
him after his Father and Mother's life, in case he survived them, but it never
vested in him, and so it differs from this Case. For here the Trust of the Term
did vest in the Duke of Norfolk till the Contingency did happen. And as that is
the difference between the two Cases, and I do apprehend it is a difference
with great reason from Wood and Saunders Case, so that which I infer from it is
this, That where the Trust of a Term is limited to a Man and his Issue, and his
Heirs Males, and that vested in him, if he die without Issue, or which is much
a stronger Case, though the Contingency be restrained within the compass of a
life, or of a certain time that is to wear out in a reasonable distance, yet
coming after a Limitation in Tail cannot carry the remainder over. For if you
once admit it during one life, you must admit it during twenty lives, for the
reason is the same as to twenty, as it is to one, if they be all in Being, and
perhaps the reason will be the same as to twenty lives all in Being, and for
the life of one person more. Then if the Trust of a Term where it is once
vested in Tail, can never be well limited over, though restrained within the
Contingent distance of a reasonable time. This Limitation to the Plaintiff can
never be good. My Lord, I crave leave to offer your Lordship one Case or two;
suppose that a Term for Years, or the Limitation of the Trust of a Term for
Years (for I think there is the same construction made of both) be limited to
J. S. and the Issue of his Body, and if J. S. die without Issue within 100
Years (for the purpose) or within twenty Years, then to go over to J. N. that
cannot be apprehended to be good, but void; for there is no difference between
1000 or 100 or 20 Years, yet 20 Years is but a reasonable time, and not more in
prospect than one or ten lives. If a Man limit the Trust of a Term, or a Term
it self to J. S. and the Issue of his Body, and if he die without Issue before
21. then to go over to J. N. This a reasonable distance of time, and yet I
believe this will not be allowed to be good and well limited over. And the
reason is, where once a Term is limited to a Man and his Issue, this in a
reasonable construction of Law carries the whole Term (for it was a good while
before they gained the point of remainders after lives) and (if after it be
said,) if he die without Issue within a 100 Years, or before 21. that
restriction will not help it as we think. Then where is the reason or sense
that it should be otherwise, if he die without Issue in the life of another
person? Truly my Lord, it is very hard to find out a true difference between
the Cases where the Restriction is, for the life of a certain person, and where
it is upon a certain number of Years. My Lord, I would put this Case upon Wood
and Saunders Case, which is the authority that is so much pressed upon us.
Suppose that Case had been thus; to the Father for 60 Years, if he so long
live; to the Mother for 60 Years, if she so long live, and then instead of that
Limitation to John, in Case he survived his Father and Mother; suppose it had
been to the first Son of the Father and Mother, and the Heirs of his Body, and
if such first Son die without Issue in the lifetime of his Father and Mother,
then it should go over to another person. Had it then been good? surely no.
What is the difference? Why this, it being to John, in case he survived his
Father and Mother, nothing vested. But if it had been to the first Son, and the
Heirs of his Body, and they have a Son, there it differs; for it is actually
vested in him. And there the Limitation over to a stranger would not be good,
even admitting the Case of Wood and Saunders to be uncontrollable. Another
Objection your Lordship made, was about the necessary Limitations of the Trusts
of Terms by Termers upon Marriage Settlements to a Man's self, till the Marriage
take effect, and then to such and such uses; and the Objection is, why should
it not be as good a Limitation of the Trust of a Term, or of a Term it self, as
well as of an Inheritance. That will not reach our Case, therefore I need not
say any thing to it, whether it would be so or no. But suppose this Case, there
be two Brothers, the Eldest has no Children, the younger Brother has a Son,
and is a going to Marry the Son, but has but a small Estate to give him. The
Elder Brother he has a Term for Years, and has a mind to provide for the Son of
his Younger Brother, and his intended Wife, and he limits the Trust of his Term
thus to the use of himself, and his Executors till the Marriage be had, but if
he die, or provided he die, before the Marriage had without Issue living, his
Younger, Brother, the Father of him that is to be Married, then to the use of
that Son, and so on. We do make a great doubt, whether the Limitation of the
Trust of the Term there, would be good or not, upon the difference of Child and
Baylies Case, that has been so often mentioned in this Cause, and was so
solemnly resolved. The resolution of which Case, and that also of Wood and
Saunders, we submit to your Lordships consideration. As for the intention of
the Parties in this settlement, we cannot but say, it was intended as a
provision, that when the Bulk of the Estate, and the Honor came to the Duke,
his Younger Brothers should have an increase of their Portions. But it is as
plain the intent does fail as to all the other Younger Children, because the
construction of Law will not support it. So that the intent without the Rule of
Law to maintain it, will signify nothing.

Mr. H. If your Lordship will please to give me leave, I think, I may offer
something that has not yet been observed; We do not trouble your Lordship, or
our selves out of a presumption, that we shall so far prevail, as to alter the
Opinion your Lordship has delivered; but truly my design is to offer some
reasons, why I hope your Lordship will be pleased to take some further
consideration of the matter. Not, but that I know your Lordship did very
seriously deliberate upon it, before you delivered your Opinion, and you have
been pleased to tell us the reasons you went upon, and they were two. First,
upon the Case of Wood and Saunders in this Court: And Secondly, upon the
natural Reason and Justice, that a Man that has no other Estate, but Terms for
Years, should have a power to settle those Terms, so as to provide for the
Contingencies of his Family. That a settlement of a Term upon Trustees to
himself, till the Marriage take effect, and then over, shall be good; this
might be resembled to Pell and Browns Case, and so come within the same reason.
Now my Lord, with submission, we have this to offer. This Trust of this Term in
our Case, was first to attend the Inheritance, and that was an Estate Tail
limited, but then there is a Contingency added to this Trust, to this Trust of
the Term, that if Thomas die without Issue, living Henry, then to Charles, and
as it has been said already, it is very plain this Entail of the Term did
actually vest. Then the single first Question is, whether upon the Contingency
happening, the death of Duke Thomas without Issue, it shall divest, and a
springing Trust arise to the now Plaintiff Mr. Charles Howard. It is said there
was a just care taken for him that was a Younger Son, so there was, but a like
care was taken for the other five, Bernard, etc. as well as for him. Now then
the Case lies upon this doubt, with submission to your Lordship, whether this
can enure by way of a springing Trust by a new Creation. We think that cannot
be; for here being once an Estate Tail limited in a Term that was to attend an
Estate Tail of the Inheritance, the Remainder over must be void in the very
Creation. My Lord, I have observed, ever since I have had the honor to practice
at this Bar, and very many particular instances might be given, that when the
Judges have been upon the Cases called to advise, here they would not go
beyond, nor think fit that the Court would not go beyond, nor think fit that
this Court should, beyond the Resolution in Mannings Case. And they have often
said, if that Case were now to be adjudged, it would receive another kind of
Resolution. The Judges gave that Resolution by way of Executory devise, and now
I think, since that, there have been more Suits in this Court of this Nature
since the King's Restoration, than were in forty Years before. For cunning
People will be always finding out Perpetuities, and are fond of Limitations
tending to Perpetuities, not only in Inheritance, but in Terms for Years. After
Mannings Case, the Conveyancers did contrive these Trusts of Terms for Years to
go beyond that Case. For they seemed to argue thus, That being good by way of
Executory devise, then we will declare a Trust, and that the Law has nothing to
do with, it is a Creature of Equity, and Governably by Equity. And I have seen
a Conveyance of this Nature made by my Lord of Leicester to Marryot and
Western, drawn 1658. Where there was the Trust of a Term limited over after an
Estate Tail, but that was never insisted upon to be good, all the Cases being
otherwise. If then it be not good by way of Executory devise, it cannot be good
by way of Limitation of the Trust of a Term. Now in this Case, certainly it
would not be a good Remainder by way of Executory devise. For when a Term is
devised to end in Tail, no Man will say a Remainder of the Term can be limited
over. As for the Case of Wood and Saunders, That, My Lord, I conceive had been
good by way of Executory devise. A Man that has a Term, devises it to his
Wife for life, and if John his Son be living at the death of his Wife, then to
him in Tail, but if he die without Issue living, Wife, then to Edward, that
might be good. For it is a condition precedent as to John, and there he must
survive his Father and Mother, or he takes nothing, but he dying before them,
never vested in him at all, and so might well vest in Edward. But in our Case
it is void in the Creation, because in the Case here before your Lordship it
did vest, and was to attend the Inheritance, when the Contingency happens: Can
it then enure to the Plaintiff by way of springing Trust? surely no. In Wood
and Saunders Case it never vested, in our Case it did vest. But I must, My
Lord, crave leave to say one word to another point in the Case, and that is the
Recovery. When Contingent Remainders in Law, in Cases of Settlements, may be by
any act in Law barred, this Court I conceive, will not set them up again. Now in
this Case before the Contingency happened, when the Estate Tail of the
Inheritance was in my Lord Duke of Norfolk, and the Lease for 200 Years
attendant upon that Estate Tail, then does my Lord Duke suffer a common
Recovery, which we apprehend has so barred and destroyed this Term, that this
Court will never interpose to set it up again. My Lord, that which on the Dukes
behalf we now desire is, that your Lordship will be pleased to take some
further time to consider of it, and deliver your Judgment the next Term.

Mr. Serj. M. My Lord, I did not expect I must confess, an Argument at this
rate, and at this time; but your Lordship in great tenderness and favor, has
given them leave to do it: but after all, under favor, what they say is a
great mistake of the Case. If they had observed what was said, and truly
applied it, they would have answered themselves. What interpretation in such a
Case shall be made, or not be made, is merely matter of Equity, which upon the
circumstances of every Case is governable by the Circumstances. I would not go
after their Example to argue, to support, as they have done to overturn the
Opinion of the Court that has been delivered. But I would offer this to your
Lordship, there is a great mistake in calling this a Remainder, it is no such
thing as a Remainder: It is indeed a springing Trust upon a Contingency; But
pray, my Lord, consider, how it stands here in Equity before your Lordship.
Here is a noble and great Family, the Heir of it under the Visitation of the
Hand of God, which no one could remove but God alone, here are a great and
numerous Issue to provide for, that provision which is made according to the
Rules of Nature and Justice, and it being necessary to be done, no Man could
contrive it better than this settlement. My Lord, they frighten us with the
word Perpetuity. It is true, a Perpetuity cannot be maintained, that is, an
Inheritance not to be aliened or barred, or that can never end. But here is but
the name of a Perpetuity, and certainly, that must be a strange and monstrous
Perpetuity, that must determine within the short space of a Life. A Perpetuity
is an Estate that can never be barred. And Littleton has a Rule, that there is
no Estate but can be barred, if all the Persons concerned in it join. But it is
under favor a contradiction, and a great one to call this a Perpetuity; a
monstrous one, I say it is, where any Man can see the end of it, and whereas to
the circumstances of the Case, the Family could not otherwise be well provided
for. And whereas Perpetuities are abhorred, it is upon the inconvenience, which
hinders other provisions in case of necessity, and it were indeed an
inconvenience, that every Family should have the misfortunes that were in this,
and not be able to provide some sort of remedy for them. Some cases my Lord,
have been put by the other side now, which under favor are nothing to the
purpose, and would need no other answer than they give themselves. But truly I
think it is not fit for the advantage of the public, that after a Case has
been so solemnly argued, the Counsel should dispute the Opinion of the Court.

My Lord, I would desire to say a word in answer to some things that have been
urged. As to the Case that Mr. H -- ch -- s put, I think it had been good by
way of Executory devise. To one and his Heirs Males, till such an one returns
from Rome, or the like, had been good, especially where the determination
Depends but upon the expiring of a short Life. But all this is but Petitio
principii, the same thing over and over. As for Child and Baylies Case, there
are several things, that differ it from ours. There it has a semblance of our
Case, of one dying without Issue, but it is there upon a Life, and not within a
Life as ours does. And in our Case, my Lord, this Limitation to Henry, is a
Limitation of a Term attendant upon an Inheritance, and then it is plainly as
if the Limitation of a Freehold Estate were to one and the Heirs of his Body,
and if such an accident happens, the Estate to cease, and be to another for a
100 Years. And it is in Henry attendant upon the Inheritance; it should not if
Henry had died, gone to his Exeecutor but to his Heir. Then as to Charles, here
is a condition that determines the whole Trust as to Henry, and there it begins
to be first a Limitation of a Term in gross. He that creates a Term attendant
upon an Inheritance, may sever it if he will, and if he may sever it, may he
not limit it upon a Contingency, that upon such a Contingency it shall be
severed. All conditions are either precedent, or subsequent. Precedent to
create a springing Trust, and Subsequent to destroy the former Estate. In Wood
and Saunders Case, John did not take, but upon the precedent Condition, but
Edward took it upon the subsequent Condition. In our Case this condition is
both; as to the destroying of the Trust to Henry it is a subsequent Condition,
but as to the creating a new Trust to Charles it is a precedent Condition. My
Lord, I must not undertake to argue this Case, but only to say a little to what
was said on the other side, we hope it being upon so short a Contingency which
has now happened, the Limitation of this Term to the Plaintiff is good, and we
pray your Judgment for him.

THE Lord Chancellor's SECOND ARGUMENT.
Lord Chancellor,
I Am not sorry for the Liberty that was taken at the Bar to argue this over
again, because I desired it should be so; for in truth I am not in love with my
own Opinion, and I have not taken all this time to consider of it, but with
very great willingness to change it, if it were possibe I have as fair and as
justifiable an opportunity to follow my own Inclinations (if it be lawful for a
Judge to say he has any) as I could desire; for I cannot concur with the three
Chief Judges, and make a Decree that would be unexceptionable: But it is my
Decree, I must be saved by my own Faith, and must not Decree against my own
Conscience and Reason.

It will be good for the satisfaction of the public in this Case, to take
notice how far the Court is agreed in this Case, and then see where they
differ, and upon what grounds they differ; and whether any thing that has been
said be a ground for the changing this Opinion. The Court agreed thus far:

That in this Case it is all one, the Limitation of the Trust of a Term, or the
Limitation of the Estate of a Term, all depends upon one and the same Reason.
The Court is likewise agreed (which I should have said first, to dispatch it
out of the Case, that it may not trouble the Case at all) that the Surrender of
Marryot to the Duke of Norfolk, and the common Recovery suffered by the Duke,
are of no use at all in this Case. For if this Limitation to Charles be good,
then is that Surrender and the Recovery a breach of Trust, and ought to be set
aside in Equity, so all the Judges that assisted at the hearing of this Cause
agreed; If the Limitation be not good, then there was no need at all of a
Surrender to bar it, nor of the common Recovery to extinguish it.

But then we come to consider the Limitation, and there it agreed all along in
point of Law, That the measures of the Limitations of the Trust of a Term, and
the measures of the Limitations of the Estate of a Term, are all one, and
uniform here, and in other Cases, and there is no difference at Chancery or at
Common Law, between the Rules of the one and the Rules of the other; what is
good in one Case, is good in the other. And therefore in this Case the Court is
agreed too, that the Limitations made in this Settlement to Edward, etc. are
all void, for they tend directly and plainly to Perpetuities, for they are
Limitations of Remainders of a Term in gross after an Estate Tail in that Term,
which commenceth to be a Term in gross, when the Contingency for Charles
happens.

Thus far there is no difference of Opinion: but whether the Limitation to
Charles, if Thomas die without Issue, living Henry, whereby the Honor of the
Earldom of Arundel descends upon Henry; I say, whether that be void too, is the
great Question of this Case wherein we differ in our Opinions.

It is said that is void too; and yet (sever it from the Authority of Child and
Baylie's Case, which I will speak to by and by) I would be glad to see some
tolerable Reason given why it should be so; for I agree it is a Question in Law
here upon a Trust, as it would be elsewhere upon an Estate; and so the
Questions here, are both Questions of Law and Equity. It was well said, and
well allowed by all the Judges, when they did allow the Remainders of Terms
after Estates Tail in those Terms to be void. I shall not devise a Term to a
Man in Tail with Remainders over; the Judges have admirably well resolved in
it, and the Law is settled (and Matthew Mannings Case did not stretch so far)
because this would tend to a Perpetuity.

Now on the other side, I would fain know, when there is a Case before the
Court, where the Limitation does not tend to a Perpetuity, nor introduces any
visible Inconvenience, what should hinder that from being good: For though if
there be a tendency to a Perpetuity, or a visible Inconvenience, that shall be
void for that reason; yet the bare Limitation of the Remainder after an Estate
Tail, which does not tend to a Perpetuity, that is not void. Why? because it is
not? I dare not say so; see then the Reasons why it is so. The Reasons that I
lie under the load of, and cannot shake off, are these.

The Law does in many Cases allow of a future Contingent Estate to be limited,
where it will not allow a present Remainder to be limited; and that Rule, well
understood, goes through the whole Case. How do you make that out? Thus: If a
Man have an Estate limited to him, his Heirs and Assigns for ever, (which is a
Fee-simple) but if he die without Issue living J. S. or in such a short time
then to J. D. though it be impossible to limit a Remainder of a Fee upon a Fee,
yet it is not impossible to limit a Contingent Fee upon a Fee. And they that
speak against this Rule, do endeavor as much as they can to set aside the
Resolution of Pells and Browns Case, which (under favor) was not the first
Case that was so Resolved; for as I said before, when I first delivered my
Opinion, it was resolved to be a good Limitation, 19 Eliz. in the Case of Hind
and Lion, 3 Leonard 64. which by the way is the best Book of Reports of the
later ones that has come out without Authority. If that be so, then where a
present Remainder will not be allowed, a Contingent one will. If a Lease for
years come to be limited in Tail, the Law allows not a present Remainder to be
limited thereupon, yet it will allow a future Estate arising upon a Contingency
only, and that to wear out in a short time.

But what time? and where are the bounds of that Contingency? You may limit, it
seems, upon a Contingency to happen in a life: what if it be limited, if such a
one die without Issue within 21 Years, or 100 Years, or while Westminster Hall
stands? Where will you stop if you do not stop here? I will tell you where I
will stop: I will stop wherever any visible Inconveniece does appear; for the
just bounds of a Fee-simple upon a Fee-simple are not yet determined, but the
first Inconvenience that arises upon it will regulate that.

First of all then, I would fain have any one answer me, where there is no
Inconvenience in this Settlement, no Tendency to a Perpetuity in this
Limitation, and no Rule of Law broken by the Conveyance? what should make this
void? And no Man can say that it does break any Rule of Law, unless there be a
Tendency to a Perpetuity, or a palpable Inconvenience. Oh, yes, Terms are mere
Chattels, and are not in consideration of Law so great as Freeholds, or
Inheritances. These are words, and but words, there is not any real difference
at all, but the Reason of Mankind will laugh at it: shall not a Man have as
much power over his Lease, as he has over his Inheritance? If he have not, he
shall be disabled to provide for the Contingencies of his own Family that are
within his view and prospect, because it is but a Lease for years, and not an
Inheritance or a Freehold. There is that absurdity in it which is to me
insuperable, nor is the Case that was put, answered in any degree. A Man that
has no Estate but what consists in a Lease for years, being to Marry his Son,
settled this Lease thus: In Trust for himself in Tail, till the Marriage take
effect; and if the Marriage take effect while he lives, then in Trust for the
Married couple; is this future Limitation to the married couple good or bad? If
any Man say it is void, he overthrows I know not how many Marriage-settlements:
If he say it be good, why is it not a future Estate in this Case as good as in
that, when there is no tendency to a Perpetuity, no visible Inconvenience?

All Men are agreed, (and my Lord Chief Justice told us particularly how) that
there is a way in which it might be done, only they do not like this way; and I
desire no better argument in the World to maintain my Opinion, than that; For,
says my Lord Chief Justice, suppose it had not been said thus, if Thomas die
without Issue, living Henry, then over to Charles; but thus, if it happens that
Thomas die without Issue in the life of Henry, etc. then this Term shall cease,
and there shall a new Term arise and be created to vest in Charles in Tail, and
that had been wonderful well, and my Lord of Arundel's intention might have
taken effect for the younger Son. This is such a subtilty as would pose the
Reason of all Mankind: For I would have any Man living open my understanding so
far, as to give me a tolerable Reason why there may not be as well a new
springing Trust upon the same Term to go to Charles, upon that Contingency, as
a new springing Lease upon the same Trust: For the latter does much more tend
to a Perpetuity than the former does, I am bold to say it.

But I expect to hear it said from the Bar, and it has been said often, the
Case of Child and Balie is a great Authority, so it is. But this I have to say
to it, first, the point resolved in Child and Balie's Case was never so
resolved before, nor ever was there such a Resolution since. Pells and Browns
Case was otherwise resolved, and has often been adjudged so since. In the next
place, I will not take much pains to distinguish Child and Balie's Case from
this, though the word (Assigns) and the grant of the Remainder by the Mother, who
was Executrix, are things that Rolls lay hold on as Reasons for the Judgment.
But I know not why I may not with Reverence to the Authority of that Case, and
the Learning of those that Adjudged it, take the same liberty as the Judges in
Westminster Hall sometimes do, to deny a Case that stands single and alone of
it self. And I am of Opinion the Resolution in that Case is not Law, though there
it came to be resolved upon very strange circumstances to support such a
Resolution; for the Remainder of a Term of seventy six years is called in
question when but fifteen years of it remained, and after the possession had
shifted hands several times, and therefore I do not wonder that the
Consideration of Equity swayed that Case.

But I put it upon this point, pray consider, there is nothing in Child and
Balie's Case that does tend to a Perpetuity, nor any thing in the Settlement of
the Estate there, that could be called an Inconvenience, nor any Rule of Law
broken by the Conveyance; but it is absolutely a Resolution quia volumus. For
it disagrees with all the other Cases before and since, all which have been
otherwise resolved; but it is a Resolution, I say, merely because it is a
Resolution. And it is expressly contrary to Wood and Saunder's Case, which no
Art or Reason can distinguish from our Case or That. For here was that Case
which was clipped and minced at the Bar, but never answered. Wood and Saunder's
Case is this. To the Husband for sixty years, if he lived so long; to the Wife
for sixty years, if she lived so long; then if John be living at the time of
the death of the Father and Mother, then to John; but if he die without Issue,
living Father or Mother, then to Edward. Suppose these words (living Father or
Mother) had been out of the Case, and it had been to John, and if he die
without Issue, to Edward, will any Man doubt, but then the Remainder over had
been void, because it is a limitation after an Express Entail? How came it then
to be adjudged good! because it was a Remainder upon a Contingency, that was to
happen during two lives, which was but a short Contingency, and the Law might
very well expect the happening of it? Now that is This Case, nay ours is much
stronger; for here it is only during one life, there were two.

The Case of Cotton and Heath in Rolls comes up to this: A Term is devised to
A. for eighteen years; the Remainder to Roll. abr. tit. Devise 612.
B. for life, the Remainder of the first Issue Male of B. which is a Contingent
Estate after a Contingency, and yet adjudged good, because the happening of the
Contingency was to be expected in so short a time. Now that Case was adjudged
by my Lord Keeper Coventry, Mr. Justice Jones, Mr. Justice Crook, and Mr.
Justice Berkley, as Wood and Saunder's Case was by my Lord Keeper Bridgman, Mr.
Justice Twisden, and Mr. Justice Reinsford; so that however I may seem to be
single in my Opinion, having the misfortune to differ from the three Learned
Judges who assisted me, yet I take my self to be supported by seven Opinions in
these two Cases I have cited.

If then this be so, that here is a Conveyance made which breaks no Rules of
Law, introduces no visible Inconvenience, savours not of a Perpetuity, tends
to no ill Example, why this should be void only, because it is a Lease for
years, there is no sense in that.

Now if Charles Howards Estate be good in Law, it is ten times better in
Equity. For it is worth the considering, that this Limitation upon this
Contingency happening, (as it has, God be thanked) was the considerate Desire
of the Family, the Circumstances whereof required Consideration, and this
Settlement was the result of it, made with the best Advice they could procure,
and is as prudent a provision as could be made. For the Son now to tell his
Father that the provision that he had made for his younger Brother is void, is
hard in any Case at Law; but it is much harder in Chancery, for there no
Conveyance is ever to be set aside, where it can be supported by a reasonable
Construction, and here must be an unreasonable one to overthrow it.

I take it then to be good both in Law and Equity; and if I could alter my
Opinion, I would not be ashamed to retract it: for I am as other Men are, and
have my partialities as other Men have. When all this is done, I am at the Bar
desired to consider further of this Case: I would do so, if I could justify
it; but Expedition is as much the right of the Subject, as Justice is, and I am
bound by Magna Charta, Nulli negari, nulli differ Justitiam. I have taken as
much pains and time as I could be informed; I cannot help it if wiser Men than
I be of another Opinion; but every Man must be saved by his own Faith, and I
must discharge my own Conscience.

I have made several Derees since I have had the Honor to sit in this place,
which have been reversed in another place, and yet I was not ashamed to make
them, nor sorry when they were reversed by others. And I assure you, I shall
not be sorry if this Decree which I do make in this Case, be reversed too; yet
I am obliged to pronounce it, by my Oath and by my Conscience. For I cannot
adjourn a Case for difficulty out of an English Court of Equity into the
Parliament; there never was an Ajournment Propter Difficultatem, but out of a
Court of Law where the proceedings are in Latin. The proceedings here upon
Record are in English, and can no way now come into Parliament, but by way of
appeal, to redress the Error in the Decree. I know I am very likely to err, for
I pretend not to be Infallible; but that is a thing I cannot help. Upon the
whole matter, I am under a Constraint, and under an Obligation which I cannot
resist. A Man behaves himself very ill in such a place as this, that he needs
to make Apologies for what he does, I will not do it. I must Decree for the
Plaintiff in this Case, and my Decree is this:

That the Plaintiff shall enjoy this Barony for the residue of the Term of two
hundred years, the Defendant shall make him a Conveyance accordingly, because
he extinguished the Trust in the other, and the Term contrary to both Law and
Reason, by the Merger and Surrender and common Recovery. And that the
Defendants do account with the Plaintiff for the profits of the premises by
them or any of them received since the Death of the said Duke Thomas, and which
they or any of them might have received without wilful default; and that it be
referred to Sir Lacon William Child, Knight, one of the Masters of this Court,
to take the said Account, and to make unto the Defendants all just allowances;
and what the said Master shall certify due, the said Defendants are to pay
unto the Plaintiffs, according to the Masters Report herein to be made. And
that the Defendants shall forthwith deliver the possession of the Premises to
the Plaintiff, and that the Plaintiff shall hold and enjoy the said Barony of
Greystock, with the Lands and Tenements thereto belonging, for the residue of
the said Term of two hundred years, against the Defendants, and all claiming
by, from, or under them. And it is further Ordered and Decreed, that the said
Defendants do Seal and Execute such a Conveyance of the said Term to the
Plaintiff as the Master shall approve of, in Case the parties cannot agree the
same; but the Defendants are not to pay any Costs of the Suit.

Die Veneris, 19 Junii, 1685.
AFter hearing Council two several days upon the Petition and Appeal of Charles
Howard, Esquire; showing, that his Father intended a Provision for his younger
Children, by Deed, made by advice of eminent Council, and did settle the Barony
of Greystocke, and other Lands, of the value of 500 l. per annum, in Trustees,
in order thereunto; and that after a long Suit in Chancery, wherein the
Petitioner was Plaintiff, against his Grace the late Duke of Norfolk, the
Marquess of Dorchester, Henry Lord Mowbray, and Richard Marriott, Esquire;
Defendants, the Cause coming to be heard before the Lord Chancellor Nottingham,
on the 17th of June, in the Four and Thirtieth Year of His late Majesty's
Reign, of Glorious Memory; who after several Days hearing, did declare his
Opinion to be, That the Petitioner had a good Title to the Barony of
Greystocke, and other the Lands in question; and Decreed the Defendants to
account to him for the Profits thereof by them received after the Death of
Thomas, late Duke of Norfolk; which Decree was signed and enrolled, and the
Petitioner actually vested in the Possession of the said Manors and Premises;
and further shows, That the Defendants, the late Duke of Norfolk, the Lord
Mowbray, now Duke of Norfolk, and Richard Marriott, exhibited a Bill of Review
into the High Court of Chancery, for reversing the said Decree; to which the
Petitioner put in a Plea, and Demurer; which being argued on the 15th of May,
in the Five and Thirtieth Year of the Reign of our late King, Charles the
Second, before the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, who after hearing Council on both sides, overruled the said Plea and
Demurrer, and reverst the Decree aforesaid; and ordered a Writ, or Writs of
Restitution, to be directed to the Sheriffs of Cumberland and Westmerland, to
put the Plaintiffs in the Bill of Review, in Possession; which accordingly was
done, as in the Petition, amongst other things, is suggested; and prayed a
Reversal of the last Decree; as also upon the Answer of the Right Noble Henry
Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal of England, and Richard Marriot, Esquire; put in
thereunto. And after due Consideration had of what was offered at the Bar by
Council on either part thereupon, IT is ordered and adjudged by the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, in Parliament assembled, That the said Decree made in
the High Court of Chancery, on the 15th of May, in the Five and Thirtieth Year
of the Reign of the late King Charles the Second, of Glorious Memory, in behalf
of the late Duke of Norfolk, and the now Duke of Norfolk, and Richard Marriott,
Esquire; be and is hereby reversed; and that the Decree made in the said Court of
Chancery, on the 17th of June, in the Four and Thirtieth Year of His late
Majesty's Reign, in behalf of Charles Howard, Esquire; the now Petitioner, Be, and
Is hereby affirmed.

JOHN BROWN, Cler. Parl.

FINIS.

