THE CASE OF JOHN DVNTON, Citizen of London: With respect to his Mother-in-Law,
Madam Jane Nicholas, Of St. ALBANS; And her Only Child, Sarah Dunton.

With the Just Reasons for her Husband's Leaving her.

In a Letter to his Worthy Friend, Mr. George Larkin, Senior.

To which is Added, His Letter to His WIFE.

Psalm. X. 3. The Wicked -- blesses the COVETOVS, whom the Lord abhors.
Eccles. V. 13, 14. There is a SORE EVIL which I have seen under the Sun,
namely, Riches kept by the Owners thereof to their hurt: But those Riches
perish by evil Travel. Luke XII. 15. Take heed and beware of COVETOVSNESS.
LONDON Printed, and are to be sold by A. Baldwin, near the Oxford Arms in
Warwick Lane. MDCC. Price Three Pence.

The CASE of John Dunton Citizen of London: In a Letter to Mr. George Larkin,
Senior.
My very good Friend,
I Received your obliging Letter, which I had answered much sooner, had I not
been prevented by a Second Fit of Sickness, which I was in hopes would have
been my last; and as it had brought me even to the Door of Death, would have
also let me into Eternity; and thereby have prevented me from disclosing what I
could wish might remain Buried (as it has done hitherto) in Eternal Silence. --
But since the good Providence of GOD has thought fit to bring me back from the
Grave, I thought my self obliged to return you an Answer to your Letter. I
cannot blame you for wondering at my Long Absence from my own House, which
methinks even to Me appears so strange, that had I not those Reasons for it
that I have hitherto concealed from all the World (and which I am sure are
Justifiable in the sight of GOD and Man) I should not know how to answer it to
my self. -- But your kind Advice to me, To hasten my Return Home, (which I look
upon as an Effect of our Old Friendship) has at last prevailed with me to
disclose to you what I always resolved to have locked up in the silent Closet
of my own grieved and afflicted Heart. You will not wonder at what I have
already writ, when I shall tell you, I must unavoidably reflect upon the great
Unkindness of my Honored Mother-in-Law and my Dear Wife, of whose Reputation
both in England and Ireland, your Self are a Witness how very tender I have
been: And I had some hopes that what Praises I gave 'em in the Dublin-Scuffle,
would have Engaged 'em Both to have been as kind as I there Represent 'em. But
I was mistaken, for they were not to be flattered into Kindness.

But though my Praises were all lost, yet I still hoped (for a Drowning Man will
catch at any thing) that the Essay I writ on knowing our Friends in Heaven,
(being more Satirical) would have made 'em Generous; and the rather (for so I
was told) as my Reverend Neighbor came on purpose to desire 'em not to starve
themselves, but rather as they had a Plentiful Fortune, to make some use on it:
And I think this was good Advice, for who'd starve himself to enrich his Heir?
('It Is no Abuse to the good Creatures of God, moderately to enjoy them.)

Sir, You may remember I gave you one of these Essays in Ireland, but I told
you nothing of what I designed by it: Here in Dark Hints, that no body can
understand but themselves (that so I might preserve their Reputation, and show
'em their Error at the same time) is a History of the Furious Treatment This is
owned in two Letters sent to me in Ireland, and which I Will Print if I see
Occasion.
(or Honey-Moon, it being so soon after our Marriage) that I received from 'em,
from the Second Day I was Married, to the time I Embarked for Ireland. And had
you seen in what manner they began their Reign (which was too Arbitrary to last
any long time) you would think me very obliging to condescend to a Reconciliation.

But seeing none could understand that Essay but themselves, I do intend (if
they tie up my Hands from doing Justice, or Print any false Stories) to write a
Narrative of this March, from the time Madam Nicholas (my Pious Mother-in-Law)
invited me by Letter A Copy of which I Will Print if they Answer this.
to court her Daughter, to the time their Raving Carriage frighted me to
Ireland; in which shall be inserted the Messages that were sent upon that
occasion, and the PRIVATE LETTERS that afterward past between the Mother and
the Daughter; with a Diary of their Quarrels at my House, which was now changed
from a Family of Love, to a mere Billingsgate. And this attested by TWO PERSONS
that then lived in my Family. And (my Friend) did you but know (as all that
came to my House observed) in what a Hell I lived, for the Four First Months
after I was Married, you would rather Encourage, than Dissuade me, from Writing of
this Narrative.

For, Mr, Larkin, I tell it you as a Secret, (though I should and will be Master
of my own House) their Furious and Cavetous Treatment has frighted away all my
Friends from the Raven, except Two, that come out of Curiosity to see 'em, that
they may more sensibly lament my Case; which you will think doleful, when I
tell you, That I am so very VXORIOUS, (as appears by my living with my First
Read her Funeral Sermon entitled, The Character of a good Woman, and you will be
convinced of the Truth of this.
Wife, 15 years, without hearing or giving one Angry Word) that had Mother or
Daughter but One Obliging Quality, I could yet dote upon 'em.

But so it is, my Friend, (my Two Sicknesses this year hindering me in the
disposing of my Remaining Stock) things are now come to that Upshot, that I
must lay my self under the Imputation of a very Unkind Husband, or else make it
appear that my Wife and Mother are very Unkind to Me. And yet to Expose those
for whom I have so Tender a Love, though it be only to your self (in whose Breast
I am satisfied I may lock up these Secrets without fear of Discovery) is that
which I know not how to do, without a very great Reluctance: And yet without my
Wife and Mother will be willing to Accommodate things better than at present I
have any grounds to hope, what I now only impart to your self, I am afraid I
must ere long be forced to declare to the whole World in my Just Vindication.

But that I may leave you no longer in the dark, as to the Cause of my Present
Retirement -- You must know, my Friend, That my being Bound for my First Wive's
Sister's Husband, and Five hundred Pounds loss at Sea, in a Ship that was Cast
away; some hundred Pounds Loss in Printing a large Folio, two thick Volumes of
the Edicts of Nants, -- and the long and chargeable Sickness of my First Wife,
together with the Charges of her Funeral (for I thought it my Duty to show a
great deal of Love to a Wife that despised the World, when it stood in
Competition with my Esteem) had run me considerably into Debt; which
notwithstanding by my own Punctual Payments, and the Prudent Silence of my
first Wife, in altogether concealing my taking up Money upon my own Estate, was
wholly hid from the World; so that my Reputation received no Diminution -- Upon
this, when I was to be married to my present Wife, I nakedly told my
Mother-in-Law that I was 1300 l. in Debt by these forementioned Losses, (for I
had no reason to conceal 'em, having gained very considerably in Trade till
these happened) I also told her that with my Wife's Portion I designed to clear
my own Estate, whch I also did, and Joyntur'd my Wife therein.

Sir, The Fortune that my Mother offered me down, was a Thousand Pounds; but
besides that, I insisted on 500 l. more, to pay off my other Debts, and to
carry on my Trade: And who could have thought but I should have obtained it, my
Wife being the only Child of her Mother? But having, as I said, cleared my Own
Estate, (which is worth 2000 l. besides the Two Reversions, which in time may
be 1800 l. added to it) and Joyntur'd my Wife therein, I drew up the State of
my Case, with respect to my other Debts, and presented it to my Mother, who (to
my great amazement) was so far from Answering my desires, that she refused so
much as to read the Paper I drew up; which was a thing so very Unkind (I was
about to say Barbarous) that had a Turk presented me his Case, I would have
Read it, though I had never Answered it.

When my hopes were thus frustrated with respect to my Mother, I then told the
matter to my Wife, and desired her to tell her Mother of the Necessity I was
under of having 300 l. which she did; but at the same time said, She Would Starve
before she would part with her Ioynture, which yet I never asked her to do. -- And
can you think now I have not Reason to absent my self from my Home, since I
cannot go thither with Safety?

You write me word indeed, That my Wife speaks of me with very much Tenderness
and Affection; which I am very apt to believe, for she tells me in her last
Letter, Let Business succeed as it please, she does not value that, so that she
could but see me at home; and in the next line adds, I Am mightily concerned for
your Illness, which is the same with mine; for you and I are one. But whilst
she expresses Unkindness in her Actions, and refuses to do what lies in her
Power to make me Easy, her words are but like those of whom St. James speaks,
Iam. 2. 16. who said, (...) warmed and filled, but gave them nothing that (...)
needful. For the Expressing of much Love, (...) showing None, does but
aggravate the Unkindness (...) Her Love to me therefore, notwithstanding all
(...) Tender Expressions, is very questionable; but (...) and my Mothers Love
to Money is very apparent (...) which they are so Tender, that they will not (...)
with it upon any Terms; and had rather I (...) lie in a Goal for not paying my
just Debts, (...) supply me with so much as will do it. And (...) can be more
Ridiculous, than her being so desirous (...) my Coming Home, and Continuing
there, when She Is the only Occasion of my Absence? For I do assure you, Mr.
Larkin, whatever my Mother and my Wife may make you believe, That if my Mother
will let me take up 500 l. upon my Own Estate; or (which will be a greater
Kindness, and sooner done) lend me 200 l. and be bound her self for 300 l.
more, that so I may pay my Debts and be made Easy, (which is all I ever
desired) I will both immediately come Home, and also continue there, and Absent
my self no more. But at present Cohabitation is no ways proper; for I have such
an Abhorrence of any thing that looks Unjust, though 'twere but in the least
Trifle, that I think it is a Great Sin (if I am mistaken, I ask Pardon) for any
Man so much as to Try for an Heir that might probably Dispossess any one of a
Just Debt, though 'twere but of Two Farthings -- But being Ambitious to be a
Father, if either my Mother or Wife will contribute to my being so upon
Honorable Terms, I will believe and say as much of the Reality of their
Kindness, as I now do to the contrary; and will esteem such a Reconciliation
the happiest day I ever yet met withal. But if they will rather choose to expose
my Reputation (which I have kept hitherto Vnblemish'd) than to comply with
those Reasonable Terms I have mentioned, it is evident their Hearts and their
Tongues don't go together: For the World knows well enough that my Mother has a
FAIR ESTATE, and that my Wife is her only Child; and to whom upon our Marriage
she promised to leave it; which Promise was made as a Motive to make Me consent
to the Match: And since upon that Promise I married her Daughter, and Joyntur'd
her in a clear Estate of 2000 l. besides the Reversions; that she should now
suffer my Reputation to be slurr'd (as it is like to be) for want of 300 l. is
what I believe your Self could never have thought, had it not been told you.

But I know well enough they have their OBJECTIONS, with which they satisfy
themselves, and I shoul'd not deal fairly by them (as I always have, and always
will do) should I not inform you what they are.

They will say, That if they should do this, there will be no end of it; for I
shall quickly run my self as far in Debt again by Printing (being what I so
much delight in.) But to obviate this, I answer, That I desire but 500 l. in
all, of which I shall use 375 to clear the Bonds, and what I owe in Trade, and
then there will be a well-furnish'd House, a clear Stock, a good Estate in
Land, and 125 l. in Money to Trade withal; and that I may not be tempted to
exceed those Bounds, I have resolved never to exceed 50 l. at once either in
Printers or Stationers Debts. And if by Trading I shall happen to run that out,
I will give over Trading, and live on what I have; which in Conjunction with my
MOTHER's PROMISE, As I shall prove by the Letter that was sent to me by her
Order.
is more by 6000 l. than ever we are likely to spend, having neither Child nor
Chick.

They may also object, That though I have Ioyntur'd my Wife in my Estate, yet I
still keep the Writings in my own hand, and will not let them have them. To
this I Answer, It Is true, I do so; but the Reason is, Because whilst I see they
have no regard either to my Ease or Reputation, by enabling me to pay my just
Debts, I cannot look upon 'em as my Friends, and upon that account have kept my
Writings from 'em [and they are now in the hands of an Eminent Citizen.] But if
they will Answer my Expectation, with respect to the Particulars above
mentioned, I will, if my Mother desires it, put all my Writings into her hands,
which at once takes off that Objection. Perhaps they will also say,

That I have received Money from Ireland, for my Venture thither, that might
have paid my Debts without their help. To this I Answer, The several Debts I
contracted for Paper and Printing since my second Marriage -- The Moneys which
I paid that I took up upon Bond, to furnish out my Venture for Ireland; The
Charges I was at in Ireland, for the King's Customs, Binders, Printers, five
Servants, and the Sale, was about 440 l. The great quantity of Money I lost in
Ireland, through the Dishonesty of some I trusted; The great Losses I have had
in several Books I have Printed since my Return for England; The Sums I have
paid for New Copies, of which Sir William Temple's Letters is one, and the
Whole Duty of Man in Verse, is another, etc.

My Dear Friend, These several Payments and Disappointments, together with the
vast Charges I have been at, in defraying Two Fits of Sickness this Summer [for
had I neglected my self, I had perished, my Wife nor Mother never sending once
to know if I wanted any thing in my Two Sicknesses] have engrossed all the
Moneys I received in Ireland, except a small Sum remaining for my present
Support; and I cannot see, as I told my Wife, why these Disappointments should
Diminish her Love, for they Increase mine. -- However, 'Twas by Reason of these
Disappointments, that I never paid off the Bonds I had told 'em of, nor gave
'em any Account of my Irish-Venture: For seeing my Mother and Wife so unkindly
refused to Assist me, (choosing rather to venture my Life on the Irish-Seas,
though I was but newly Married) I thought they showed a very Selfish Temper, so
Industriously to enquire about what I had received, but no ways to concern
themselves about what I wanted: And, which adds to their Unkindness, (if they
don't permit me to do Justice) I had several Proposals made of a Thousand
Pounds [without (...) rejected for the sake of my Present Wife.

Should I have any Debates with 'em upon this Subject, it would run us into New
Quarrels, and therefore I Resolve [for my own Quiet] to forget all their
Provocations; and sure I am, Ill Husbandry [for Losses in Trade cannot be so
Accounted] can be no excuse for their being Unkind; perhaps a Drunken Swearing
Husband might have frighted 'em to a Compliance; but I do averr, I was never
disordered with Drinking in my whole Life; and Challenge all the Servants that
have lived with me, to prove one single instance to the contrary: -- Nay, Mr.
Larkin, I appeal even to you, whether ever you saw any thing in all the time
that you have been acquainted with me [which is 20 years] that looked like
Extravagance? Nay, I Am sure, you have rather thought me too Covetous, but it
was because you knew not where the Shoo pinched me; and had I not met with
these Disappointments in Trade, I intended not to have troubled them: And yet
why should this be thought such a Trouble? You know I was bound for a Thousand
Pound for my first Wive's Sisters Husband [at my Wife's desire] and forced to
pay a great part of it, and yet never loved my Wife the worse, nor once
upbraided her with it, as she declared upon her Deathbed.

My Wife and Mother have now such an Opportunity to oblige me as may never fall
out again; but I desire they would remember that the 500 l. I am asking for, is not
Money Given, but only Lent Me, and that upon my Own Estate, in which my Wife,
[a very sickly Woman] has no further Interest than her bare Life: But tho my
Dear has no more than her Life in my Estate, yet her free and generous granting
my present Request, will be so gratefully taken by me, that I shall make it the
Business of my whole Life to study to Requite it. -- I say, Provided it be done
Freely, and without Reflections. There is indeed a way of doing Kindnesses that
takes away the Kindness of the thing done; but when I see a Kindness is done
Kindly, there is nothing can oblige me more -- Nor will the Kindness be more to
me than to my DEAR SPOUSE; for, a Wife shines by her Husbands Honor, but must
be darkened if he suffer an Eclipse. -- If she believed this, she would be forward
to grant my Request; but whether she does or no, I look upon it an
indispensible Duty to pay my Just Debts, and cannot die with a good Conscience
till it be done; and would no more have put my self out of a Capacity of doing
it, than I would have Eaten Fire, had I not thought I should have had that
Money from my Mother which would have enabled me to do it. And do you Judge
whether I had not Reason to think so, for when her Attorney, whom I mentioned
before, asked her before our Marriage to lend me 300 l. she did not say she
would not, which made him tell me, he did not doubt but she would lend it. I
say, looking upon the Payment of my just Debts, as I do, to be an Indispensible
Duty, if both my Wife and Mother refuse to assist me in it, I must Endeavor to
raise it from my Estate by Cutting down the Timber, there being several Acres
of Wood upon it, which being sold, I doubt not will raise me a considerable
Sum. It Is true, I am very loath to do this, because it will disgrace the Estate;
but seeing they first expose my Reputation, why should I be solicitous about
it? And I have no ways left to help my self, but either this, or else the
Selling the Reversion of it after my Wives Life: And for my self, I am no ways
solicitous; for, IN d rather Beg, than not pay my Debts.

This, and our Living from each other, will be the unhappy Consequences of
their Refusing to assist me: When on the contrary, should they comply with my
Desires, we might live happily together, and the Estate kept Free and
Undisfigured. Besides, if Providence should take me hence before her, I should
think I could not do better than to leave all to her, who was willing to part
with all to serve me, and make me Easy.

But if they do not agree to these Terms, instead of Marrying a Wife of a
Fortune, [as many a man has done, whose Estate is not worth so many Pence as
mine is worth Hundreds] I have fairly married my own Ruin, and must have the
Scandal of Owing (I will not say Breaking for) 300 l. tho my own Estate with the
Reversions, is worth ten times more, besides her MOTHERS PROMISE of giving me
Sampsil, (which is a Noble Estate it self) and the several hundreds she Dyed
Possessed of, which I am so far from desiring, that would she but make me
easy, there is not a Person in the World would more heartily desire her Life
than my self. But the Whole Duty of Man tells us, that A Promise is a Debt, and
I thought I might depend upon it, (and therefore refused a Note she offered to
secure Sampsil to me and my Wife, in Case she Married her self) when made to
influence such a Solemn thing, as a Marriage. Neither do I doubt, at her Death,
the Performance of the Marriage Promise, tho she should think good, to make me
a Vagabond in the mean time.

But though at present I labor under the Misfortune of being forced to ask a
Favor at their hands [I word it so, for were it in my Power, and I saw them so
pinched as I am, I should voluntarily propose doing that which I am forced to
entreat for, and perhaps in vain.] Yet my Comfort is, the Printing of this
Letter will let the World (and my Few Creditors) see that I would be Honest, if
my Mother, or Wife either, had so much Love for me as to let me; and therefore
all the Injuries others suffer by me, will lie at their Doors; which will be a
greater Clog upon their Consciences than they will be able to bear; and therefore
I hope they will consider that Covetousness [especially in a Husband or Wife] is
a more provoking Sin than is generally thought; for how often have
SMITHFIELD-BARGAINS been made, to add Land to Land, not Love to Love; and to
unite Houses to Houses, not Hearts to Hearts; which has been the Occasion that
Men have turned Monsters, and Women Devils.

Thus have I fairly represented my Whole Case, with respect to my Honored
Mother and my Dear Wife. I shall not need to desire you to keep it private,
having told it as a Secret [unless you shall think it proper to show it to my
Wife and Mother] for I would not it should be made Public whilst there remains
any hopes of an Accommodation; and therefore to question your Faithfulness
herein, would look like a Reflection upon you; or rather upon my self, in
communicating a Secret of this Importance to one that I thought coudn't keep
it. But I have no such thoughts, only having been thus free with you, let me
beg your Advice herein. -- I cannot think but with Extreme Trouble, of doing
any thing that may Expose my Dear Wife and Mother, whom [upon their Compliance
with my Just Desires] I could Embrace in the Arms of a Sincere and Unfeigned
Affection, and bury all that has hitherto looked like Unkindness, in the Grave
of Eternal Oblivion. But since Self-Preservation is the Great Fundamental
Principle and Law of Nature, if they refuse to comply with me herein, and go
about through their inordinate Love of Money, to Banish me from my own Home,
and Expose my Reputation to the World; I shall then be under a Necessity of
Exposing them to the World in their proper Colors, being furnished [as I
hinted before] with Materials for that Purpose, but they shall never be
Published, if I can but meet with that Compliance from my Wife, which both the
Law of God and Man has made her Duty.

These things, I think to lay before my Wife and her Mother, but would
willingly have your Thoughts about it first, which I shall very much depend
upon, as being one whom I always found my Faithful Friend: Pray be not long in
sending me your Best Advice, for at present my Mind is very much disordered,
and the Disorder of my Mind, has 'twice this Summer, like to have proved fatal
to my Body. I am glad to hear your good Wife is come safe to London, and shall
be glader to see her there, when my Circumstance will permit me. I have only to
add, That my very Bowels Yearn toward my Dear Wife; and if you can direct me
how to (...) as my De^res, with Respect to the (...) Debts, may be Answered,
and a good Agreement with Her and her Mother Effected, whereby we may live in
that Unity, Love and Concord, which might make us happy both here and
hereafter, you will Eternally Oblige

Your Truly Loving Friend, John Dunton.
December. 8. 1699
Reflections upon the Carriage of my Wife and Mother, after they had seen the
Foregoing LETTER.
THe foregoing Letter I writ to Mr. Larkin, in Answer to one of his to me, who
after he had read it [unknown to me] went with it to my Wife and Mother; who
both refused to Comply with my just Desires, either of Suffering me to take up
500 l. upon my own Estate, or to lend me such a Sum out of her own heaps; tho
besides showing my Letter, he used several Pathetical Arguments to incite them
to it, but all in Vain. On the 9th Instant coming to London, I sent for Mr.
Larkin, who acquainted me, That [hoping to serve me thereby] he had showed my
Letter to my Mother and Wife, and that they had heard it through, but without
any success; which he admired at, seeing, as he expressed it, There were
Arguments enough in it, if not to melt a Stone, yet at least to carry a Cause
where a Wife, that was continually saying, She had been Miserable had she
Married any Man but Dunton, As several that heard her can testify.
was the sole Judge. And certainly unless they have seared Consciences, which I
am apt to fear, by their unnatural Carriage, and something I conceal till I am
further Provoked they will one day think it their Duty to Answer my Reasonable
Request, and to move for a Reconciliation: And to encourage 'em to it, I here
declare (tho they have had no regard to my Reputation) I am yet ready to
forgive 'em, tho I find it the hardest Task o Life; For by reason of their
Covetousness, they have Banished me from a House that I thought a Paralise* and
what has cost me several Hundred Pounds, will now be sold for a Trifle. Then
let the World judge, considering what Fair Offers I made 'em, whether I had not
reason to be Moved; especially since my Wife told me at parting, She Would Burn
rather than Assist me.

Yet for all this Matchless Provocation, whenever my Wife casts a Longing Look
toward her Husband, and asks Pardon for Loving the World more than him, I
shall leap to see the returning Prodigal, and run to meet her with open Arms.

And if I may hope for this Reconciliation from the Consideration of their
Covetous Tempers, I have all the Reason in the World to expect it; for I shall
next prove they were fully satisfied with my Estate. And this is Evident by the
Letter sent to my Mother-in-Law, by her own Attorney, which is this following
-- viz.

Madam,
I Received Yours, and am now to tell You, I could not have an Answer from
Chesham, till last Monday; but now I have an Account of Mr. Dunton's Estate,
according to his own Particulars. Which is all at present from

Your Servant, I. R.


So much for my Estate in Land. -- As to my Stock, she said she did not so much
concern her self about that, as my Land; and indeed I don't know why she
should; for my Land (which her Friend declares was what I related) was a
sufficient Ioynture for her Thousand Pound. However, as I had satisfied her
about my Land, so I was willing to give her the best Account I could of my
Stock; and accordingly I told her my Copies and Books I had Printed, had cost
me 2000 l. and if I added Three, 'twas no more than was True, ( I having
Printed many Hundred Books) But tho my Stock was thus Bulky, as is sufficiently
seen by my Irish-Venture, and the remaining Stock which I left behind, yet
withal I told her I could not say, if my Stock was forced to be Sold, that it
would yield me 400 l. for in such Cases (as was seen in the Fate of my
Remaining Stock) Books sell little more than for waste Paper. However, That
part of my Stock I sent to Dublin, yielded 400 l. and a great deal more, as Mr.
Larkin knows, that was present at the Sale: So that my Land was as much, and my
Stock better, than I represented it. -- But I cannot help Losses and
Disappointments in Trade, and would be easy under them; For not being able to
Govern Events, I Endeavor to Govern my self. -- Neither dare I rail at
Providence, as they do, who abuse their Friends for not being Successful.

A Word to those Gentlemen to whom I Am Engaged.
I Shall next in a particular manner address my self to those Gentlemen to
whom I Am Obliged, and upon whose Patience (by reason of a Covetous Mother and
Unkind Wife) I am forced to Trespass a little, which, Next to the Unkindness of
my Wife, is the only thing in the World that Troubles me. -- I have ever had a
great Aversion to be in Debt, in small as well as in greater matters; and for
that reason have often paid a Debt twice over, for fear I had not paid it once;
but that which I so much dreaded, is now come upon me; For tho I respect my
Wife and Mother as much, or, were it possible, more than they love the World,
yet you see, Gentlemen, by my Letter to Mr. Larkin, that their Caresses before
Marriage are all forgot, and that the Tears of a Husband have no Rhetoric in
'em, where Money is the thing desired.

It Is true, they have a FAIR ESTATE, but ha'nt the Soul to do good with it
either to themselves or others. But it is no more than what Solomrn tells us,
Eccles. 5. 13, 14. There is (says he) a sore Evi. which I have seen under the
Sun, namely, Riches kept for the Owners thereof to their hurt -- But those
Riches perish by Evil Travel.

For my own part, I can truly say, I have found more Pleasure in dividing a
small Fortune with my Friends, than in Hoarding up, or Enjoying the greatest
Treasures without them. The greatest Benefit that we can receive from Riches,
is, their inabling us in our LIFE TIME to do more good than those that have
less; and therefore as I never waited for DEAD-MENS-SHOES, As I have proved in
An Essay upon dead-Mens-Shoes, (...) ready for the Press.
so I hope mine are as little desired; which did the Miser consider, he would grow
more Generous than he is now Sneaking; or at least so kind as not to starve
himself. I cannot say my Wife or Mother have starved themselves, (for I found
'em alive when I came home) and to do 'em Justice, They Never Fight; but it is
evident by my Mothers denying my small Request, that she loves nothing but her
Money: Her FIRST SON-IN-LAW (a Person of Great Worth) found her of this Temper
(to his Great Disappointment) and I could say something of HER CARRIAGE TO HER
HUSBAND, etc. But here is enough to convince the world (more especially my
Neighbors in Iewenstreet) how falsely she represented my Last Farewell; and her
Barbarous Treatment appears in nothing so much, as in her aggravating those
Heats at parting, of which (as I can prove by several Witnesses) She and her
Daughter were the Sole Occasion. It could not satisfy them to be the Cause of
my Ruin, (for is'nt it plain, when they could so easily Prevent it, and would
not?) but they must afterward murder my Reputation. This is such a Barbarous
thing for a Wife to be guilty of, that I never heard any thing like it. -- And
it appears yet the more unkind, as I Am told yesterday of a young Lady that (of
her own accord) sold her Jewels, Watch, Rings, (instead of Raving that her
Husband had got 'em) to pay off his Just Debts. But tho I have nothing to boast
of, of this kind, yet my comfort is, ALL I owe in the World, is now brought
into the Narrow Compass of 250 l. For being obliged in Conscience to secure to
a near Relation 150 l. (as 'twas the greatest part of her Maintenance) I have
by the said Security paid all I owe, to the Sum of 250 l. and that is owing to
Persons that are so far from blaming what I ve done, that they are amazed (as
every body was that knew 'em) how I could live with 'em so long. Three of these
Persons have sent me word that they are so well satisfied of my Honest
Intentions, that they will never Touch a Hair of my Head; and I don't doubt but I
shall meet with the like Compassion from all the rest. It Is not long since I
told a Person, that sued to me for Pity, that I Would Sign his Liberty with as many
Hands (if I had 'em) as I have Hairs on my Head. Gent. I don't doubt but my
Readiness to Serve others in their Distress, has been the occasion of that
Generous Treatment I receive from you. However I do assure you, that the good
Opinion you have of me, shall not be lost; for that I may do you Justice, I am
willing to sell even mySelf (to the very Skin) to Pay you: It Is true, the Sum
is so very Little, I owe now, that I Am ashamed to think that my Wife and Mother
should have such a Mean Spirit as to suffer me to be Exposed for it: But
Gentlemen, I ever thought there was as much Justice in a Penny as a Pound; and
shall be so scrupulous to pay every one to a half Farthing, with the Interest
Money, (and Interest upon Interest, if demanded) But (...) under a necessity to
entreat your Patience till next Christmas, having two Barns to build, and such
unavoidable Repairs, as will devour all my Rent, but what is necessary for my
own Support; but at Christmas (in the year 1700,) I Will clear all the Interest
that shall then be due; and if Gods Providence does not work my Deliverance
before that, (for if I Dye before that time, I Have Willed that the Reversions
shall be Sold as soon as ever I am Buried, to pays my Debts; or if my Wife
should Dye, I can take up 1000 l. in a Weeks Time) I Will then set upon Felling
my Woods to a single Twigg, and I don't doubt but they will pay the 250 l. or if
they don't, by the Lady Day after, I Will Sell the Reversions of my whole Estate,
or else Beg from Door to door, till such time that the Income of my Estate, by
Equal Divisions, has paid my Debts; but, Gentlemen, I do believe I Am the only
Instance in this Age, that has starved in the midst of Plenty. Sure no Man will
be so unkind as to question the Sincerity of these Promises; for tho I cannot
do more than I here promise, yet what I promise, you may depend upon. Neither
can any think I had any Dishonorable Design in making a Ioynture of my Estate;
for I should have been more Fool than Knave, had I Married with a design to be
ruined for 300 l. when my bare word (Before I fell into Misers Hands) would
have passed for 1000 l.

Thus, Gentlemen, have I laid before you my Whole Case. And seeing my Ruin is,
of the two, a more Melancholy thing, than the Delay of your Moneys for a few
Months, I hope you will send me word In a Letter directed for me, to M. Kenswel's
House in Little-East-cheap.
( for, it is all that is left to comfort me) That you are fully satisfied with
what I Have promised.

And as to my Wife, tho she has turned me over to the mercy of Strangers
(which, without Repentance, will bring a Curse upon her whole Estate) yet I
still have a Tenderness for her, and think it my Duty, tho her Mother be worth
Thousands, to take a most Particular Care that she want for nothing; and in
order to it, I told her Mother, before Mr. Larkinn and several Others, That l'd
pay her for her Board in the Country, as she had paid me in the City, which was
Four Shillings a Week for Meat, Drink, Washing, and Lodging; and I further told
her, when I was settled, which I hope will be by next Midsummer, that I Would send
for her. And tho she has said before Mr. Larkin and others, She Would not come; yet
I Will try her again, and I give this Public Notice of it, that she may have no
Pretense to be out of the way, but may leave word with Mr. Blackstone in
Bull-Head-Cour't in Iewen street, where I may send to her; for seeing she might
have lived with me in Splendour and Reputation, and would not, I shall prove it
her Duty to live with me in Adversity* Or if she refuses to come to me, I shall
Print such an Advertisement as Mr Godfrey Lee did in the Flying Post, about his
Wive's Elopement.

Gentlemen, I did all I could to prevent things coming to this Extremity: And
therefore, tho my Wife and Mother had returned a very Provoking Answer to that
Letter I sent Mr. Larkin, yet being resolved to try my Wife's Kindness a little
further, I writ the following Letter to her; and because Mr. Larkin was only
(as yet) acquainted with our Affairs, and showed my Wife the Letter I sent to
him, I desired him to give himself the trouble of being the Bearer of this
also; To which he readily consented.

My Letter to my WIFE.
MY DEAR!
I Came to Town last Night, and sent for my Friend Mr. Larkin about Ten at
Night; who told me he had been with you and my Mother, and had showed you my
Letter to him, wherein I gave him a true state of my Case; and though it was what
I did not design he should have done, yet having done it, he has thereby saved
me the Labor, and can justify to the World, That my Mother has Refused to
lend me any Assistance to Enable me to be honest, or to make me Easy; and that
she Values me, and you so little, that rather than let me take up 500 l. upon
my Own Estate, or lend me so much of hers, she will suffer my Reputation, and
yours too (for to use your own Words, You and I are One) to be Exposed to the
World; which when once done, is a Damage she will scarce be able to repair:
However I can Justify my self in all that I have done; and resolve to be as
honest as I can, till I can be so honest as I would: In order to which I will
Print my CASE with all convenient speed, and let the World see that all those
Allegations under which she would cover her self, are but like so many Cobwebs,
which the Beesom of Truth will quickly sweep away: And I am sorry that in this
Unkindness of my Mother, you should take part with her against me, that is,
against your self; For a Husband ought to be nearer and dearer than a Mother;
and had you esteemed me so, and dealt as such by me, I had had no need to
trouble my Mother: As to what you make your Excuse, That then your Mother would
have given you nothing, if you can believe she would have been so UNNATURAL,
yet it can be no Excuse, except such a one as the Apostle Condemns, which is a
doing Evil that Good may come of it.

Then, Prithee, my Dear, Let my Mother Act as she pleases, let not thee and I
(who are both extraordinary Crazy, and can live but a few Years) make such a
poor use of the World as to Hugg and Embrace it. Besides, if you don't Consent
to the making me easy, how can I think your Love is what you pretend? Your
showing so much Love to the World, is neither pleasing to God nor Man; and
consider (for you pretend to Religion) how twill rejoice our Enemies, to see us
Quarrel with our very Blessings, and to make even Happiness it self to
Disappoint us. -- You know, my Dear, Madam C -- y Sold her Estate un-aks'd, to
oblige her Spouse; and indeed the Design of Ioyntures is to defend against bad
Husbands, and not to Ruin those that are kind, and would be honest, if their
Wives would let 'em. I knew a Wife that would often say, What does a Jointure
signify to a Woman that loves her Husband? When Man and Wife love so little,
that the one is unconcerned in the others Afflictions, there generally follows
a Blast upon all they undertake.

My Dear, All our Distresses of Body and Mind should be so Equally Divided, As
I have largely proved in my Essay on knowing our Friends in Heaven.
that all yours should be mine, and all mine should be yours: Mr. Rochford
Married us for better for worse, for Richer for Poorer; and [as you well
observe] We are One Flesh; and therefore should be no more offended with the
Words, or Failings and Wants of each other, than we would be had they been our
own. For my own share, I solemnly declare, Were you seized with a Fit of
Sickness that required the Advice of the whole College of Physicians, and all
the Physic in the Apothecaries Shops, I Would sell my Estate to procure it. And
why should you doubt it? For did I not spend near 100 l. [tho I had but a
thousand with you] in (...) related to my Courtship, and your coming home? So
(...) I cannot imagine what your Mother means by the mighty Presents she talks
of; For I don't think all that she ever gave us [besides the Thousand Pound]
ever amounted to Ten Pounds: For as to the 40 l. she paid for your Admittance
to my Copyhold-Land, 'twas no Service to me, as I then told her, but Money
purely flung in the dirt; for I was Admitted before I knew her, So that I had
but a Thousand Pound, tho she boasts of more; and that Thousand is a dear
Purchase, if my Ruin must pay for it.

All that I shall add, is, That you must not blame me for what Methods I shall
take: For 'twill look very Ridiculous for you [or your Mother either] to blame
me for that which you can prevent, but will not. And whatever you may think of
the matter, I cannot see that my Love to you will acquit me from being Just to
those (...) whom I am Indebted.

I have thought fit to send these Lines by Mr. Larkin, as well to persuade you
to what is both your Duty and Interest, as to acquaint you that I will be with
you my self by and by, to make the Last Offers; that so, if possible, Things
may be Accommodated before it be too late: For if my Reputation be once
Publicly Exposed, it wll be to no purpose to talk of Terms. Which is all, till
I see you, from him who resolves [in spite of all your Unkindness] to continue

Your most Affectionate Husband till Death, JOHN DVNTON.
Dec. 10. 1699.

My Wife upon reading of this Letter, showed her self as inexorable as her
Mother, telling Mr. Larkin [as she did me afterwards] That her Mother made her
swear, before she was Married, that she would never suffer her Husband to take
up a Penny upon her Ioynture, in case of the greatest Necessity; and threatening
that if she did, she would never leave her a Farthing of what she had.

The CONCLUSION.
MY Letters meeting with no Success, either from Mother or Daughter, I was then
resolved to go my self, which accordingly I did: For tho my Letters were sent
in vain, yet I did not know but by going in PERSON I might move Compassion, if
not in my Mother, yet at least in my Wife, who in several Letters had so
passionately desired to see me; yet still my Fears were more than my Hopes; for
I knew how their Hearts were GLV'D to the World, and therefore could not expect
to see much Affection, or that Tenderness which ought to be between a Man and
his Wife: So that methoughts I went to my own House (whither, some years ago, I
went with such Pleasure and Delight, as being sure to be received with a
thousand Welcomes) just like a man going to his Execution; and so it
accordingly happened, for when I came to my House, whither I was accompanied by
several Friends, which rendered my Farwell the more dismal) I found both Mother
and Daughter in the same Mind Mr. Larkin had done before* my Mother declaring
to those Persons then present, That she would be pulled Limb frem Limb, before
she would lend a Farthing, or suffer me to take up a Penny upon my Estate; my
Wife at the same time declaring, SHE WOV'D BE BVRN'D BEFORE SHE WOULD LET ME; which
I confess put me into a Great Passion, for I am but Flesh and Blood, and tho I
can bear long, cannot bear always: So that now, for about Five Hours (which I
could never say before, since my Second Marriage) I was Sole Master of my own
House.

Having staid with 'em about five Hours, and heard a great deal of Raving, I
was so sick on it, that I could stay no longer: So I took my leave (for that
Night) in the following words:

Mother, It Is now but a few hours before my Reputation will be Slurr'd; which
seeing neither you nor my Wise will prevent, I have only to add, I pray God
bless you Both; and so (with thanking you for my Ruin) bid you Farwell; not
doubting but the GOD of my Life, who knows the Sincerity of my Heart, and
Designs, to pay my Debts, and in all things to keep a Conscience void of
offense toward GOD and Man, will notwithstanding all your Unkindness, enable
me to accomplish what I so earnestly desire.

After uttering these Words, to show I was in Charity with them, I Saluted 'em
both, and gave 'em a Second Farwell; and at parting I told my Mother the Story
of Midas, who (as the Poets feign) starved in the midst of Plenty: And so
Mother (said I) do you deal with me. And with those words, I took leave of both
Wife and Mother; and then bid Farwell to the Black Raven, the most Pleasant
House that I ever dwelt in.

I know some that can creep for Interest, will blame me for Publishing This
CASE; Say they, Who would lose such a Fair Estate at the Manor of Sampsil, for
want of a little Submission?

To this I answer, A Man may bear till his heart breaks; and having used all
the gentle Methods I could think of, to no purpose, the Publishing of This Case
is the only way I have left to Reform 'em. Besides, I think it my Duty to
prefer a Quiet Life, and the doing of Justice, to the Fine Manor of Sampsil;
for I can be happy without Sampsil, but I should never be so, should I prove
dishonest. -- But say I had a Mind to Sampsil, I Am sure to Publish this Case,
is the only way to insure it; for when my Mother reads it, (wherein I have
concealed abundance of things relating to her) she will find that Sampsil, and
her Useless Heaps, will not be able to repair that Damage I now suffer by her
Matchless Cruelty. -- Besides, I Have proved already, that A PROMISE IS A DEBT,
and she having promised me Sampsil, in a solemn manner, I cannot see how she
should dye with a Safe Conscience, (...) me of, it* So that I have no fear of
(...) of Sampsil,(and for the Houses at St. Albans, they were given to my Wife
after her Mothers Death) who knows she may with as much reason make bold with a
Disgust to Protest paying a due Debt, to any Person that does not humor or
please her, as not perform an Absolute Promise; and Conscience must needs tell
them so that make it. It Is very Ridiculous, after a Promise is past, to bring
in Conditions. I might be Endless upon this Subject; but, as Cowley says, I am
almost choked with the Super-abundance of the matter: Too much Plenty
impoverishes me, as it does them. So that I have the same Reasons, or greater,
to expect Sampsil, as ever I had. And therefore whoever blames me for
Publishing of This Case, I shall not think 'em my Friends.

I shall only add, There Is not a Line in this CASE but what I Will prove, and
assert with my Last Breath; and therefore if my Mother or Wife think good to
reply to it, they cannot do it in a better time; for they have Banished me from
my House and Home, and where I Sojourn, I have nothing else to do but to Answer
them; but let me have the BEST CAUSE in the World, I must expect that men of a
Narrow Soul will be raising of Lies, and that my Enemies will triumph over me.
But I bless GOD, Ill Husband^^ having had no hand in my Ruin, I am yet above
such Treatment; for the Sun that Sets, will Rise again; or if it don't* I have
some Friends that have Souls Brave enough to know a Friend in Adversity.
However, I shall now have an opportunity to know who my Friends are, which
while the World Smiled, I could never discern. Or suppose the Worst, I can
Write away my Melancholy Hours; and seeing it is far better to give some account
of Time [tho' to little Purpose] than none at-all, I shall now enter upon
Writing The Art of Living and Dying Incognito. And there, I End.

To the Reverend Mr. Blackstone in Bull-Head-Court in Iewen-street.
Dear Sir,
THE Obligingness of Your Temper, and your being a Peacemaker, not only by
your Office, as a Minister, but by your Natural Inclination; which, together
with the good Opinion my Wife and Mother (as well as every body else) has of
you, has prevailed with me to desire that Favor of you, as to see if it be
possible to bring 'em to a Sense of their Duty, and to a Compliance with my
Reasonable Demands: In order to which, I would desire you to read my Case to
'em, which I have here sent you in Print, and which will be Published to
Morrow. But if upon hearing it, they are willing to grant my Request, I do
hereby declare to you, That upon such an Assurance, I will yet Suppress this
Paper, tho Printed, and will Burn the Impression. For even Matrimonial
Quarrels, provided they are heartily Forgiven, make the Married Couple but love
better: The Falling out of Lovers (and such Married Folks are, or should be) is
not only the Renewer; but Increaser of Love. Or if any angry Words should here
after arise, I Am for following your Advice, to let 'em no more take Air, than
Fire in a Cellar; I Would not have 'em told so much as to her Mother, but let the
Pillow alone decide 'em. And if we'd yet be happy, it is my Advice (so my Self,
as well as to my Wife) That we are never Angry together: For if only one is
Angry, it is the Easier to Agree -- However, in This Case, I desire we may both
learn the Art of Memory, and the greater Art of Forgetfulness, and we shall not
fail of being Happy still; that is, Remember all the kind things, Forget all
that is harsh or ungrateful; at least never Repeat 'em, which will be the best
way to Forget 'em.

But if they still continue Obdurate to all Advances I have made toward a
Comfortable Living with my Dear Wife, I am satisfied that I have done my Duty,
and that the Fault will lie at their Doors. And this Letter to your self will
be a further Testimony against' em. Which is all, at present, from Reverend Sir,

Your most Obliged Humble Servant, John Dunton
Dec. 20 1699.

