THE HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH and SCOTCH Presbytery. Wherein is discovered their
Designs and Practices for the Subversion of Government in CHURCH and STATE.

Written in French, by an Eminent Divine of the REFORMED CHURCH, and now
Englished.

The Second Edition Corrected and Enlarged.

EPIPHANIUS, Lib. 1. Haeres. ^7. Quod hominum Genus ad Ecclesiae Dei probrum
and Scandalum adornasse and submisisse Satanas videtur, quippe qui
Christianorum sibi nomen indiderint, ut prop^er eos offensae Gentes a sanctae
Ecclesiae utilitate abhorreant, nuntiatamque veritatem, ob immania illorum
facinora and incredibilem nequitiam, repudient; ut inquam frequentibus illorum
sceleribus animadversis, eos quoque, quia Sancta Dei Ecclesia sunt, tales esse
sibi persuadeant, atque ita a verissima Dei Doctrina aures avertant, ut certe
paucorum improbita^e, conspecta in universos eadem Maledicta Conjiciunt.

Printed in Villa Franca, Anno Dom. 1660.

THE PREFACE.
WE will take our first rise from that Royal Declaration or Manifesto which his
Majesty of great Britain, Cha. the I. commanded to be exposed to the world, for
the satisfaction, not only of his own people, but of the Reformed Churches
abroad, at that time when the differences were at the highest, 'twixt him and
his Parliament-Subjects, who practiced all the artifices that could be, (by
making use of Press and Pulpit for that purpose) to make him not only odious
at home, but sent clandestine Agenis, and intelligence abroad, to traduce him
among the Reformed Princes and States, that He was branling in his belief, and
had a design to re-introduce the Roman Religion into his Dominions, which was
the motive of publishing this Manifesto hereunto annexed.

CAROLUS, singulari Omnipotentis Dei providentia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and
Hiberniae Rex, Fidei Defensor, etc. Universis and singulis qui praesens hoc
scriptum ceu protestationem inspexerint, potissimam Reformatae Religionis,
cultoribus cujuscunque sint gentis, gradus, aut conditionis salutem, etc.
CUM ad aures nostras non ita pridem fama pervenerit, sinistros quosdam
rumores, literasque politica vel perniciosa potius quorundam industria sparsas
esse, and nonnullis protestantium ecclesiis in exteris partibus emissas, nobis
esse animum and consilium ab illa Orthodoxa Religione quam ab incunabilis
imbibimus, and ad hoc usque momentum per integrum vitae nostrae curriculum
amplexi sumus recedendi; and Papismum in haec Regna iterum introducendi, Quae
conjectura, ceu nefanda potius calumnia nullo prorsus nixa vel imaginabili
fundamento horrendos hosce tumultus, and rabiem plusquam belluinam in Anglia
suscitavit sub praetextu cujusdam (chimericae) Reformationis regimini
legibusque hujus Dominii non solum incong^uae, sed incompatibilis: VOLUMUS, ut
toti Christiano Orbi innotescat, ne minimam quidem animum nost^um incidisse
cogitatiunculam hoc aggrediendi, aut transversum unguem ab illa Religione
discedendi quam cum corona, sceptroque hujus regni solemni, and sacramentali
juramento tenemur prositeri, protegere and propugnare. Nec tantum
constantissima nostra praxis, and quotidiana in exercitiis praefatae Religionis
praesentia cum crebris in facie nostrorum agminum asseverationibus, publicisque
procerum hujus Regni testimoniis, and sedula in regiam nostram sobolem educando
circumspectione (omissis plurimis aliis argumentis) luculentissime hoc
demonstrat, sed etiam faelicissimum illud matrimonium quod inter nostram
primogenitam, and illustrissimu^ principem Auriacum sponte contraximus, idem
fortissime attestatur: Quo nuptiali faedere insuper constat, nobis non esse
propositu^ illa^ p^ofiteri solummodo, sed expandere, and corroborare quantum in
nobis situm est.

Hanc sacrosanctam Anglicanae Christi Ecclesiae Religionem, tot Theologorum
convocationibus sancitam, tot comitiorum edictis confirmatam tot Regiis
Diplomatibus stabilitam, una cum regimine Ecclesiastico, and Liturgia ei
annexa, quam liturgiam, regimenque celebriores protestantium Authors tam
Germani, quam Galli, tam Dani quam Helvetici, tam Batavi, quam Bohemi multis
elogiis nec sine quadam invidia in suis publicis scriptis comprobant and
applaudunt, ut in transactionibus Dordrechtanae Synodus, cui nonnulli nostrorum
praesulum, quorum Dignitati debita prestita fuit reverentia (interfuerunt,
apparet Istam, inquimus, Religionem quam Regius noster pater (beatissimae
memoriae) in illa celeber^ima fidei suae Confessione omnibus Christianis
principibus (ut and haec praesens nostra protestatio exhibita, public asserit:
Istam, istam Religionem solenniter protestamur, Nos integram, sartam tectam,
and inviolabilem conservaturos, and pro virili nostro (divino adjuvante Numine)
usque ad extrema^ virae nostrae periodu^ protecturos, and omnibus nostris
Ecclesiasticis pro muneris nostri, and supradicti sacro-sancti juramenti
ratione doceri, and praedicari curaturos. Quapropter injungimus and in mandatis
damus Omnibus ministris nostris in exteris partibus tam Legatis, quam
Residentibus, Agentibusque and nunciis, reliquisque nostris subditis ubicunque
Orbis Christiani terrarum aut curiositatis aut comercii gratia degentibus hanc
solennem and sinceram nostram protestationem quandocunque sese obtulerit loci
and temporis opportunitas, communicare, asserere, asseverare.

Dat. in Academia and Civitate nostra Oxoniensi pridei Idus Maii, 1644.
CHARLES by the Providence of Almighty God, King of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all who profess the true Reformed
Protestant Religion, of what Nation, degree, and condition soever they be to
whom this present Declaration shall come, Greeting.
WHereas We are given to understand, That many false Rumors, and scandalous
Letters, are spread up and down amongst the Reformed Churches in foreign
Parts, by the Pollitick, or rather the pernicious industry of some ill affected
persons, that we have an inclination to recede from that Orthodox Religion,
which we were born, baptized, and bred in, and which We have firmly professed
and practiced throughout the whole course of our life to this moment, and that
We intend to give way to the Introduction and public exercise of Popery again
in Our Dominions: Which conjecture or rather most detestable calumny, being
grounded upon no imaginable foundation, has raised these horrid Tumults, and
more then barbarous Wars throughout this flourishing Island, under pretext of a
kind of Reformation, which would not only prove incongruous, but incompatible
with the fundamental Laws and government of this Kingdom. We desire that the
whole Christian World should take notice, and rest assured, that We never
entertained in Our imagination the least thought to attempt such a thing, or to
depart a jot from that holy Religion, which when we received the Crown and
Scepter of this Kingdom, We took a most solemn Sacramental Oath to profess and
protect. Nor does Our most constant practice and quotidian visible presence in
the exercise of this sole Religion, with so many Asseverations in the head of
Our Armies, and the public Attestation of our Barons, with the circumspection
used in the education of our Royal Off spring, besides diverse other undeniable
Arguments, only demonstrate this; but also that happy Alliance of Marriage, We
contracted twixt Our eldest Daughter, and the Illustrious Prince of Orange,
most clearly confirms the reallity of Our intentions herein; by which Nuptial
engagement it appears further, that Our endeavors are not only to make a bare
profession thereof in Our own Dominions, but to enlarge and corroborate it
abroad as much as lies in our Power: This most holy Religion of the Anglican
Church, ordained by so many Convocations of learned Divines, confirmed by so
many Acts of National Parliaments, and strengthened by so many Royal
Proclamations, together with the Ecclesiastic Discipline and Liturgy thereunto
appertaining, which Liturgy and Discipline, the most eminent of Protestant
Authors, as well Germans as French; as well Danes as Swedes and Switze^s; as
well Belgians; as Bohemians, do with many Elogies (and not without a kind of
Envy) approve and applaud in their public Writings, particularly in the
transactions of the Synod of Dort, wherein besides other of Our Divines (who
afterward were Prelates) one of Our Bishops assisted, to whose dignity all due
respects and precedence was given: This Religion We say, which Our Royal Father
of blessed memory does publicly assert in that His famous Confession
addressed, as we also do this our Protestation, to all Christian Princes; This,
this most holy Religion, with the Hierarchy and Liturgy thereof, We solemnly
protest, that by the help of Almighty God, we will endeavor to our utmost
power, and last period of our life, to keep entire and inviolable, and will be
careful, according to our duty to Heaven, and the tenor of the foresaid most
sacred Oath at Our Coronation, that all our Ecclesiastics in their several
degrees and Incumbences shall preach and practice the same. Wherefore we enjoin
and command all our Ministers of State beyond the Seas, as well Ambassadors, as
Residents, Agents and Messengers; And We desire all the rest of Our loving
Subjects, that sojourn either for curiosity or commerce in any foreign Parts,
to communicate, uphold, and assert this Our solemn and sincere Protestation,
when opportunity of time and place shall be offered.

This Royal Declaration or Manifesto was committed to the management and care
of James Howel Esquire Clerk of His Majesty's Privy Council (who though then
Prisoner in the Fleet) performed the business very worthily and like himself.

CHARLES, par la Providence de Dieu Roy de la grand' Bretagne, de France, and
d' Irlande, Defenseur de la Foy, etc. A tous ceux qui ceste present
Declaration verront, particulierement a Ceux de la Religion Reform^e de quelque
Nation, degreou condition qu'ils soient, Salut.
AYant receu advis de bonne main que plusieurs faux rapports and lettres sont
esparses parmi les Eglisses, Reformees de lala mer, par la politic, ou
plustost la pernicieuse industry de persons mal affectionnes a nostre
government, que nous auons dessein a receder de celle Religion que Nous auons
profess and pratique tout le temps de nostre vie iusques a present; and de
vouloir intro duire la papaute derechef en nos Dominions, Laquelle conjecture,
ou calumny plustost, appuyee sur null fundement imaginable, a suscite ces
horribles tumultes and allume le feu d'une tres s^nglante guerre en tous les
quatre coins de ceste fleurissante Monarchy, soubs pretexte d'une (
chymerique) Reformation, la quelle seroit incompatible avec le government and
les loix fondementales de ce Royaume.

Nous Desirons, quil soit notoire a tout le monde, que la moindre pensee de ce
fair n'a pas entree en nostre imagination, de departir ancunement de
cell'Orthodoxe Religion, qu'auec la Couronne and le scepter de ce Royaume Nous
sommes tenus par un serment solennel and sacramentaire a proteger and defendre.
Ce qu'appert non seulement par nostre quotidienne presence es Exercies de la
dite Religion, avec, tant d'asseverations a la test de nos Armees and la
publicque Attestation de nos Barons, avec le soin que nous tenons en la
nourrituredes Princes and Princesses nos enfans, Mais le tres-heureux marriage
que nous avons conclu enter la nostre plus aisnee, and le tres illustrie Prince
d' Orange en est encore un tres-evident tesmoignage, par la quell'alliance il
appert aussy que nostre desir est de n'en fair pas vne nue profession
seulement dicelle, mais de la vouloir estendre and corroberer autant qu'il nous
est possible: Cest'Orthodoxe Religion de leglise Anglicane Ordonnee par tant de
Conventione de Teologues, confirmee par tant de arrests d'Parlement, and
fortify par tant d'Edicts royaux auec la discipline and la Lyturgie a elle
appartenant, laquelle discipline and Lyturgie les plus celebres Autheurs
Protestants, tant Francois, qu' Allemands, tant Seudois que Suisses, tant
Belgiens, que Bohemiens approuent entierement and non sans quelqu envy en leur
escrits particulierement en la Synod de Dort, ou un de nos Euesques assistoit,
and la Reverence and precedence deue a sa dignite Ecclesiastique luy fut
exactement rendue: Ceste tres saint Religion que nostre feu pere de
tres-heureuse memoire aduoue en sa celebre Confession de la Foy addressee come
nous faisons ceste Declaration atous Princes Chrestiens; Nous Protestons que
moyennant la grace de Dieu, nous tascherone de conseruer ceste Religion
inviolable, and en son entier selon la mesure de puissance que Dieu amiss enter
nos mains; Et nous requerons and commandons a tous nos ministres d'estat tant
Ambassadeurs, que Residens, Agens ou messagers, and a tous autres nos subjects
qui font leur seiour es pays estrangers de communiquer, maintenir and aduouer
ceste nostre solennelle Protestation toutes fois and quantes que l'occasion se
presentera.

TO THE MINISTERS OF THE REFORMED CHURCH AT PARIS.
Gentlemen,
HAving to contend with them who invite you to uphold their disloyalty by your
example, nothing can be more to our purpose, then to prefix your example in the
front of this work to teach them Loyalty. During the Agitations of the State,
your Church, as the Needle in the Mariners Compass, kept steady upon the point
of rest, which is God and the King: And your obedience served as an Ensign on a
hill to France, to guide the people to their duty. Whereby you have justified
the holiness of your profession, making the world know, the Religion you teach
binds you to be good subjects, and that you honor the King, because ye fear
God.

Therefore the English Covenanters did very ill to address themselves to you,
since they hold a method quite contrary, for they dishonor and massacre their
King, under a color of devotion to God, and undertake to set up the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ, by the ruin of the Kingdom of their Sovereign; which is as
if they would build the Temple of God with Cannon shot, and defend Religion in
violating it.

The truth of the Gospel was never advanced by these ways, but the patience,
and even the sufferings of the Christians, was it which propagated the
Christian Religion, and rendered the Church mighty and glorious. Those who
suffered under the Pagan and Arian Emperors, conquered both the Empire and
Emperors, and the Champions of truth purchased a Kingdom to Jesus Christ, not
in shedding the blood of their Sovereigns, but in pouring forth their own for
righteousness, by a voluntary submission to their judgment.

He who cannot frame himself to this Doctrine, does not so much as God requires
of him, if he makes profession of Christianity; for Christ tells us in calling
us, that whosoever takes not up his Cross, and comes not after me, cannot be
my Disciple; and commands him who would embrace the Gospel, to set down before
and calculate the expense, as if he were about to build. Certainly he that
cannot resolve to subject himself to his Sovereign for the love of God, and
never draw his sword against him to whom God has committed it, made an ill
calculation before he dedicated himself to Jesus Christ, for he ought not to
take upon him Christianity, if he were not able to go through with it, and was
not resolved rather to suffer then resist, and to spend his goods and life to
preserve himself in that subjection, commanded by the Word of God.

For maintaining this holy Doctrine, we have been banished and pursued with
Arms, and after we had defended our Sovereign with more fidelity then success,
we have been constrained to forsake our dear Country, driven from our houses,
and spoiled of our revenues, but yet we praise God for giving them, since he
has done us the honor that we should lose them for his service; and we ought
this to our King, of whom our lands held, to abandon them for love of him: For
to enter into a Covenant against him peaceably to enjoy his, and the Kings his
Predecessors bounty, and to betray the truth, and our consciences, to save our
moneys, we could never resolve.

Now since those who have done the evil, began first to cry out, and have
spread their unjust clamours through all the Reformed Churches, we'll make the
same journey with our just complaints, and after the example of the abased
Levite, by the Sons of Jemini, we send this recital of our grievances through
all the quarters of Israel; Judge. 19.30. Consider of it, take advice, and speak
your minds.

The injury which does touch us nearest, is not our Exile, nor the loss of our
goods, nor theirs of our nearest Relations, but the extreme wrong done to the
Gospel, and the Reformed Churches, to whom these new Reformers falsely impute
their Maxims of Rebellion, and hereby render our most holy profession
suspected and hateful to Princes of a contrary Religion.

This (Gentlemen) touches you very near, considering your condition, and the
Summons the Assembly at Westminster, made to you to covenant with them, or to
make a covenant like theirs. The Epistle was addressed to the Church of Paris,
in the name of all the Reformed Churches of France, and with the Epistle they
sent the Oath of their Covenant, which concludes with an Exhortation in form of
a prayer to God, That it would please him to stir up by their example, other
Churches who live under the Tyranny of Antichrist, to swear this Covenant, or
one like it.

This same Epistle, together with the Oath, being sent to the Ministers of the
Church of Genevah, stirred up in them a holy jealousy, and drew from that
excellent person, Monsieur Diodati, who is now in glory, an answer worthy of
him in the name of all the Church: Repel this horrible scandal, which so
extremely wrongs Christianity in general; wash and cleanse this filthy attempt
of the blackest oppression, which above all is imputed to the most pure
profession of the Gospel, as if the Gospel opposed, and affronted by a kind of
antipathy and secret hatred, all Royal Power of Sovereign Authority. Pacify
the exasperated spirit, and too much provoked of your King, and drive him not
upon Pinacles and Precipices.

Blessed be God who touched the heart of this great person, whose memory shall
be for ever precious for rendering so open a testimony to the truth; And because
he have not suffered himself to be fl^ered and persuaded by the complements of
these enemies to his a Mjesty, to applaud them in their evil actions, such are
these Refiners of Reformation, as not content by their factious zeal to set
their own country on fire, but they labor also to cast the fire into their
neighbors, and to blow Rebellion through all Europe.

And of late the most enormous actions of the English drew from Master
Salmasius, Prince of Letters, and the Honor of France, a defense of the Right
of Kings; God was so pleased to raise up the Learned pen of these times to
defend the best cause of the world, in which this great person has highly
honored his country; But to speak right, he more honored himself, and the
Church wherein he was educated. For if hereafter these malefactors dare be so
bold, as to say the Reformed Churches approved their actions, they shall
produce this book which condemns them, and defends the Royal cause with such
wisdom, and efficacy of spirit, suitable to the dignity of the subject, and
shall require them to produce, if they can, any one of the Reformed Churches
who have in the least manner written in favor of their proceedings: It should
have been a strange and shameful thing, if there were none found amongst the
Reformed Churches who should not disown their wicked Doctrines, and cause all
Princes and people of the world to know that the Reformed Churches are very far
from following their counsels, and abhor their seductions to disloyalty, from
what part soever they come.

Heretofore indeed it was accounted the duty of charity and prudence, to cover
the faults of this faction, and if corruption enter into Israel, not to publish
it in Gath; but when the Doctrine of Rebellion disputed in corners, ascends the
Pulpit, hold assizes in open Court, sends forth Ambassadors, invites the
Reformed Churches to their party, and employ the Gospel, Piety, zeal of Gods
Glory, to raise subjects against their Sovereigns; now it is time or never to
pluck off their mask of hypocrisy, and show where the evil lies, and discover
the wickedness of a party (...) preserve from shame and disgrace the general;
and the rather since the Aphorisms of Rebellion, and seducing people to
sedition, are reproached to the Protestants, and employed by the enemies of our
holy Religion to stir up Princes against the Church, and the pure profession of
the Gospel. It Is the duty of the Reformed Churches to speak aloud, that it is not
we that teach the people are above their King, and that endeavor by Letters
and Intelligences a general rising, but that it is the Covenanters of England,
who attempting to cut off their King and Monarchy by the sword, labor in vain
to seduce their neighbors, to increase their party, thereby to hide themselves
in the multitude of their accomplices, they came forth of us long since, but were
not of us, and for their Doctrines and actions (which are the only things evil
in their Reformation) they never received any countenance or encouragement from
us.

We assure our selves Gentlemen, in that Divine assistance which has to this
present upheld you, that ye will never be seduced to defend evil, neither by
complacency nor contradiction, but will follow the precept of the Apostle Saint
James, Jam. 2.1. My Brethren have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Lord of Glory with respect of persons. Ye will consider that those who chase
us, seek not your alliance, but to strengthen their separation from us, and not
to embrace good Doctrine, or follow your council, which if they had asked and
followed, the one had never sold their King, nor the other over massacred him.

Believe it (Sirs) they are your best friends at distance rather then near, and
if ye never converse with them, ye will never be weary of their company.

Your free, meek and solid piety, which feeds it self simply upon the substance
of Religion, without picking quarrels at the shell, is very far from sordid
superstition, and the Hypocondriak and bloody zeal of these Covenanters, who
pretend to advance the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, by cutting the throats of his
Disciples, and cementing his Temple with blood instead of the cement of
charity; and in the mean while, make some petty circumstances, the principals
of Religion, and cut out their holy Doctrine according to the Discipline which
they are forging, as he that cuts his flesh to make his doublet fit for his
body.

By how much more these are wicked, by so much the more are they worthy of
compassion, whom we must behold as people drunken with the Wine of
Astonishment, which they themselves confess in their Epistle they sent unto
you, they shall find the rest of their description in that place, where they
borrowed those words, and shall there behold themselves set forth, as a wild
Bull in a net, they are full of the fury of the Lord, Isa. 51.20. For as the
wild Bull rages when he feels himself entangled, and intangleth, and insnares
himself more by raging; so these miserable people, who by an impetuosity
without reason rid themselves out of all Laws, Ecclesiastical and Civil, are
ensnared in stronger bonds then before, and by their brutish fury are more and
more entangled. These, these are the sad effects of the just wr^th of God, who
has smote those with blindness, who have abused the light of the Gospel, and
have given them the hear^ of a beast, Dan. 4.16. as he did to Nebuchadnezzar,
wh^ have cast off all humanity. God by his mercy reduce to their senses, and
guide them and us in his paths, and grant his peace to them that are far off,
and to them that are near, Isa. 57.19. For in civil wars, that party that is
nearest to God, and right, is yet very far from his duty.

Your wisdom will instruct you to profit by the folly of your neighbors, and
their evil actions teach you to do well, they will let you see that to destroy
the Ecclesiastical and Political Order, by a bloody war to reform Religion, is
to commit the fault in the vulgar Latin Translation, Evertit domum, instead of
Eve^rit, Luke 15.8. That is to overthrow the house in stead of sweeping it; the
folly is the greater, when its only to find a trifle, and that they overthrow
both Church and State, for some particularity, which were it good, cannot
recompense the general destruction.

You will also learn by the proceedings of these Covenanters, that its
impossible to alter the foundation of Church and State, without pulling down
the house, which is the work of the blind, as Sampson, to over-turn the Pillars
of the public building, that those that thrust them down might be crushed to
pieces under the fall; that those that take the Church and State apieces to
cleanse it, have not the power to put it together and in order again when they
please, and that all violent changes in a State, as in an old body, are always
for the worst.

We hope also that our good God, beholding us with pity, in this our weak
condition, will give you somewhat to observe and learn from us, as that a
Rebellion which pulls down Monarchy, without thinking so, lifts it up, and
fortifie't, as a violent Crysis, which if it takes not away the Patient,
contributes to his recovery. For the insolence of the new masters, does mind
the people of their duty to their lawful Prince, and the unlocked for success
of a new Obligarchy, sowes dissension amongst the Usurpers. The conduct of the
Providence of God in the movings of States teaches us, that in chastising
Kings by the rebellion of their subjects, hereby he punishes the people more
then their Kings, and those very Kings that God gives people in his wrath,
Hosea 13.11. are not taken away without his fury, and the public ruin, which
is then greatest, when he takes from an ungrateful people, a King whom he have
given in his mercy; the wise, and fearing God, should consider their sufferings
under their Sovereigns, as sinister influences of celestial bodies, against
which no man in his wits will draw his sword, for both the one and the other
comes from heaven, and cannot be remedied but by humility, prayers, and
veneration, all other remedies are worse then the evil.

Also amidst your grief to behold the ruin of our not long since flourishing
Churches, you may comfort your selves in the weakness of our condition, which
now renders us less subject to the like dangers; for as full and sanguine
bodies, are most subject to violent fevers and sharp diseases, which those of
weaker complexions are ordinarily free from, so those persons who have power in
their hands, and are puffed up with a long prosperity, ordinarily fall into
most violent evils, which seiseth not upon them, but with too much strength:
Then when the Church has the least luster, she often times is nearest to God, as
the Moon is never nearer the Sun then when she is in the lowest degree of her
declension, and without light to our regard. The Power of God is made perfect
in our weakness, and we hope to behold you subsist, yea increase and grow in
bowing down under the storm, whilst those that have so striven and contended
against their Sovereigns shall be rooted out by their arrogance.

By humility and submission under the mighty hand of God, which leads his
Church through ways he knows safest for them, and stopping the ear to all
factious Councils clothed with the zeal of Religion, ye will at last obtain
that testimony of God which he gives to the Church of Ephesus; I know thy
works, and thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou can not bear them which
are evil, and thou have tried them which say they are Apostles, and are not,
and have found them liars, and have borne, and have patience, and have not
fainted, Rev. 2.2. and thus ye shall surely obtain the promised reward
following, To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the tree of life,
which is in the midst of the paradise of God, v. 7.

This hope is our support in the depth of our afflictions, for under that
terrible weight of public and particular miseries, capable to bear down the
strongest and firmest spirits, we are raised and kept up by this consolation,
that we serve a good Master, who will never forsake them who forsake all which
is most dear to them to follow him. What though our sufferings be the effects
of our sins, yet are they also honorable marks of our loyalty, both to God
and our King, and though we have left our estates a little before death would
have taken them away, yet God has by his grace preserved in us a good
conscience, riches which is not subject to sequestration, but dying we shall
carry away with us.

In these great trials of our faith and patience, whilst we seek ease in
pouring forth our griefs into the bosom of our brethren, behold yet another
increase of affliction, upon affliction; for we find to our great regret, that
the subtilty of our enemies have begotten an evil understanding between you and
some of ours, to which some have much contributed, if the complaints we hear be
true, that they have manifested and declared themselves contrary to the
Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, and that they have despised your assemblies,
as not being Churches, and maintained that there could be no Church where there
was no Bishop.

As for their Doctrine, if it be diverse from our public Confession, they are
no more of our Church then of yours; and to satisfy you upon this point, we
have joined the Confession of the Church of England, which all th^se who have
been received into holy Orders, swear to defend at their reception, and all who
were to be admitted into Churches were enjoined at their entrance, publicly to
read, and to profess thereupon, their consent to them, under pain of losing
their Benefices. If any have departed from that profession, which they did so
solemnly make, the body of the Church which maintains that holy Doctrine, is no
way responsible for their erring. If the Rebels had not prevented the King from
assembling a national Synod, to which his Majesty purposed to invite other
Reformed Churches, your Judgments would have been heard for the purging our
Churches of all new Doctrines, which without all comparison are worse, and in a
far greater number amongst our enemies, then amongst the Royal party.

As for this position,
that there cannot be a Church without a Bishop, we account it full of
rashness and void of Charity; It Is indeed a cruel sentence to deprive of the
benefit of the Gospel, and of their union with Christ, all those Churches which
live under the Cross, and cannot enjoy the Episcopal Order. That Famous Dr.
Andrews Bishop of Winchester, was not of this opinion, for in one of his
Epistles touching Episcopacy, He ( says he) should be harder than Iron, who
would not acknowledge that there are holy Chur^^es that subsist and flourish
without Bishops; and with what respect our Bishops speak of your Church, you
shall read in this ensuing Treatise.

It Is easy to see that the Episcopal Order is wholly incompatible with the
present condition of the Reformed Churches of France, for if there were twenty
or thirty Bishops amongst you, that should Govern all the other Churches, it
would be easy for those of the contrary Religion under whom you live, to fill
up those places with some persons who should be at their devotion; whence would
follow, either a seduction, or an oppression of the other Pastors: But whilst
the Gentlemen of the Clergy in the Court behold all Pastors equal, they will
lose their cunning in this multitude, and although they be excellent in playing
on the Organs, yet they have not fingers enough to touch every Key.

If your Order of equality might or ought to be conserved, if it should please
God the French Monarchy should embra^e the Reformation, its a thing we will not
touch, but if that only were the obstruction, we account you too wise and good
Christians, and such as would not hinder the settling of the holy Doctrine, for
maintaining a point of Discipline,

You then (Gentlemen) joining to your Christian charity, the French courtesy,
pardon our English Scholars, who peradventure have brought with them from the
University, an humor a little affirmative, and from the fresh remembrance of
their Glorious Church, retain yet an admiration of home things, which is an
humor Neighbor Nations observe in the English, and which those that
heretofore have known England, will easily pardon.

Consider on the other side, whether some of yours have not given them just
occasion to be so sharp and bitter, and to pass their limits in their
affirmations; it cannot be denied but we have met with spirits possessed with
the reports of our adversaries, who have been more ready to court you than we,
as always those that have (...) ^vil cause, are ever more diligent to gain by
faction that which they want, and cannot obtain by right. It may be also that
your people have manifested themselves too rigid in their Opinions, as well as
some of ours, upon points which touch not the principles of Religion; and as it
is ordinary for humane infirmity to turn custom into necessity, you may not
wonder that if some of yours maintain as necessary and perpetual, which your
wise Reformers established as arbitrary, and for the present necessity, as it
is formally declared by the last Article of your Discipline,

We have placed in the Front of this work, the Manifesto of the Late King
Charles the First, of Blessed and Glorious Memory, in which he takes a
religious care to satisfy you, touching his Constancy in the Reformed
Religion, and of his Resolution to enlarge and strengthen it in all foreign
Countries to the utmost of his power, he could no more to manifest how much he
valued your affection and good opinion, and we following the example of our
holy and Glorious Martyr, labor here to knit with you a holy union, which our
enemies have so vigorously labored to break and in these our great afflictions
do take care to prevent your, and to give you saving Council.

Know then, Gentlemen, that your most holy Religion is much defamed by the
Actions of these paraci^^ Zealots, who have particularly courted and invite^
(...) to Covenant with them, and that your Churches are ^lemished in
reputation, only because these men have dared to address their infamous
complements to you, a thing nevertheless which ye could not prevent how great
soever your aversion were from their wicked actions; wherefore we beseech you,
as you love your subsistence and the honor of the Gospel, which ought to be
dearer to you then your lives, that you exhort the general of your Churches to
declare readily and vigorously by a public Act against these false brethren
and their pernicious Maxims, for fear least the crime of men, be imputed to
Religion, and that the innocent suffer not for the guilty. Let it appear to the
State under which ye live, that the Reformed Religion for conscience sake
upheld Kingly Authority, and that it is the true Doctrine that maintains
subjects in their duty, and a Kingdom in peace.

You may also boldly advise the Gentlemen at Court to beware of them, and that
they give order to prevent that inundation, that is threatened from our Islands,
and let them be most assured that the Independent Armies, have not less
ambition to cause all people to rise, and overthrow all the Monarchs of
Christendom, and that to this effect Cr -- have often declared his intentions:
all the popular tumults in France are the productions of this Artist, ever in
motion, infatigable, swollen with success, who h^^h his eyes and hands every
where, and gains in all places either by the sword or gold; now in all changes
of the State whosoever gains, the Church loses, and the filth in all
inundations rests upon the valleys.

We are so near neighbors that the contagion of our evils cannot but pass to
you, therefore ye shall do prudently and Christianly to keep your selves from
the contagion of our evils, and since those of the Reformed Religion are better
instructed, then the other, it is therefore for them first to begin to do their
duty.

And (...) ^his the considerations in this ensuing Treatise will enc^^rage you,
and our adversities will furnish you with better Councels then the prosperity
of our persecutors, Agr^e Fortunae sana Concilia, we hope that this true and
lively pourtraiture of their Rebellious Covenant that we present unto you, will
so strike the spectators with horror that they will become good Christians, and
good subjects by Antiperistisis.

THE ARTICLES OF RELIGION of the CHURCH OF ENGLAND.
I.
THere is but one living and true God, everlasting, without body, parts, or
passions; of infinite power, wisdom and goodness, the Maker and preserver of
all things both visible and invisible. And in unity of this Godhead there be
three persons, of one substance, power, and eternity; the Father, the Son, and
holy Ghost.

II.
THe Son, which is the Word of the Father, begotten from everlasting of the
Father, the very and eternal God of one substance with the Father, took man's
nature in the womb of the blessed Virgin, of her substance: so that two whole
and perfect natures, that is to say, the Godhead and manhood, were joined
together in one person, never to be divided, whereof is one Christ, very God
and very man who truly suffered, was crucified, dead, and buried, to reconcile
his Father to us, and to be a sacrifice, not only for Original guilt, but
also for actual sins of men.

III.
AS Christ died for us, and was buried: so also is it to be believed, that he
went down into hell.

IV.
CHrist did truly rise again from death, and took again his body, with flesh,
bones, and all things appertaining to the perfection of man's nature, wherewith
he ascended into heaven, and th^re sits until he return to judge all men at
the last day.

V.
THe holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son, is of one Substance,
majesty and glory, with the Father and the Son, very and eternal God.

VI.
HOly Scripture contains all things necessary to salvation: so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be prooved thereby, is not to be
required of any man, that it should be believed as an Article of the faith, or
be thought requisite or necessary to salvation. In the name of the holy
Scripture, we do understand those Canonical Books of the Old and New
Testament, of whose authority was never any doubt in the Church.

Of the Names and Number of the Canonical Books.
GEnesis. Exodus. Leviticus. Numeri. Deuteronomium. Josue. Judges. Ruth. The 1.
Book of Samuel. The 2. Book of Samuel. The 1. Book of Kings. The 2. Book of
Kings. The 1. Book of Chronicles. The 2. Book of Chronicles. The 1. Book of
Esdras. The 2. Book of Esdras. The Book of Hester. The Book of Job. The
Psalms. The Proverbs. Ecclesiastes or Preacher. Cantica, or Songs of Solomon.
4. Prophets the greater. 12. Prophets the less.
And the other Books (as Hierome says) the Church does read for example of
life and instruction of manners: but yet does it not apply them to establish
any doctrine; Such are these following.

The 3. Book of Esdras. The 4. Book of Esdras. The Book of Tobias. The Book of
Judeth. The rest of the Book of Hester. The Book of Wisdom. Jesus the son of
Sirach. Baruch the Prophet. The song of the three Children. The Story of
Susanna. Of Bell and the Dragon. The Praye^ of Manasses. The 1. Book of
Maccabees. The 2. Book of Maccabees.
All the Books of the New Testament, as they are commonly received, we do
receive and account them Canonical.

VII.
THe Old Testament is not contrary to the New, for both in the Old and New
Testament, everlasting life is offered to mankind by Christ, who is the only
Mediator between God and man, being both God and man. Wherefore they are not to
be heard which feign that the old fathers did look only for transitory
promises. Although the Law given from God by Moses, as touching Ceremonies and
Rites, do not bind Christian men, nor the civil precepts thereof ought of
necessity to be received in any Commonwealth; yet notwihstanding, no Christian
man whatsoever is free from the obedience of the Commandments, which are called
Moral.

VIII.
THe three Creeds, Nice Creed, Athanasius Creed, and that which is commonly
called the Apostles Creed, ought thoroughly to be received and believed* for
they may be proved by most certain warrants of holy Scripture.

IX.
Original sin stands not in the following of Adam (as the Pelagians do
vainly talk) but it is the fault and corruption of the nature of every man,
that naturally is engendered of the offspring of Adam, when by man is very far
gone from original righteousness, and is of his own nature inclined to evil*
so that the flesh lusts always contrary to the spirit, and therefore in
every person born into this world, it deserves Gods wrath and damnation. And
this infection of nature does remain yea, in them that are regenerated, whereby
the lust of the flesh, called in Greek (...), which some do expound the
wisdom, some sensuallity, some the affection, some the desire of the flesh, is
not subject to the Law of God. And although there is no condemnation for them
that believe and are baptized, yet the Apostle does confess, that
concup^scence and lust* has of it self the nature of sin.

X.
THe condition of man after the fall of Adam* is such that he cannot turn and
prepare himself by his own natural strength and good works to faith and calling
upon God: Wherefore we have no power to do good works pleasant and acceptable
to God, without the grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we man have a
good will* and working with us, when we have that good will.

XI.
WE are accounted righteous before God, only for the merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ by faith* and not for our own works, or deservings.
Wherefore, that we are notified by faith only, is a most wholesome* Doctrine,
and very full of comfort, as more largely is expressed in the Homily of
Justification.

XII.
ALbeit that good works* which are the fruits of faith* and follow after
Justification, cannot put away our sins* and endure the severity of Gods
judgment, yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, and do ^pring
out necessarily of a tru^ and ^ holy faith* in so much that by them a lively
^aith may be as evidently known, as a ^ree discerned by the ^^utt.

XIII.
WOrks done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit are
not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they spring not of faith in Jesus Christ,
neither do they make men meet to receive grace, or (as the School-Authors say)
deserve grace of congruity: yea, rather for that they are not done as God has
willed and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the nature of
sin.

XIV.
VOluntary Works, besides, over and above Gods Commandments* which they call
works of Sup^rer^gation, cannot be taught without arrogance and impiety. For by
them men do declare that they do not only render unto God as much as they are
bound to do, but that they do more for his sake then of bounden duty is
required: Whereas Christ says plainly, When ye have done all that are commanded
to you, say, We are unprofitable servants.

XV.
CHrist in the truth of our nature, was made like unto us in all things (sin
only except) from which he was clearly void, both in his flesh, and in his
Spirit. He came to be a Lamb without spot, who by sacrifice of himself once
made, should take away the sins of the world: and sin (as Saint John says)
was not in him. But all we the rest, (although baptized and born again in
Christ) yet offend in many things, and if we say we have no sin, we deceive
our selves, and the truth is not in us.

XVI.
NOt every deadly sin willingly committed after Baptism, is sin against
the holy Ghost, and impardonable. Wherefore, the grant of repentance is not to
be denied to such as fall into sin after Baptism* After we have received the
holy Ghost, we may depart from grace given, and fall into sin, and by the
grace of God (we may) arise again, and amend our lives. And therefore, they are
to be condemned, which say they can no more sin as long as they live here, to
deny the place of forgiveness to such as truly repent.

XVII.
PRedestination to life, is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before the
foundations of the world were laid) he has constan^ly ^ec^eed by his counsel,
secret to us, to deliver from curse and damnation, those whom he has chosen in
Christ out of mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting salvation, as
vessels made to honor. Wherefore they which be endued with so excellent a
benefit of God, be called according to Gods purpose by his Spirit working in
due season: they through grace obey the calling, they be justified freely: they
be made Sons of God by adoption: they be made like the Image of his only
begotten Son Jesus Christ: they walk rel^giously in good works, and at leng^h
by Gods mercy they attain to everlasting felicity.

As the godly consideration of Predestination and our Election in Christ, is
full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to godly persons, and such as
feel in themselves the working of ye Spirit of Christ, mortifying the works of
the flesh, and their earthly members, and drawing up their mind to high and
heavenly things, as well because it does greatly establish and confirm their
faith of eternal salvation, to be enjoyed through Christ, as because it does
fervently kindle their love toward God: So, for curious and carnal persons,
lacking the Spirit of Christ, to have continually before their eyes the
sentence of Gods predestination, is a most dangerous down fall, whereby the
devil does thrust them either into desparation or into retchlessenesse of most
unclean living, no less perilous then desparation.

Furthermore, we must receive Gods promises in such wise as they be generally
set forth to us in holy Scripture: and in our doings, that will of God is to be
followed, which we have expressly declared unto us in the Word of God.

XVIII.
THey also are to be had accursed, that presume to say that every man shall be
saved by the Law or sect which he professes, so that he be diligent to frame
his life according to that law, and the light of nature. For holy Scripture
does set out unto us only the Name of Jesus Christ, whereby men must be saved.

XIX.
THe visible Church of Christ, is a congregation of faithful men, in the which
the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly minister,
according to Christ's Ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are
requisite to the same.

As the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch have erred: So also the
Church of Rome has erred, not only in their living and manner of ceremonies,
but also in matters of faith.

XX.
THe Church has power to decr^e Rites or Ceremonies, and authority in
controversies of faith: And yet it is not lawful for the Church to ordain any
thing that is contrary to Gods Word written* neither may it so expound one
place of Scripture, that it be repugnant to another. Wherefore although the
Church be a witness and a keeper of holy Writ: yet as it ought not to decree
any thing against the same, so besides the same ought it not to enforce any
thing to be believed for necessity of salvation.

XXI.
General Councels may not be gathered together without the commandment and
will of Princes. And when they be gathered together (forasmuch as they be an
assembly of men, whereof all be not governed with the Spirit and Word of God)
they may err, and sometime have erred, even in things pertaining unto God.
Wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to salvation, have neither
strength nor authority, unless it may be declared that they be taken out of
holy Scripture.

XXII.
THe Romish doctrine concerning Purgatory, Pardons, worshipping and adoration as
well of Images as of Relics, and also invocation of Saints, is a ^ond thing,
vainly invented, and grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but rather
repugnant to the Word of God.

XXIII.
IT is not lawful for any man to take upon him the office of public
preaching, or ministering the Sacraments in the Congregation, before he be
lawfully called, and sent to execute the same. And those we ought to judge
lawfully called and sent, which be chosen and called to this work by men, who
have public authority given unto them in the Congregation, to call and send
Ministers into the Lords vineyard.

XXIV.
IT is a thing plainly repugnant to the Word of God* and the custom of the
Primitive Church, to have public prayer in the Church* or to minister the
Sacraments in a tongue not understanded of the people.

XXV.
SAcraments ordained of Christ be not only badges or tokens of Christian men's
profession: but rather they be certain sure witnesses, and effectual signs of
grace and Gods good will toward us, by the which he does work invisibly in us,
and does not only quicken, but also strengthen and confirm our faith in him.

There are two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that is to
say, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord.

Those five commonly called Sacraments that is to say, Confirmation, Penance,
Orders, Matrimony, and extreme Unction, are not to be counted for Sacraments of
the Gospel, being such as have grown, partly of the corrupt following of the
Apostles, partly are states of life allowed in the Scriptures: but yet have not
like nature of Sacraments with Baptism and the Lords Supper, for that they
have not any visible sign or ceremony ordained of God.

The Sacraments were not ordained of Christ to be gazed upon, or to be carried
about, but that we should duly use them. And in such only, as worthily
receive the same, they have a wholesome effect or operation: But they that
receive them unworthily, purchase to themselves damnation, as S. Paul says.

XXVI.
ALthough in the visible Church the evil be ever mingled with the good, and
sometime the evil have chief authority in the ministration of the Word and
Sacraments: yet forasmuch as they do not the same in their own name, but in
Christ's, and do minister by his commission and authority, we may use their
ministry, both in hearing the Word of God, and in the receiving of the
Sacraments. Neither is the effect of Christ ordinance taken away by their
wickedness, no^ the grace of Gods gifts diminished from such, as by faith, and
rightly do receive the Sacraments ministered unto them, which be effectual,
because of Christ^ institution and promise, although they be ministered by evil
men.

Nevertheless, it appertains to the discipline of the Church, that inquiry
be made of evil Ministers, and that they be accused by those that have
knowledge of their offenses: and finally being found guilty, by just judgment
be deposed.

XXVII.
Baptism is not only a sign of profession, and mark of difference, whereby
Christian men are discerned from others that be not Christened: but it is also a
sign of Regeneration or new birth, whereby, as by an instrument, they that
receive Baptism rightly, are grafted into the Church: the promises of the
forgiveness of sin, and of our adoption to be the Sons of God, by the holy
Ghost* are visibly signed and sealed* faith is confirmed: and grace increased
by virtue of prayer unto God. The Baptism of young children is in any wise to
be retained in the Church, as most agreeable with the institution of Christ.

XXVIII.
THe Supper of the Lord is not only a sign of the love that Christians ought
to have among themselves one to another: but rather it is a Sacrament of our
redemption by Christ's death. Insomuch that to such as rightly, worthily, and
with faith receive the same, the bread which we break, is a partaking of the
Body of Christ: and likewise the Cup of blessing is a partaking of the blood of
Christ.

Transubstantiation (or the change of the substance of Bread and Wine) in the
Supper of the Lord, cannot be prooved by holy Writ: but it is repugnant to the
plain words of Scripture, overthrows the nature of a Sacrament, and has
given occasion to many superstitions.

The body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper only after an
heavenly and spiritual manner. And the mean whereby the Body of Christ is
received and eaten in the Supper, is Faith.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper was not by Christ's ordinance reserved,
carried about, lif^ed up or worshipped.

XXIX.
THe wicked, and such as be void of a lively faith, although they do carnally
and visibly press with their teeth (as S. Augustine says) the Sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ: yet in no wise are they partakers of Christ, but
rather to their condemnation do eat and drink the sign or Sacrament of so
great a thing.

XXX.
THe Cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the Lay people. For both the parts
of the Lords Sacrament, by Christ's ordinance and commandment ought to be
ministered to all Christian men alike.

XXXI.
THe offering of Christ once made* is that perfect redemption, propitiation,
and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world, both original and
actual and there is none other satisfaction for sin, but that alone. Wherefore
the sacrifices of Masses, in the which it was commonly said, that the Priests
did offer Christ for the quick and the dead, to have remission of pain or
guilt, were blasphemous fables, and dangerous deceits.

XXXII.
BIshops, Priests, and Deacons, are not commanded by Gods Law, either to vow
the estate of single life, or to abstain from marriage: Therefore it is lawful
also for them, as for all other Christian men to marry at their own discretion,
as they shall judge the same to serve better to Godliness.

XXXIII.
THat person which by open denunciation of the Church, is rightly cut off from
the unity of the Church, and excommunicated, ought to be taken of the whole
multitude of the faithful as an heathen and Publican, until he be openly
reconciled by Penance, and received into the Church by a Judge that has
authority thereunto.

XXXIV.
IT is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all places one, or
utterly like, for at all times they have been diverse, and may be changed,
according to the diversity of Countries, times, and men's manners, so that
nothing be ordained against Gods Word. Whosoever through his private judgment,
willingly and purposely does openly break the Traditions and Ceremonies of the
Church, which be not repugnant to the Word of God, and be ordained and approved
by common authority, ought to be rebuked openly, (that other may fear to do the
like) as he that offends against the common Order of the Church, and hurts
the authority of the Magistrate, and wounds the Consciences of the weak
brethren.

Every particular or national Church, has authority to ordain, change, and
abolish Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, ordained only by man's authority,
so that all things be done to edifying.

XXXV.
THe second Book of Homilies, the several titles whereof we have joined under
this Article, does contain a godly and wholesome Doctrine and necessary for
these times, as does the former book of Homilies, which were set forth in the
time of Edward the sixth: and therefore we judge them to be read in Churches by
the Ministers diligently and distinctly, that they may be understanded of the
people.

Of the Names of the Homilies.
1 OF the right use of the Church. 2 Against peril of Idolatry. 3 Of repairing
and keeping clean of Churches. 4 Of good works, first of Fasting. 5 Against
Gluttony and Drunkenness. 6 Against Excess of Apparel. 7 Of Prayer. 8 Of the
Place and Time of Prayer. 9 That Common Prayers and Sacraments ought to be
ministered in a known Tongue. 10 Of the reverent estimation of Gods Word. 11 Of
Alms doing. 12 Of the Nativity of Christ. 13 Of the passion of Christ. 14 Of
the Resurrection of Christ. 15 Of the worthy receiving of the Sacrament of the
Body and Blood of Christ. 16 Of the Gifts of the holy Ghost. 17 For the
Rogation days. 18 Of the State of Matrimony. 19 Of Repentance. 20 Against
Idleness. 21 Against Rebellion.
XXXVI.
THe Book of Consecration of Archbishops, and Bishops, and ordering of Priests
and Deacons, lately set forth in the time of Edward the sixth, and confirmed at
the same time by authority of Parliament, does contain all things necessary to
such Consecration and ordering: neither has it any thing, that of it self is
superstitious and ungodly. And therefore* whosoever are consecrated or ordered
according to the Rites of that Book, since the second year of the aforenamed
King Edward, unto this time, or hereafter shall be consecrated or ordered
according to the same Rites, we decree all such to be rightly, orderly, and
lawfully consecrated and ordered.

XXXVII.
THe Queens Majesty has the chief power in this Realm of England, and other
her Dominions, unto whom the chief government of all estates of this Realm,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil in all causes does appertain, and is
not, nor ought to be subject to any foreign Jurisdiction.

Where we attribute to the Queens Majesty the chief government, by which
titles we understand the minds of some slanderous folks to be o^fended: we
give not to our Princes the ministering, either of Gods word, or of the
Sacraments, the which thing the Injunctions also lately set forth by Elizabeth
our Queen do most plainly testify: but that only prerogative which we see to
have been given always to all godly Princes in holy Scriptures by God himself,
that is, that they should rule all estates and degrees committed to their
charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with
the Civil sword the stubborn and evil deers.

The Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in this Realm of England.

The Laws of the Realm may punish Christian men with death, for heinous and
grievous offenses.

It is lawful for Christian men, at the Commandment of the Magistrate, to wear
weapons, and serve in the wars.

XXXVIII.
THe Riches and goods of Christians are not common, as touching the right title
and possession of the same, as certain Anabaptists do falsely boast.
Notwithstanding, every man ought of such things as he possesses liberally to
give alms to the poor, according to his ability.

XXXIX.
AS we confess that vain and rash swearing is forbidden Christian men by our
Lord Jesus Christ, and James his Apostle: So we judge that Christian Religion
does not prohibit, but that a man may swear when the Magistrate requires, in
a cause of faith and charity, so it be done according to the Prophets
teaching, in justice, judgment, and truth.

The Contents.
Chap. 1. OF the Seditious Liberty of the new Doctrines which has been the
principal means of the Covenant, p. 1. Chap. 2. That the Covenanters are
destitute of all Proofs for their war made against the King, p. 12. Chap. 3.
Express Texts of Scripture which commands Obedience, and forbids Resistance to
Soverigns, p. 23. Chap. 4. The Evasions of the Covenanters upon the Texts of
Saint Paul, Romans 13. and how in time they refuse the judgment of Scripture, p.
28. Chap. 5. What Constitution of State the Covenanters forge, and how they
refuse the judgment of the Laws of the Kingdom, p. 40. Chap. 6. What Examples
in the Histories of England, the Covenanters make use of to authorize their
actions, p. 46. Chap. 7. Declaring wherein the Legislative power of Parliament
consists, p. 50. Chap. 8. How the Covenanters will be Judges in their own
cause, p. 63. Chap. 9. That the most noble and best part of the Parliament
retired to the King, being driven away by the worser, p. 65. Chap. 10. A
Parallel of the Covenant with the holy League of France, under Henry the Third,
Page 71. Chap. 11. The Doctrine of the English Covenanters paralleled with the
Doctrine of the Jesuits, p. 72. Chap. 12. How the Covenanters wrong the
Reformed Churches, in inviting them to join with them: with an Answer for the
Churches of France, p. 81. Chap. 13. The preceding Answer confirmed by Divines
of the Reformed Religion, with an Answer to some Objections of the Covenanters
upon this Subject, p. 101. Chap. 14. How the Covenanters have no reason to
invite the Reformed Churches to their Alliance, since they differ from them in
many things of great importance, p. 115. Chap. 15. Of abolishing the Lyturgy,
in doing of which the Covenanters oppose the Reformed Churches, p. 122. Chap.
16. Of the great prudence and wisdom of the first English Reformers, and of the
Fool hardiness of these at present, p. 132. Chap. 17. How the Covenanters
labor in vain to sow Sedition between the Churches of England and France, upon
the point of Discipline: Of the Christian prudence of the French Reformers, and
of the nature of Discipline in general, p. 145. Chap. 18. How the Discipline of
the Covenanters is far from the practice of other Churches, p. 156. Chap. 19.
That the Covenanters ruin the Ministers of the Gospel under color of
Reformation, p. 163. Chap. 20. Of the Corruption of Religion objected to the
English Clergy, and the ways that the Covenanters took to remedy them, Page
167. Chap. 21. An Answer to the Objection, That the King made War against the
Parliament, p. 176. Chap. 22. Of the Depraved and Evil Faith of the
Covenanters. p. 184. Chap. 23. Of the Instruments both Parties made use of, and
of the Irish Affairs. p. 207 Chap. 24. How the different Factions of the
Covenant agreed to ruin the King, and contributed to put him to death, p. 226.
Chap. 25. Of the cruelty of the Covenanters toward the good Subjects of the
King, p. 232.
CHAP. I. Of the seditious Liberty of New Doctrines, which has been the
principal means of the Covenant.
A Complete History of our Affairs since the beginning of these Commotions,
would be the best Apology for the Justice of our Cause; but this let some brave
Spirits labor that are furnished with Records and Intelligences, and who are
endued with a judicious Candor, which may leave to after Age* an accomplished
portraicture of the wickedness of this last Age; but that we shall not
undertake here: Yet nevertheless, since the Question of Right depends upon
that of Fact, and that to judge of a Different, we must know who began the
Quarrel, it is necessary that something be said of the occasions and beginning
of this here; for in regard of the progress, it is so notoriously and
prodigiously wicked on our Enemies side, that their neighbors that formerly
had too good an opinion of their Cause, acknowledge now that they have rendered
it very evil.

It shall be our Task then to let the world see that it has been Evil from the
very beginning, and that their first proceedings were contrary to the Word of
God, to the constitution of the Kingdom, and to natural Equity; Yea, that all
those fearful prodigies of Iniquity which the world beholds with a just
execration, are the necessary consequences of their first avowed and published
principles.

Ye must therefore know, that the Parliament assembled in November. 1640, was
composed for the most part of Persons of Honor, affectious to their Religion,
King and Country, and of some others also, whose designs aimed at a general
overthrow of all things: These finding themselves to be few in number, labor
to join to their Faction the numerous and meaner sort of people of London, who
being kept under a just and gracious Sovereign in their duty, and in happy
subjection, could not be induced to mutiny by no other motive then that of
Religion, which is the handle by which the Politicians in all times have wound
and turned about the Spirits of the people.

We will not nevertheless deprive them of this Glory, that it was they that
first brought the Reformation of Religion upon the Stage, but the Honor is due
to them who since have suffered for their Loyalty toward God and the King;
that in this holy enterprise they only carried themselves vigorously and
sincerely, but their good Zeal by the Cunning of the Party was driven so far,
that laboring to reform the Clergy, they served, without thinking, the design
of them that would destroy them, and to cause afterward Monarchy to stumble
upon the Ruins of the Church.

This profession of the Parliament to Reform the Church, fills the hearts of all
good men with joy and hope; for although that the excellent Order in the
English Church deserves highly to be respected and admired; the purity of the
Gospel there being clothed with Honor, and defended by an Episcopal Gravity,
yet is it of our Government, and of all other in the world, be they
Ecclesiastical or Civil, as with Watches, that how good and excellent soever
they be, length of time disorders them, that ever and anon they have need of
mending and making clean.

It is almost an Age since the Doctrine and Discipline of our Church has been
renewed, and it is a wonder both the one and the other have been so well
conserved in so long a space: Nevertheless, the faults of some Particulars
ought not to be imputed to the General. The Church has flourished under our
Discipline, and the Truth has been preserved, and the Good being put in the
Balance against the Evil, the people had far more cause to glorify God, than
to complain; but we have to do with Spirits whose nature is like Lapwings,
which in a Garden full of fruits, feed only on the Caterpillars.

There is nothing so well done, that does not displease some, even the works of
God displease the Devil, because they are well done; and in all those works
wherein the spirit of man has a part, there is nothing so perfect which may
not be amended. Our Lyturgie, so holy, and so highly esteemed in all the
Reformed Churches, has nevertheless given offense to many persons amongst us.
And although it was for a very small matter, yet those who were affectionate to
peace, were content to change something, and so to purchase Concord with their
Dissenting Brethren at that price.

Whence this overture of Reformation opened a gate to the Liberty of them that
desired a change, and the Parliament being composed of persons of different
inclinations, in matters of Religion, every one had liberty to say and write
what he pleased, and had a Party in the Assembly of Estates, that protected and
encouraged them: The Germans never wrote so much upon Logic in a hundred
years, as the English wrote of the Designs of their Ecclesiastical Discipline
in three months; every week brought forth a thousand seditious pamphlets,
which supplied the scarcity of Coals; every writer made a Platform of
Reformation according to his humor, and in this new building none would
content himself to be a Mason, but every one would be Architect; and there was
none of them who called not his reformation the only Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
out of which there was no salvation: But these Kingdoms of Jesus Christ agreed
one with another, and with the nature of the thing, as the Titles and Chapters
of Montagues Essays: The people are called a Beast with many Heads, and when
all these heads shall cry out at one time, and every one with a different cry,
I leave you to g^esse what an odious discord they make in the ears both of God
and man.

In the midst of this universal distraction, it was appointed that a certain
number of Divines, differing in the point of Discipline, should meet together
to confer about Religion, as well for the interior as the exterior part,
where many Bishops and other of the chief of the Clergy men; the Bishop of
Lincoln (who afterward was Archbishop of York) made this Proposition to them,
That the Divines should in no wise touch upon the point of Discipline, until
such time as they were agreed about the points of Doctrine, hoping thereby that
their spirits being united by the bond of one common, but holy Faith, they
would easily accord about the exterior Government or Discipline.

This Counsel was embraced by all, and so wisely managed by that great Person,
that in three Meetings, the Divines accorded upon all the substance of
Religion, and formed hereupon diverse Articles, and with one consent condemned
diverse opinions: This general consent in Doctrine filled them with hope, that
the points of Discipline would pass with the like sweetness; and indeed there
wanted not much to have made us happy.

But before the report of this good Agreement could be published abroad, the
Factious party of the State, fearing above all things this accord in Religion,
suddenly raised a strong Quarrel against the Degree of Bishops, as an
appurtenance of Antichrist; and another, about their sitting in Parliament; and
did so exasperate the people against the Prelates, that in stead of pursuing
their design of Reformation, they were constrained to provide for the safety of
their own lives. After this, there was no more speech of the Agreement in
Religion, for that would utterly have spoiled their work, for it had never been
possible to have raised the people against the King, if the conclusion of this
conference had been made known to the world, that the King, the Court, and the
Bishops, made profession of the sincere reformed Religion. Now, because all the
Lies and Subtilties of the Devil were not capable to impute unto them another
Confession of Faith, but that which they maintain, which was Holy and Orthodox,
known every where, and confirmed by the Confessions of all the reformed
Churches of Europe; the Factious persuaded the people, both by their Sermons
and seditious Libels, that the degree of Bishops was an essential Branch and
Mark of Antichrist, and that to pull them down, was to do the work of the Lord,
and to ruin Antichrist; and that if the King would maintain them, he would be
destroyed with them, as being one of those Kings who gave his power to the
Beast.

And besides the destruction of Bishops, they openly demanded the Abolition of
the Divine Service received in the Church of England, condemning the use of all
other prayers, yea even of the Lords Prayer; quarrelling with the Apostles
Creed, denied the necessity of the Sacraments, boasted of a new Light that had
appeared to them from Heaven to draw them out of Popish Darkness; and all that
was not compatible with their extravagant Illuminations, they called Popery;
and the Ministers that disobeyed them, Baal's Priests, and the supporters of
Antichrist.

By such kind of people were the great multitudes stirred, who came crying at
the Gates of the King and Parliament for Reformation, threatening with fire and
sword all those that should oppose it: Of these Assemblies, we may speak what
is spoken of the uproar at Ephesus, Acts 19.32. The Assembly was confused, and
the more part knew not wherefore they were come together, for those that called
for Reformation, understood not one another, and their opinions were different
in Religion, as appears at this day; agreeing only in this, to pull down the
Ecclesiastical Government; and what New Government they will build upon the
Ruins of the Old, we shall know, when the sword has decided the controversy;
but whilst the Mariners strive, the Ship sinks. The Lord behold his poor Church
in compassion.

We have great hope now, beholding the diversity of Opinions and Inclinations,
that these evil ingredients will together make a good Temperature, and that the
disorder, yea, even the Licentiousness it self will enforce order, as commonly
evil Manners beget good Laws* but to attain this, it is required in this general
confusion, that those of clear and sound judgments, who see the bottom of the
evil, and know the Remedy of it: But having considered them that walk before in
the design of Reformation, we find that they are such that neither know the
Remedy nor the Evil.

As for the Evil, in stead of having their eyes upon the errors of particulars,
against the principal points of Faith, and Confession of the English Church;
they grew obstinate against certain small and indifferent Ceremonies which the
King had many times offered to change by a Synod lawfully assembled; and cast
all the Fire of their passion upon the Episcopal pre-eminence, a Surpliss, a
Festival, Forms of Prayer, Painted windows; and condemning many good things
amongst ^he evil.

And as for the Remedy, we have here whereat to admire, that striking at so
small and light evils, they would employ such extreme Remedies, nothing being
able to serve but general destruction, as if to heal the pain of the Teeth,
they would cut off the Head, in stead of proceeding by an amiable conference,
appointing a deputation of the Clergy of the Kingdom to assemble in a Synod to
calm the fiery spirits, and to keep the people in obedience to their Sovereign,
and to fasten the building that shaked, by the Ciment of Charity; they made
open profession that the Reformation could not be effected but by blood, that
they would have no peace with the Bishops and their Clergy, that they must
destroy before they build, raze Babylon (as they called our Discipline) even to
the very foundations, overthrow the Altars of Baal, and sacrifice all his
Priests; that now the time was come, that the Israel of God ought to pillage
the Egyptians. And that now the just should wash their footsteps in the blood
of the ungodly, for such they accounted us; and thus they did us the honor to
plunder and kill us in Scripture Language.

And with this Divinity the Pulpits sounded aloud, and the people publicly
exhorted to take up Arms against the King, and to destroy all Ministers both of
Church and State, that should join with him; and for this effect, these
following Texts of Scripture were pressed by their zealous Preachers, Luke
19.27. Those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring
hither, and slay them before me. Judge. 5.23. Curse ye Meroz, curse ye bitterly
the Inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the help of the Lord, to help
the Lord against the mighty. Jer. 48.10. Cursed be he that does the work of the
Lord deceitfully, and cursed be he that keeps back his sword from blood; and
these they appropriated to their war against their King and Clergy of England,
and all that adhered unto them; there being no way of Reformation in these men's
accounts but to kill us for the Love of God, and the Advancement of his Kingdom.

Now being exceedingly astonished, how men of Learning could possibly be so
bewitched with a furious and foolish zeal; we found at length, having sounded
the depth of their opinions, that their Brains were troubled with Prophesies
and Revelations, that their principal reading was in Commentaries upon the
Revelation, which they interpreted according to their fancies; and that they
had studied more, what God would do hereafter, than what their Duty was to do
for the present; that they made no Conscience to transgress the declared Will
of God in his Commands, to accomplish the secret will of his Decree. That they
were Millenari^s, expecting a Temporal Kingdom of Jesus Christ, believing that
the time of that Kingdom was now come; and to establish that Kingdom, they were
to pluck down that of Antichrist (as they understood) the ancient
Ecclesiastical Order, and to dispossess Kings, drive away the wicked, dash the
children of Babel against the stones, tread the winepress of the wrath of God,
till the Blood rose to their Bridle reins, that thereby Christ alone may reign
in the world, and the meek inherit the earth: We have since enough tasted of
the fruits of their meekness: All this is drawn from the model of the
Commonwealth of John a Leyden, and the Prophets of Munster.

But if any of the Covenanters shall disavow these opinions, they cannot deny
but they were preached publicly and ordinarily; neither can they deny but the
defenders of this pernicious Doctrine were the chief of their New Reformation,
and the Authors of the war; people whose Counsels were applauded as Oracles,
and who drew after them their party by the repetition of their sanctified
strength of zeal; those who dared to contradict them, did it very fearfully,
and kissing their hands before they spoke, but they themselves carried all
before them, acting with a prophetic liberty and boldness; also, after all,
they only were the men to be trusted, and who were put upon all great designs
and employments; for they feared that they who are less governed by
Enthusiasms, might at last so far forget themselves, as to be faithful to their
Sovereign, and yield to a peaceable accommodation.

Behold here then, wherefore we would not join our selves with these Reformers,
because we see that even they themselves have the greatest need of Reformation,
being far gone from the Doctrine of the reformed Churches, erring in the Faith,
but yet more in Charity; It Is they would sweep the Church, as God swept
Babylon, with the Beesom of destruction: They speak not of reforming neither
Doctrines nor Manners, but to ruin the Persons: They account the most part of
the Clergy of the Kingdom unworthy to be corrected, but altogether to be rooted
out; that one part of the Reformation was to ruin the King, and to take the
sword from his side to cut off his head; the favorers of tumults were the only
persons that were caressed, they lent their ears to the popul^r tumults, whilst
they shut the mouths and bound the hands of the Magistrates: It was they taught
that the people were above the King, and that the Command of Saint Paul, that
every one should be subject to the higher Powers, obliges the King for to obey
the People; it was they that upheld, yea, favored and courted all sorts of
pernicious Sects, provided that they would bandy with them against their King:
It was they that suffered to go unpunished the Blasphemies in the Pulpits, the
Insolences, Sacriledges and horrible profanations of the Service of God, and
permitted all things to those who were of the zealous party.

We beheld on the other side, that the King took knowledge of the grievances of
his people, as well for the spiritual as temporal, and labored sincerely to
remedy them; that he consented to the alteration of offensive things in
Religion, and to the punishment of those who were accused as troublers of the
Church, provided that the things and persons were examined by regular and
lawful ways of a general Synod, which he offered to assemble; he also was
pleased to yield of his own right to augment the rights of his Subjects, and
daily multiplied acts of favor, capable to convert the most alienated spirits,
passed by the many and great affronts that were done to his authority, and
endeavored by all ways possible to overcome evil with good.

But the more the King yielded, the more insolent were the factious against
him; he offered to reform both the State and Church, but they would not permit
him, they themselves would do that work without him. The King sent diverse
messages to know of them what things they would reform, but to this they
answered only with complaints. Neither could he obtain any declaration of that
which they desired, until that his Forts, Magazines, Ships and Revenues were
taken from him; the reason of which has since been given by one of their
principal Champions. Having to sow the Lords Field, Fuller Ans. p. 7.
they had need to make a fence about it before they begin, that the workmen
might labor without interruption; and that to lance the Apostume of a sick
State, they must first bind the Patient.

Our Conscience could not accomodate it self to this prudence, neither ever
expect any good from such a way of Reformation, which would bind the Royal
hands and feet of Majesty, before they would declare what they desired of his
Favor; and cut asunder the Nerves of his Authority and subsistence, under
color to establish the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

A strange proceeding to us that have learned of St Paul, that a Prince bears
not the sword in vain, Romans 13.4. But in that is the Minister of God to execute
wrath; and that to resist him, yea, when he should make use of the sword to
commit injustice, is to resist the Ordinance of God: But if he use it well or
ill, that ought to be left to him who gave it him, and to whom only he ought to
render account; his Subjects ought to counsel him, if he did ill, and refuse to
assist him in evil doing, and not repress him by Arms: That if this Command of
St Paul obliged the Romans to obey a cruel vicious Prince, and enemy to God, we
should account our selves much more bound to obey a just, merciful, religious
Prince, whose life was a rare example of piety and sanctity, and his Government
so just and peaceable, that he might well be called the Father of his Subjects;
who wanted nothing to make them happy, but to know their happiness.

CHAP. II. That the Covenanters are destitute of all Proofs from Holy Scripture
for their War made against the King.
THese violent beginnings of the Covenanters, and their Progress also, which
overthrows all humane Authority, had great need to strengthen it self by Divine
Authority, to satisfy the Conscience; whence is it that they made a great
noise of it in their Pulpits, but not in their Disputes; for those that
exhorted the people in Scripture-term to War against the King, hang down the
head, when in conference their Proofs are demanded, saying; that, It is not for
Divines but Lawyers to decide the present quarrel; Whence it appears that there
is a great difference betwixt the terms and proofs of Scripture, and that many
that have the voice of the Lamb, speak as the Dragon.

But fearing lest they should accuse us, that we suppress their proofs, behold
here all that they make use of, both in their Books and Sermons, part borrowed
from the writings of the Jesuits, and part from Vindiciae contra Tirannos, and
De jure Magistratus.
two Books which are Printed with Machiavels Prince, and not without great
reason, for there are three wicked Books together, and its a wonder how that in
threescore years their Books have not been burnt for company by the hands of
the common Executioner.

They allege the example of David, who had six hundred men for his guard when
he was pursued by Saul, 1 Samuel 22.2.

The example of the Army of Israel, which saved Jonathan, when Saul* would have
put him to death, 1 Samuel 14.45.

Of Ehud, who slew Eglon King of Moab, an Oppressor of the Israelites, Judge.
3.21.

The example of the Town of Libnah, which revolted from the obedience of
Jehoram, because he had forsaken the Lord God of his Fathers, 2 Chr. 21.10.

Of Jehu, that cut off the House of Ahab* 2 Kings 9.

The example of Jehojadah the High Priest, who commanded Athaliah the Queen to
be put to death, 2 Kings 11.15.

Of the Priests of Jerusalem, who resisted Uzziah the King, when he would have
exercised the Priests Office, 2 Chronicles. 26.18.

The example of Elisha who caused the door to be shut, when Joram the King of
Israel sent a messenger to cut off his head, 2 Kings 6.13.

And also the malediction that Deborah gave to the Inhabitants of Meroz,
because they came not to the help of the Lord, when Barak fought against
Siserae, Judges 5.23.

Likewise the malediction pronounced by Jeremy against him that should do the
work of the Lord deceitfully, and that should keep his sword from shedding the
blood of the Moabites, Jer. 48.10.

The Idols of Laban, and the Genealogies of the Patriarchs might also have been
brought to this purpose; it must needs be, that the Spirit of Error and of
Lies, have a great power upon the understanding of these people, for to
persuade them by such reasons to hazard their Goods, and Lives, and Consciences
in an open War against their Sovereign.

All these passages of Scripture are Examples and particular Cases, and all
except one far from the point in controversy; but in a matter of such
importance as the resisting of the King, which is so expressly forbidden, and
under pain of damnation, there is need of a formal command, or of a permission
expressed, that exempts Christians; at least in some certain cases, for the
crime of resisting the higher powers, which is to resist God, and from the
punishment of eternal damnation; without this all the Examples of Subjects
rising up against their Princes from the very Creation of the World cannot, nor
is able to put Conscience into a quiet condition: He has but small knowledge
that knows not that Examples prove nothing, but that such a thing has been
done, and is possible; not that it ought to be done, or that it is lawful to be
done; if there be not a Law built upon the Example, and a Sovereign Authority
given to it, that it may be a pattern for the future; and then its not the
Example, but the Law that we are bound to follow, which cannot be said of the
Examples before alleged, which beside the general insufficiency of Examples in
matter of proof touch not the point of Resistance in question, except the
first, which is wholly contrary to it.

Which is the Example of David, who being persecuted by Saul, took six hundred
men for his Guard; this might suffice for Answer, That this action is not
recommended by the Word of God, nor proposed as an example for us to follow;
Christian piety and prudence, may imitate many actions of holy persons, which
are not formally recommended in the word of God; but the question being to
exempt us from a prohibition, and a formal threatening, Romans 13.2. one of the
most considerable and penal in all the Scripture, we may receive no example to
the contrary, if it be not expressly recommended and turned into a command; and
besides the last command ought to have the advantage, and to be obeyed before
the first.

Moreover, extraordinary Cases in Scripture, wherein there is a Miraculous and
Prophetic Conduct, cannot serve for a pattern in ordinary cases: David was
Anointed King over Israel, by a special command of God, and in all the List of
the Kings of Judah, there were none but Saul and David called to the Kingdom in
this manner. And this holy Unction gave them privileges in Israel which were
only proper to them, and which the Gentlemen of the Covenant have not in
England, for ordinary cases there are perpetual and inviolable precepts, and
these precepts are wholly contrary to the resisting of Sovereigns by Arms.

Our Enemies nevertheless challenge a particular Interest in this example of
David, because they account themselves the anointed of the Lord, but deny this
Title to their King, if he be not one of the Elect of God; but let them learn,
that that which renders Kings the anointed of the Lord, is not true Faith, nor
the Gifts of the Spirit, but that Sovereign power which they have from on high.

And therefore Cyrus a Pagan King is called by God himself, his anointed, and
his Shepherd, Isai. 45.1. If then Kings are the anointed of the Lord, without
consideration of their Religion or virtue, it follows then that they lose not
their unction, neither by their Errors nor their Vices; and that falling from
the grace of God, yet they fall not from that power which they held of him.
This is spoken of by the way against the Heresy of most part of the
Covenanters, who deny the divine Unction of Kings, and fasten it to their
f^ntasies in Religion.

And we have cause to give thanks to these men who allege to us the example of
David, there being nothing in all the Scripture more contrary to them; for in
stead of that they pursued the King with weapons in their hands, and gave him
Battle; David fled continually from place to place, and never struck one stroke
nor drew his Sword against his King. Twice he let him escape when he had him in
his power, and having taken away his spear, restored it to him again; and
having but cut off the Lap of his garment, his heart smote him for it; and when
one counseled him to dispatch him, then when he was in his hands, he said, The
Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my Master, the Lords anointed, to
stretch forth my hand against him, seeing he is the Anointed of the Lord, 1 Samuel 24.6. And when his servants would have slain him, he says, Destroy him
not: for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed, and be
guiltless, 1 Samuel 26.9. This Divine Title bound his hands; and possessed his
spirit with fear and astonishment.

And since our Enemies make him to say that he would not stretch forth his hand
against the King, if he descended not in Battle against him; let them well read
the Text, but especially in the Original, and they shall find no such thing;
David does rather put Saul wholly into the hands of God, Verse. 10. The Lord
shall smite him, or his day shall come to die, or he shall descend into the
battle and perish; The Lord forbid that I should stretch forth my hand against
the Lords Anointed: He does not say that he will not stretch forth his hand
against him, unless that the Lord smite him; for if God smite him, what need
had David to smite him? He does not say he would descend into Battle against
him, for then his Actions would have contradicted his Words, for he always fled
from him; the Event proved that his words were Prophetical, and that h^ waited
whilst Saul should be slain in a strange War, and that the hand of the Lord
should be upon him.

And if David never gave him Battle, we cannot impute it to his weakness; for
he might as well have defeated the Army of Saul, as that of the Philistines
before Keilah, with his small number; if God who guided him in all his ways had
found it good, since it had been easy for him to have raised mighty Armies,
being designed the Successor of Saul in the Kingdom; for people naturally adore
the Rising Sun.

David retired into Keilah, and having heard that Saul had an intention to come
thither to take him, enquired of the Lord, if those in the City would deliver
him up to Saul, and God having answered him, that they would deliver him, fled
from thence; the Ministers therefore of the Covenant infer, that David had a
desire to fortify Keilah, and to endure a siege. But all which they can gather
from that Passage is, that David was not safe in that retreat, and that God
advised him to seek another, for the Inhabitants of Keilah might have delivered
him to Saul without attending a siege; but when they shall have proved that
David would have fortified Keilah, it makes nothing for them, since God
declares by his Answer, that it was not pleasing to him.

We would beseech the Gentlemen of the Covenant to hold themselves to this
example which they have chosen, that they would cashier their great Armies, for
David had but a few people, with them, 1 Samuel 25.16. that they would not rob
the Subjects of their King, of their Goods; but imitate the Soldiers of David,
who were a wall both by night and day to the Flocks and Herds of Nabal; That
having seized upon the Arms of the King, let them peaceably restore them again
as David, and not with the points forward. Let their Conscience strike them,
and make them cry out, The Lord forbid that I should do this thing against my
Master the Lords Anointed, for who can stretch forth his hand against him and
be guiltless? Words which beside the example carry with them a perpetual and
express command, and shall one day be produced in judgment against those that
defend the late Commotions by the example of David; and if their continuance in
the Kingdoms of his Majesty, is either displeasing or dangerous to them, in
stead of opposing him, let them retire into some strange Country, as David did
to King Achis; let them also imitate his sincerity in making use of strangers
only for his protection, and not to invade his Country, and raise his Subjects
against their King, which is that use the Covenanters employed the Scots; In
one point only they imitate and surpass David, in that he fained himself a
Fool, for they indeed act the Fools in good earnest.

In brief, the Example of David which they allege, is so contrary to the
Actions of the Covenanters, that they have great reason to fear least God
allege this at the dreadful day of Judgment against them, saying, Out of thy
own mouth will I judge thee, then wicked servant, Luke 19.22. The other
passages of Scripture are most ridiculously alleged, and serve only to show
their great weakness.

They bring the action of the Army of Saul, that saved Jonathan against the
Oath of his Father, 1 Samuel 14.45. but to what purpose is this? Does this Army
draw their sword against the King? Use they any violence either against his
Person or Estate? If a King would put to death his Innocent Son, those faithful
Subjects whom the King employs in this Execution do well not to do it, and to
refuse giving obedience to so unjust a command.

They make use also of the example of Ehud, who slew Eglon King of Moab, who
kept the Israelites in slavery, Judge. 3.21. we have often heard this example
pressed with much vehemence in Pulpits. The Preachers compared Eglon to the
King, affirming that Eglon was the lawful King of Israel, and that it is lawful
to kill a legitimate King, if he oppress the people of God; all this is false,
and proper to be refuted only by the Hangman, to whom we leave them.

The Example follows of the City of Libnah, which appertained to the Levites,
which revolted from the obedience of Jehoram, because (says the Text) he had
forsaken the Lord God of his Fathers; the Covenanters apply the word Because to
the intention of the Inhabitants of Libnah, and not to the judgment of God;
whence these Gentlemen conclude, That it is lawful for the people to shake off
the yoke of their Prince, when the Prince forsakes God, of which they will be
Judges. Although Libnah should revolt for this reason, yet it follows not that
the reason is of strength, or that it ought to be turned into example, a thing
which requires a new proof of Scripture; but the drift of the Text is, to
assign the cause of this revolt to the Justice of God, and not to that of men:
Take the whole Text, 2 Chronicles. 21.^0. So the Edomites revolted from under the
hand of Judah unto this day. The same time also did Libnah revolt from under
his hand, because he had forsaken the Lord God of his Fathers. Having consulted
with the Original, we find that the revolt of Edom and of Libnah were both
together, without the least distinction; but between the discourse of these two
Revolts, and the reason adjoined, there is Accentus Athuach.
there the usual mark for the distinction of half periods: which shows that
this reason serves equally for both the Revolts, and the sense of the Text
carries it evidently, that the Idumeans, and those of Libnah revolted for the
same cause, and that these Idumeans which were Idolaters, had no ground to
revolt from the King of Judah, because at that time he was also fallen into
Idolatry; its therefore the Divine justice that the Text regards, and not the
Motives of second Causes.

Also the same Author says, that Pekah the Son of Remaliah slew in Judah
120000 in one day, which were all valiant men, because they had forsaken the
Lord God of their Fathers. In these two passages the sense is alike, and the
reason of the punishment couched in the same terms; now its most evident that
the Syrians had no Quarrel against the Jews for forsaking God, because they did
not believe in him, wherefore we are to look to Justice of the King of Kings,
who for the sins of Princes suffers them to lose the obedience of their
Subjects; for God serve^ himself of the wickedness of men, whereof he is not
the cause, for to execute his just judgments; but that excuses not the
Rebellion of Subjects, for it is their part to consider what they owe to their
King, and not what their King deserves of the Justice of God. They add the
example of Jehu, who exterminated the King of Israel, and all the posterity of
Ahab, 2 Kings 9. in which without doubt he did very well, because God commanded
him, but the Covenanters did very ill in persecuting their King, because God
had forbidden them* After this they bring the Execution of the Queen Athaliah,
by the Command of Jeho^adah the High Priest, 2 Chronicles. 26.18. which no more then
the former touches the Question; for not only Jeho^adah, but all other people
might have done as much, because there was a lawful King, whom they ought to
defend and maintain against a stranger usurping, and that had murdered the
Royal Family; and here the Maxim is valid, That against a public enemy, every
one has right to take up Arms: But what conclude they from these two last
examples, they would have been ashamed to have named them before the death of
their King, but since they have explained themselves, God defend the holiness
of his Word* and confound this Divelish Divinity.

Those that follow are not much better; they allege the example of the
Priests, who resisted King Uzziah, when he would have exercised the Priests
Office, so ought the Ministers of the Gospel to resist the King, if he would
administer the Sacraments; but this resistance ought to be done by humble
admonitions, and as refusing to serve him in his design, not by way of Arms: In
the matter of (...) the Priests used not any violence, it is said (...) caused
him to go out of the Temple, because Go^ (...) him with the Leprosy; but that
(...) force, for the Text says, verse. 20. he (...) ^ed to go out, because the
Lord had (...) his serves nothing for their Subject, they have no other reason
to allege this, but because having quarrelled against all Kings, they take
delight to blast their Dignity. The like is the example of Elisha, who
commanded the door to be shut against the messenger that was sent from Ioram to
cut off his head, 2 Kings 2.32. If Elisha had sent a Messenger to cut off the
Kings* Head, the example had been to the purpose, for this is our case at this
day; but to shut the door against an Officer of the Kings to save his life,
being condemned to die wrongfully, and without force of Justice, is very far
from attempting either against the Person or Authority of the King: The English
Law in many Case^ gives to every one his house for a place of safety, neither
is there any Law either Divine or Humane, that forbids us to defend a blow from
what part soever it comes; if the Covenanters had done no other thing, there
never had been a War, but they proceeded further then defense; Was there ever a
more important Action upon so small a foundation, to persecute their King by
Sea and Land, destroy his Estate, plant their Cannon against his Person,
imprison him, and at last cut off his head, because Elisha caused the door to
be shut against the Messenger of Joram.

But in recompense, behold here two proofs, wherein there is as much piety as
reason, Judge. 5.23. Deborah cursed the Inhabitants of Meroz, because they came
not forth to help the Lord against Jabin and Sisera; and Jer. 48.10. Jeremy
cursed them that kept their sword from shedding the blood of the Moabites,
Ergo, Cursed are all they that came not to help the Covenanters against the
King: For these rare consequences they deserve a bundle of Thistles, such as
Asses feed on, and to be driven from the society of men, as being deprived both
of Reason and Humanity: who has given them power to stretch to the King either
by words or actions, the judgments pronounced against the enemies of God, and
which are restrained to certain Nations and Persons: The King, was he a
Moabite? Was he a Pagan? or an Usurper of a Kingdom, as Jabin? Are you Prophets
as Deborah and Jeremy, to curse with Authority? If ye be not Prophets, ye are
Sacrilegious, for cursing is a Fire that appertains only to God to cast forth,
they who are so bold to take it into their hands without Authority burn them,
and hurt none but themselves, but oftentimes does good to them whom they would
hurt; for this Rashness moves God to jealousy, and provokes him to do the
contrary, according to the Psalmist, Psalm. 109. Let them curse, but do thou
bless; we have great hopes that our enemies shall be the Occasion of the
blessing of God upon us, since they take such pains to curse us; it is the
constant Argument of their Sermons and public Prayers; to it they employ the
vehemence of their Eloquence and fervor of their Devotion; Let us then say
with David, 2 Samuel 16.12. It may be the Lord will look upon our affliction, and
that the Lord will requite good for their cursing; but let us bless them that
persecute us, and despitefully use us: O our God! turn their Hearts, and bless
their persons, and as our Lord Jesus by his Prayer on the Cross saved them
which crucified him, save we beseech thee all those that crucify him in his
Members, and those who killing us think they do God service.

CHAP. III. Express Texts of Scripture which Commands Obedience, and forbids
Resistance to Sovereigns.
FOr to draw them from Examples and particular Cases, which is their retreat,
to general Precepts, we beseech them as they love God and their own salvation,
to review their proofs, and consider that in all the Scripture there is neither
Precepts nor Permission that authorizeth the taking up of Arms against their
Sovereign, but there are very many formal Commands to the contrary.

The first Commandment, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, binds us to honor
the King; for in the beginning Sovereignty appertained to Fathers, and is
derived of the paternal power, Deuteronomy. 13.6, etc. Now it is impossible to honor
the King, and draw your sword against him; upon which we observe that in case
of Idolatry, the Father was commanded by the King to accuse his Son and
Daughter, and the Husband his Wife, and to stretch forth first his hand against
them to slay them; but neither the Son nor the Daughter ought to accuse the
Father, nor the Wife the Husband, much less to put forth their hand against
them: Whence we learn, that neither Children nor Subjects ought to rise up
against their Fathers or their Kings, which have in them the Paternal
Character, no, not for the service of God; and that their Persons ought to be
inviolable; those who confess this Truth, and yet in the mean while separate
the Authority of the King from his Person, deny that which they have confessed,
and expose the Person of the King to violence, for it is the Authority that
renders the Persons of Kings unviolable.

Therefore among so many Reprehensions and Judgments against Idolatrous Kings,
whereof the holy History is full, ye shall in no place nor part find that the
people are reproved for not depressing or deposing their King; ordinarily the
punishment that God sent upon them, came immediately from himself, or out of the
Kingdom, not by their own Subjects: Before God would employ Jehu, who was a
Subject, to destroy the Kings of Israel and Judah, he anointed him King, and
besides, gave him a special and extraordinary Command.

We say the like of Jeroboam, whose Example is very ill alleged to defend
Rebellion, for Jeroboam was sent of God to take the Kingdom from Rehoboam, and
was authorized by a formal donation. The sentence of David before mentioned, 1 Samuel ^6.9. is of very great weight: Who can stretch forth his hand against the
Lords Anointed, and be guiltless?

And this other of him, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm,
Psalm. 109.19. But the Covenanters have violently and cruelly proceeded against
both.

God speaking under the name of Sovereign Wisdom, says, By me Kings reign, and
Princes decree Justice: By me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of
the earth, Prove. 8.15, 16. If it be by him that Kings reign, they should be
respected for love of him, and he that resists them makes against God.

To this purpose also tends that excellent scripture, Prove. 24.21, 22. My Son,
fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to
change: For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of
them both? A Scripture which shows, that the fear of the King, is a part of the
fear of God, and that those that rise up against him, are reserved of God for a
sudden calamity.

And this is also of him, Eccles. 8.2. I counsel you to keep the Kings
Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of God. A passage that binds us to
keep the Commandment of the King, for the Love of God, and the Oath of
Allegiance, under which all Subjects are born, and many have actually taken;
for every Oath is a contract made with God.

And a little after, Eccles. 8.14. Where the word of the King is, there is
power; and who may say unto him, what do thou? But we have to do with those,
who make this Question to their King, and care neither for his word nor power.

The Law speaks expressly, Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not revile the Judges, nor
curse the Ruler of thy people. Yea, it restrains the thoughts as well as
actions, Eccles. 10.20. Curse not the King, no, not in thy thoughts. If we are
not to speak nor think ill of the King, much less should do ill to him; the
violation of these Commands by the Covenanters, are too enormous, and cry aloud
to Heaven for vengeance.

Our Lord Jesus Christ himself commands us, to render to Caesar the things which
are Cesars, and to God the things that are Gods, Mat. 22.^1. He himself would
pay Tribute to Caesar, although of right he should have made Caesar Tributary to
him? and not having money, he caused it to be brought to him by a Miracle,
rather than he would be wanting in this duty; this is far from taking the Kings
Revenues from him, and employing the Tribute due to him, to raise a war against
him.

When the Officers of Justice came to take him, he rebuked his Disciple who had
drawn his sword against them, and healed the wound that he had made* Mat. 26.
He suffered himself peaceably to be led before Herod and Pilate, whom he might
have as easily destroyed, as make them fall down backward who came to apprehend
him* but he submitted to the Divine Authority that shined in the Person of the
Governor, yea even to death; openly professing that the power which he had,
was from above, John 19.11. If the power of Kings depended upon the gift of
their Subjects, as the Covenanters held, Jesus Christ should have said that the
power that he had was from below; but this Divinity proceeds from another
Doctor than the Son of God.

Saint Paul is mavelous express and full upon this point, Romans 13.1, etc. Let
every soul be subject unto the higher Powers, for there is no Power but of God:
The Powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the
Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation. For Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the
evil. Will thou then not be afraid of the Power? Do that which is good, and
thou shall have praise of the same. For he is the Minister of God to thee for
good; but if thou do that which is evil, be afraid: for he bears not the
sword in vain; for he is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon
him that does evil: Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but
also for Conscience sake. For, for this cause p^y you tribute also, for they
are Gods Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing. Render
therefore to all their dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom
Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor.

Oh! behold with what vigor of spirit and power the Apostle presses
Obedience, and condemns resistance of Sovereign Powers; Is there any thing in
the world so strong and pressing as this Divine Lesson? the authority alone had
been sufficient, but over and above he adds threatenings, promises reason upon
reason; they who shall well consider the Text, will learn; That it is
impossible to be a good Christian, without being a good Subject, and that they
cannot resist the King without resisting God; also that terrible threatening of
damnation should retain men in their duty: Let every one (in the fear of God)
that have born Arms against their King, think well of this, and repent: Oh! it
is a dangerous thing to resist God, he must be very imprudent that will hazard
the damnation of his soul, so formally denounced against Rebels, upon
distinctions and good intentions, at the great day of account they will find
these very light things. The Divines of the Covenant labor with might and main
to elude the force of this Scripture, which plucks them by the throat, they
change themselves into many contrary forms to escape it, as we shall see
hereafter.

Saint Paul recommends this Doctrine to Titus, Tit. 3.1, 2. Put them in mind to
be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, to be ready to
every good work; to speak evil of no man, to be in brawlers, showing all
meekness to all men. A dangerous Scripture; to teach subjection and meekness,
is to strike the Covenanter at the heart.

Saint Peter speaks in the same style, 1 Pet. 2.13, etc. Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as
supreme; or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the
punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well, for so is the
will of God, that with well doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men: As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness,
but as the Servants of God. Honor all men, Love the Brotherhood, Fear God,
Honor the King. The rest of the Chapter is employed in teaching Christians to
submit to their Superiors, and to suffer for righteousness: Behold truly the
Doctrine of Christ, it is thus that the Apostles planted the Church, it is thus
that they fought the good fight, not in killing Kings, but in bearing the Cross
for the Gospel.

One of ours, having requested a Learned Divine that followed the party of the
Covenanters, that he would give him a precept of Scripture, where it is
commanded for Subjects to take up Arms for Religion against their Sovereign: He
returned this Scripture, Stand fast therefore in the Liberty wherewith Christ
has made us free, Gal. 5.1. But we maintain against him, that both Saint Peter
and Saint Paul preserved themselves more steadfast in their Christian Liberty in
suffering death, than all the Armies of the Covenanters in fighting; and that
they take the ways not to establish, but to shake and overthrow their liberty
in Christ* We need not prove that Saint Paul in this Scripture, never meant to
speak of fighting, but to preserve the spirit free from superstition. Christian
Liberty consists not in shaking off the yoke of Superior Powers, but of that
of Error and vice; and that liberty which our enemies have assumed, to present
their Petitions to their King, upon their Pikes point, and in the end to kill
him, was not the liberty from which Christ had made them free: Let them learn
the Lesson of Saint Peter, to carry themselves as free, and not using their
Liberty for a Cloak of Maliciousness.

CHAP. IV. The Evasions of the Covenanters upon the Texts of Saint Paul, Romans
13. And how in Fine they refuse the Judgment of Scripture.
THE Apostle commands, Romans 13.1. That every Soul be subject to the higher
Powers, for there is no power but of God. The Powers that be, are ordained of
God.

To this Scripture, some of them answer, that evil Kings are not ordained of
God, having learned this Doctrine of Goodman; but therein they directly
contradict Saint Paul, Goodman of Obedience. (...)
who spoke of the Powers then in being; they that were then when Saint Paul
wrote this Epistle, were one of the three Nero's Successors of Tyberius, the
best of them were nothing worth; a child is capable to distinguish betwixt the
wickedness of a Prince, and his authority; the first whereof is of himself, the
second is of God, and it is of the power that Saint Paul speaks of, without
distinction of persons.

As for the following verse, where Saint Paul infers thus, Whosoever therefore
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist,
shall receive to themselves damnation. Buchanan de Jure Reg. p. 56, 57.
Buchanan and his followers* answer, that this Command was but for a time,
whilst the Church was in it is Infancy weak, and under the Cross, incapable to
resist their Prince; but if Saint Paul had lived now, and were to write a body
of Commonwealth, he would speak far otherwise, and would leave Kings to be
punished of their Subjects, and this is that Buchanan assures us upon his word.

Likewise one of the best writers of the Covenanters affirms, that Saint Paul
spoke to some particulars dispersed in the condition of the Primitive Church,
Observator defended, p. 8.
who had not means to provide for their safety; if this License were lawful,
men might reject all the Doctrines of Saint Paul's Epistles, as written to
particulars, and the Masters of the Covenant would make a way to exempt*
themselves from many duties commanded by Saint Paul, which would very ill
accord with their intentions: So when the Apostle says, Romans 12.9, 10. Let
Love be without dissimulation, abhor that which is evil cleave to that which is
good, be kindly affectionate one to another, with brotherly love preferring one
another, there is some appearance that they take this Command addressed to some
particulars, and not to them, since they give themselves the liberty to do the
quite contrary: There is in these Epistles some Commands provisional, moveable
according to the times and persons, as those which concern the outward Order;
others which are purely personal, as the Command made to Timothy, to come to
him before Winter; but the Moral Doctrines are immovable, and vary not
according to the Times, since that reason of Saint Paul given, that the Powers
that be, are ordained of God, is a Truth perpetual and universal, and the
Command not to resist the Powers, ought also to be general for all Ages and all
people; so likewise this reason is perpetual, That the Magistrate bears not
the sword in vain, but to do justice; and this other, ye must needs be subject,
not only for wrath, but also for Conscience sake: Wherefore the Command
grounded hereon to be subject to the higher Powers, and not resist them, is of
perpetual necessity and obligation. And since to resist the powers, is to
resist the Ordinance of God, may we not ask of our new Divines, why the strong
and not the weak are permitted to resist the Ordinance of God? It Is enough to
have a good sword to exempt a man from the Commands of the Gospel.

Bellar. de Po^t. l. 5. Cap. 7.
The Covenanters might defend this interpretation of the Text of Saint Paul, by
the authority of Cardinal Bellarmine, who says, that if the Christians long
since did not depose Dioclesian, Julian, the Apostate Valens the Arrian, and
others, it was because they wanted temporal forces, otherwise of right they
might, which is the language of our Covenanters; but this opinion draws along
with it three inconveniences.

First, That it blasts the primitive Church, and deprives the Martyrs of their
honor; for it is little worth praise to suffer for the Gospel, when a man has
a will without means to rebel; their obedience to their Sovereigns was then
nothing worth, since it was forced, and all their protestations of subjection
in the writings of the Fathers, of which they are full, ought to be imputed to
weakness and hypocrisy.

This likewise is to accuse Saint Paul of want of sincerity, as if he taught
patience and obedience to Kings, only to accomodate himself to the Times, and
not to obey God; but he clears himself sufficiently of this accusation, saying,
that we must not only be subject for wrath, that is to say, for fear of
punishment, but also for Conscience.

Moreover this Doctrine is pernicious to the Church, for if it were embraced,
it would render Christians suspected, and hateful to their Sovereigns; as
persons who would subject the Conscience of their Prince to theirs, and submits
to them only out of weakness, and wait only an occasion to cast off their yoke;
which would oblige Kings ever to keep them weak, and to impose heavy burdens
upon them, and so prevent their rising.

Also this Doctrine is pernicious to the profession of the Gospel, for it would
much hinder the conversion of Pagan Kings, since that turning Christians,
according to the Mode, they should lose their authority, there being no Pagan
Religion, which teaches Subjects to resist their Prince by Arms; which would
also endure Christian Kings of a diverse Religion, to hinder with all their
might the Conversion of their Subjects: Blessed be God that there are none but
the Jesuits and Covenanters that maintain so destructive an Opinion: The
Reformed Churches, and the most part of the Roman Church give no jealousy to
their Princes hereupon.

The holy prudence of the Apostles saw well, that even besides Conscience, the
Counsel, the most profitable for the conservation of the Church, and the
propagati^^ of the Gospel, was to subject themselves wholly to their
Sovereigns, and without any reservation, but to suffer for righteousness sake,
rather than disobey* God; for hereby the principal hinderance was removed,
namely, that shadow which the enemies of the Gospel made the Emperors to
apprehend that this Doctrine which spread so fast, would bring along with it an
alteration in their Estates, and that the Christians wa^ted but the coming of a
King, that would break in pieces all other Kings, and have for his possession
the ends of the earth; it is that which Saint Peter had regard unto, where he
exhorts Believers, 1 Pet. 2* 13, 15. To submit themselves to every Ordinance
of man for the Lords sake, that in all well-doing ye may put to silence the
Ignorance of foolish men. By this manner of subjection whole States were
converted, and in the end patience overcame* For the Christians of the first
Ages have made appear by their piety and moderation, that the Kingdom whither
they aspired was not of this world, neither did in any thing diminish the
rights of Monarchs, but rather strengthened their authority, binding their
Subjects anew by Conscience, yea so far as to make whole Armies of valiant m^n
that had power in their hands, to lay down their necks rather than to draw
their swords against their Emperor; so did the Christian Soldiers under
Maximinian, who would have constrained them to sacrifice to his Idols*

The Armies of the English and Scottish Covenanters are not capable of this
Doctrine; these Northern people are impatient Libertines and haughty* they will
form a Gospel according to the Air of their ^^^mate.

Their other crafty Evasion is not much better, that Saint Paul forbids to
disobey the power of the King, but not to his person; but the Text is formally
against this, for the Apostle by Power does not understand a Quality without a
Subject, but fastens it to the Person, saying in verse. 6. That the Prince is
the Minister of God, and that he bears not the sword in vain, and that they are
ordained of God to do Justice. And he speaks, verse. 6. of Princes in the plural
number, they are Gods Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing.

It Is the style of Saint Paul to call the Angels, who excel in power,
Principalities and Powers: When he speaks, Ephesians. 3.10. That the manifold wisdom
of God might be known to Principalities and Powers in heavenly places: It
appears that he speaks not of Accidents, but of Persons, for they are the
Persons, and not the Titles, that are capable of knowledge.

Now I would fain know of these men, what this Person is that it is lawful to
resist? If it be the person of the King or supreme Magistrate, whilst it is
joined to his power, they resist the power in the person; and if it be the
person separated from the power, they must needs before resist either the one
or the other for to m^ke this violent separation.

And seeing that the Covenanters maintain that the authority of the King
resides in their Chief, those that draw the sword against them, may return the
same answer, and say, that they resist not their authority, but their Persons;
but the Oath of Allegiance, and that of supremacy, which are imposed by Act of
Parliament, cause all these subtilties to vanish, for men take these Oaths to
the person of the King, and not to his power, or to his supremacy separated
from him.

Moreover this distinction is contradicted by another, which has been frequent
a long time in their mouths, that they resisted not the King, but his Armies,
which signifies in effect, that they resisted not the person or King, but his
power; for his power laid in his Armies, and as it is the nature of a lie to
enter far, these people who say they are licensed by Saint Paul to oppose the
person of the King, and not his power, were marvellously impatient when they
were told they fought against the King, and affirmed that they fought for him
and defended his person, which doubtless seems to be spoken to move laughter
and indignation; but God cannot be mocked, nor Conscience wholly blinded, by
their impatience; hereupon they testify that their Conscience makes their
process, and dictates to them within, that to bear Arms against the King, is to
sin against God and Nature.

It Is a notable Symptom of a desperate sick State, where the reason of a
people is smitten with astonishment, whereof we have a most lamentable example,
for was there ever such a capricious madness, It was declared by the two Houses
that the Kings coming to the House of Commons was Treason
to accuse the Royal Majesty of Treason, to make Edicts by the King against the
King, to swear a Covenant for defense of the King, which nevertheless obliges
them to make war against him, and the King being alive, to forge a Platonic
Idea of the same King, residing fifty miles from himself, that so they might
fight against the Person of the King. There is no Cymera, nor fantastical
humor like this! Behold the work of the Spirit that now works efficaciously in
the children of disobedience! Behold another Evasion! The Apostle (say they)
does not teach us who is the Superior Power, but that it is the Superior
Power that we must obey, and therefore they strive to form in the Kingdom a
Superior Power above the King, a thing contrary to the Constitution of this
Monarchy, as I hope to make appear.

It Is easy to gather which is the Superior Power, which Saint Paul
understands, for he expresses it himself, Its the Power which bears the Sword,
ver. 3. And he to whom Tribute is paid, Psalm. 7. Rights that appertain to the
King alone, and which were actually possessed by the Emperor, where Saint Paul
wrote this Epistle: That which they allege against this, that the Emperor then
was more absolute than the Kings at present, is false, but he was much more
limited: Suetonius that lived under Trajan, puts amongst the enormities of
Caligula, Caligula parum abfuit quin Speciem Principatus in Regnum converteret
and capiti diadema circumponeret.
to have been very near changing the form of Government (which was a
Principality) into a Kingdom, and to place the Diadem upon his head. And the
Learned called not the power of these Emperors Regnum but Principatus; and were
this allegation true, yet it would be far from the purpose; for be it that the
Emperor should be more or less absolute than our Kings, the command of Saint
Paul is always the same, That we must not resist him that bears the Sword, and
to whom Custom is due, because his Authority is of God.

This other starting hole is of the same stuff, they say that the defense not
to resist Supreme Powers, obliges only Particulars, and not the States of a
Kingdom; this is to make another Gospel for the General than for the
Particulars; as if they should say, the Commandments of God are directed to
every one, but not to all, which is to overthrow common Sense, since the Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy are imposed upon all the States of England, whereby
they are bound also in General; none sit in Parliament that takes not their
Oaths at his entrance, neither is it in their power to overthrow without and
against the King that which is established by the King sitting in Parliament.

Also this is a thing that never entered into the spirits of the English before
the times of this epidemical frenzy, that the Kings Writs which makes the
Estates to assemble, and the deputation of the people that sends them, should
exempt their Deputies or Parliament men from the duty of Subjects, and absolve
them of their Oath of Allegiance and St. Paul's Command. The Text of St. Paul
according to the Greek requires that every Soul should be subjects; If so be
then that their Deputies or Parliament men have no souls, they are not bound to
give obedience to the King.

When we reason thus, our adversaries are extraordinarily moved, and would take
this matter out of the hands of the Clergy, saying, that the Lawyers, and not
the Divines are to decide where the Supreme Power of the State rests, whether
it be in the person of the King or the people, and with what limitations the
King ought to be obeyed, and that the Apostle requiring an obedience to supreme
Powers, intends an obedience according to the Laws, and the Laws are every
where different, and that one and the same Rule of Scripture cannot serve for
all Kingdoms; that the Kingdom of England not being formed as the Kingdom of
Israel, or the Roman Empire, the Commands of the Old and New Testament
alleged, touches not the present Quarrel.

Now are they not ashamed to forbid our Clergy to discourse of Political
affairs (whilst the Gentlemen of the Bar take upon them to teach Divinity to
the Clergy, and by infinite Boo^s, as processes, stir up the people to
Rebellion by Reasons of Religion) and to uphold staggering Consciences in the
duty of Obedience and Christian Concord, and to defend the Truth of God by our
sufferances, as we have endeavored to do; It Is not to meddle in the affairs of
State, but to discharge our Consciences, and to keep that good thing which God
has committed unto us. We cannot be accused to intrude our selves into the
Civil Government, as their Ministers, who serve as Agents and Factors in
public affairs. Its henceforth the duty of Divines to handle this point of
State, for the Lawyers and Statesmen of the Covenant, who having lately built
their New Policy upon a New Divinity of their fashion, have forced the Divines
to become Politicians, at lea^ ^o far as to defend true Divinity from the crime
of Disobedience; since they press us for Conscience to join with them to resist
the King, they must satisfy our Consciences that the fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom require us so to do. But if they would that Divines rest themselves
upon the faith of the Lawyers in the point of resistance, upon which there is
no less penalty than damnation, it is to press an implicit Faith, and blind
obedience upon those that preach the contrary.

Without exceeding then the limits of our vocation, we do acknowledge that the
Apostle requires an obedience, according to the Laws of the State, not only of
the State of Rome, but of every other form of Government; and we deny, that
there may not be found in Scripture a Rule of Obedience, which serves for all
sorts of Estates, for such is that of the present Text, That every Soul should
be subject to the Higher Powers, and that he that resists the Powers,
resists the Ordinance of God, and thereby shall receive to himself damnation;
the reason inserted between these two sentences do manifestly regard all forms
of States, that there are no powers but they be of God, and the powers that
are, are ordained of God; therefore the Command that goes before and after,
appertains to all sorts of Government: Let every one be subject to the power,
and let none resist the power and threatenings; also which is the terriblest of
all threatenings, that those that resist the Powers, shall receive to themselves
damnation.

Saint Peter wills us to be subject to every Ordinance of man for the Lords
sake, that is, we are to subject our selves to every form of Government
lawfully established, and to persuade our selves that that Ordinance is of God:
Generally the Scriptures before alleged, oblige all persons of all Estates to
yield Obedience to him, and those in whom the Supreme Power resides; and there
cannot (...) brought any valuable reason why it is more lawful to resist the
Supreme Power in England, than in Israel or in Rome.

Indeed if they could produce a fundamental Law of the Kingdom, that did permit
the people of England in certain cases to take up Arms against the King, they
had some reason then to say that Saint Paul did not forbid the English to
resist their Prince, beyond the nature of their Laws, as the Princes of
Germany, Melchior Golodast. Tom. 3. p. 124.
when they took up Arms against the Emperor, produced the Golden Bull of
Charles the fourth, and the Emperial Capitulation, for by it they were expressly
permitted to make war against him, if he attempted any thing against their
ancient composition; although I account that this Capitulation could not be
made without contradicting the Command of the Apostle, for Histories mention
that the Emperor was reduced to it by the threatenings and Menaces of the Pope;
but now by long prescription, the Empire is not that it was, and it is a point
disputable what is the Supreme Power in diverse States of Germany.

It Is that which but of late has been put to the Question in England, and was
never disputed before the year 1642. where the Supreme Power of the Kingdom
resides, unless when the Crown was in dispute between two Princes: The Kings
enemies employed all their forces to prove that the Sovereign Authority
appertained to the people, to evade the Text of Saint Paul and other Texts of
Scripture, which did marvellously incommode their affairs, imitating those that
alter the Lock of their doors, when the Key is in possession of their
Adversary; for beholding to their great regret, that the Scripture is wholly
ours, commanding obedience, and strictly forbidding resistance to Sovereigns,
yea under pain of damnation, they labor with all their might to change the
nature of the State, that thereby the rules of subjection contained in the
Scripture might be of no use.

One of their Authors, of whom they make great account, Fuller Ans. p. 21.
affirms boldly, that the passages in Scripture against resisting the Supreme
Power are of no force, but in simple and absolute Monarchies, as that of the
Jews and Romans, and do no ways touch ours: This is a clean shaver, who cuts
the knot that he cannot untie; wherein he imitates the ingenuity of Buchanan,
Buchanan de Jure Reg. p. 57.
who having taught Subjects to punish their King, and feeling himself pressed
by Conscience, which suggested to him, that the Scripture was wholly contrary
to it, prevents the Objection that might be made, by maintaining, that it is ill
inferred to say that the thing is unlawful, because there is no such thing or
the like found in Scripture.

These their Confessions are very remarkable, and indeed most strange, coming
from Christians, who should rather frame their policy to Scripture, than reject
the Scripture, because it contradicts the policy they would establish: They
have found out an invention to cast off the yoke of their King, which is to
cast off that of the Word of God. After this so open a profession, it is against
all equity they should make use of Scripture for their cause, either in their
Writings or Sermons: They alledg nothing but examples, but there is no reason
that the examples should be made use of by them who reject the Commands, but
after they have turned themselves into as many postures as a Fencer, to defend
themselves against the invincible Text of the Apostle; in the end, hither they
are driven, to refuse wholly to debate the difference touching their duty to
their King by the Commands of Scripture. The last Figure of Proteus is the
Natural, and after all their tricks of Lying and Hypocrisy, at last their
Nature shows it self. In fine, when all is said, this is the only answer on
which they rest, that the Commands of Scripture cannot determine the point of
their resistance, and that we must have recourse to the Lawyers. This speech is
commonly in the mouths of all the wisest of their party, and let all Christian
Churches take notice of this their most shameful Evasion.

The Covenanters of England, who pretend to establish the Kingdom of Christ
according to the Word of God, refuse to be judged by the Commands of Scripture,
touching the War made against their Sovereign.

CHAP. V. What Constitution of State the Covenanters forge, and how they refuse
the Judgment of the Laws of the Kingdom.
TO elude the strength of humane Laws as well as divine, they forge a primitive
and fundamental Constitution of this Estate, destitute of all authority both of
God or man.

And here we must distinguish between their doctrine they taught in the
beginning of their Covenant, and that which they taught afterward; for then
when they were to fight with the King in the field, and were not yet capable o^
so high hopes as afterward they effected; they forged a form of State suitable
to their possibility then, which was to constrain the King by the Terror of
their Arms to accord to all that should please them, and wholly to put the
Government into their hands; notwithstanding their Principles then led them to
those Conclusions which since followed, for they supposed that the Sovereign
Power was inherent in the People, that the People elected the King, and had
committed to him the Authority that he exercised, reserving to themselves the
Power to assume it again when the State should judge it most convenient; and to
take away the sword of Justice and the Militia, to make use of it against him
if there were need. That the King had not the Supreme Power but by Paction,
which being once broke by him, the Subjects were exempted from their Obedience,
That he was only Depository of the Supremacy, but when the Estates were
assembled, the Supremacy was jointly possessed by him and the two Houses; so
that the King had but the thirds, and that but very hardly, for they held that
the States had a Negative voice, and the King could do nothing without their
consent; and whether the King had the Negative Voice of right they were not
ag^eed, but all accorded to take it away from him in effect; that is to say,
after their account, That the People might refuse the King what displeased
them; but if the King denied what the People propounded to him, they esteemed
that the two Houses might and ought to do it without him, and force him to it
by Arms; and this Doctrine has been confirmed by their practice, or to speak
the truth, this their practice has occasioned this Doctrine.

Now since God through his secret and incomprehensible Judgments, has suffered
the wickedness of this Age to have success above their desires, they built upon
these principles this Conclusion, that the People may judge and execute their
King, dissolve the Monarchy for ever, and turn it into an Aristocracy or
Popular Government: for yet they cannot agree to which they should hold
themselves; since then they would persuade us that the Constitution of the
English Government, exempts us from these two great dangers; Disobedience to
God, and damning our Souls in resisting the King; and since they would oblige
us for Conscience sake to oppose the King in obedience to God and the higher
Powers; and that our Clergy are commanded to exhort the people, that God has
commanded them to draw their Swords against their Sovereign; there is a
necessity to satisfy our Reason, and resolve our Consciences hereupon, to
enquire whether the Nature of the State be such as they have painted it out to
us.

And for this we have not referred our selves to those of the Royal party, but
have consulted with the most Judicious Writers of the Covenanters, who pass
amongst them as Oracles of the State, expecting that for proof of this form of
Government, they would have produced the old Records of the Kingdom, which are
now in their Custody, the ancient Statutes of Parliaments, and the Testimony
of their old Historians; but they allege no such things, though much pressed
thereunto by their Adversaries, only they make a Discourse in the Air upon the
Law of Nature, that has given to every person, and by consequent to every
Estate, a power for his preservation; troubling the Ignorant Readers brains
with barbarous terms, and thorny distinctions, Fullers Answer.
and extracting the Quintessence of the State into an invisible substance: They
tell us that the Parliament was coordinate, and not subordinate to the King;
That the three Estates of Parliament, whereof the King made one, being
fundamental, admitted not of the difference of Higher or Lower: That the power
of the King in Parliament was not Royal but Political: That this Fundamental
Law of the kingdom was not written, for if it were it should be superstructive,
and therefore Mutable, and not Fundamental: That the mixture of the three
Estates in Government was not Personal but Incorporate.

Those that understand not these Mystical sentences, ought to be nevertheless
content; it being not reasonable that they should understand them better then
the Authors themselves. An affected obscurity amongst Idiots passes for
knowledge; and ye shall find that the Discourses that have least reason in them
are most difficult, like Olive stones which are very hard, because there is
nothing in them.

Now is it not requisite to subtilize upon the virtuality and actuality of the
Peoples power, for to inform the Conscience of the Subject, touching the
Justice of his Arms against his King; but for that there is indeed need both of
Divine and Humane Authority, and such as is easy, and to be understood of all.
But the observation of Mr. du Moulin is very true, that ordinarily Lying arms
its weakness with thorns, like Lizards, who save themselves by running into
Bushes.

Above all in a point where the Question of Right is founded upon that of Fact;
as this Question now, whether it be lawful for the English to take up Arms
against their Prince, here to go about to satisfy Reason and Conscience with
political and metaphisical Contemplations is not to purpose, they should
(besides Divine Authority which should ever march before) enquire whether the
Laws and Constitutions of the Country authorize this War.

The Question being not to dispute which is the best Form of Government, but to
preserve the Form to which God has subjected us, and to observe the Laws of
the Kingdom, and after many Moral and Political Discourses (for our Adversaries
pay us with no other) those that have any Honesty or Understanding come always
to this, that they would show us by what Law of England it is permitted the
Subjects to take up Arms without the Kings permission, and against him: When
did the people ever make this Election? Where is it that they have reserved the
liberty to resume the Supreme Authority when they shall please? Is there any
Statute made during the Ages that this Monarchy has continued, that prefers or
equals the two Houses to the King, or does authorize them to ratify any thing
without him? Where is the Articles of that Capitulation which in some certain
cases dissolves the Subjects Oath of Allegiance? Is there any Case in the Law
in which it should be lawful for Subjects to take from their King or Supreme
Magistrate, his Forts, Navies, and Magazines, and to take into their hands the
sole Administration of Justice, and the Militia, to confer the great Offices of
the Crown, to receive Ambassadors, to treat with Foreign Nations, and to
dispose of the Goods and Lives of the Kings Subjects.

To these so important Questions, for the duty and happiness of all the members
of an Estate, and the eternal salvation of their Souls and Bodies, to answer
with Platonic considerations, and in stead of producing the Laws of the
Kingdom, to Philosophy upon the Law of Nature, and form an appeal from
Authentical and known Laws to a Word not written, made at pleasure; This is to
mock God and men, this is to insult upon the Brutality of the people, and to
take a wicked advantage from the wine of Astonishment or Senselessness, which
God in his just wrath has poured forth upon this miserable Nation; for if they
did believe there remained any common sense in this blind and mad people, durst
they so boldly return so ridiculous an Answer to those that demand where are
those Fundamental Laws written, Full. Ans. p. 6. l. 12.
that now make all other Laws bow to them, namely, that the Fundamental Laws
are not written, and that if they were, they should be superstructive, and not
fundamental; after this account the command to love God with all our heart, and
our Neighbor as our self, is not fundamental, because it is written; it were
to profane Reason to employ it to refute a reasoning so unreasonable; it must
needs be that these people know they have to do with Persons of great
credulity, since they dare give them for a Fundamental Law, a Fantasy which
they never heard before spoken of, and whereof no Writings nor Histories make
mention, and this is to fight against their King, overthrow the State, lose
their goods, hazard their Lives and Consciences: But what should I say? There
is no reason but is persuasive when the Conclusions are taken, and there is
strength to maintain them.

Christendom which have now their eyes upon our Broils, will take notice of
the open confession of the Troubles of this State* That for the War against the
King, and for the form of Government which they establish in the kingdom a
Superior power that abolisheth the Royal, they have no Fundamental Law
written: Is not this then marvellously to abuse the Justice of God, and the
patience of reasonable creatures made after his Image, and endued with
knowledge; to constrain them to prostitute their Consciences and Lives in a
Quarrel for which they openly confess there is not any Law written, and for
which there is not the least footing of Approbation, in all that has been
established, or left authentically written since England has been a Nation? We
have let you see before how they decline the Defenses of Scripture against the
resistance of Sovereigns; behold now they confess there is no fundamental Law
written for to justify their Arms, and the superiority of the people above the
King, which they would introduce with the sword; and thus they acknowledge they
have no authority neither divine nor humane for what they do; In his Oration
before the Three Estates, Jan. 15. 160^.
as Cardinal Perron having maintained the power of the Pope over the Temporal
of Kings, before the Estates of France, in conclusion affirmed, that it was an
Article which was not decided, neither by the Scriptures nor the Ancient
Church, so that the Pope and our Mutineers agree together to usurp an authority
upon Kings, without any ground or warrant in the Word of God, and contradicted
by all humane Constitutions, that is to say, that hoth God and man are contrary
unto them.

CHAP. VI. What Examples in the Histories of England the Covenanters make use
of to authorize their Actions.
BUt do we not much wrong them to say that there is nothing makes for them in
all the ancient Writings and Histories of this Kingdom? Do they not alledg the
two Parliaments that deposed Edward the second, and Richard the second, yea
truly, and to their great shame, Observations upon the Answers of his Majesty.
as the wisest of their party do acknowledge, affirming that those Acts of
Parliament against Richard the second, were not properly the Acts of the two
Houses, but of Henry the fourth, and his victorious Army, in which they say
true, for the Duke of Lancaster, who after caused himself to be called Henry
the fourth, having prevailed with the people to rise against their lawful King,
assembled a Parliament, which he made to do whatsoever he would, and having
deposed and imprisoned this poor King, soon after caused him to be put to
death; though this action were as just, as it is execrable, yet it would make
nothing to the purpose, where the Question is, of that which the two Houses may
do, separate from the King; for the deposing of King Richard was by another
King sitting in Parliament; for until these last States, the two Houses never
thought that they were able to conclude any thing without the Royal Consent;
and since, the Parliaments held under the House of York, declared Henry the
fourth Usurper of the Crown, and therefore condemned the Parliament which had
confirmed his usurpation.

The other example is no better than this, the deposing of Edward the second,
by the Conspiracy of his Wife, and the Favorites of this Queen, who served
themselves of a Parliament to execute this wickedness, and having deposed the
King, and crowned his Son, who was under age, caused the Father to be most
cruelly put to death in prison, and yet the authority of the young K. must be
made use of to make the resolution of the Parliament pass into an Act; for
without the King the Parliament can no more act, than a Body without a Head:
But when the young King came to age, he caused the Authors and Accomplices of his
Fathers death to be executed, and caused all the Acts of this Parliament to be
broken by another.

And less than these to the purpose is, which they alledg, concerning the
accord the Barons extorted from King John, by which this unhappy and imprudent
King being reduced to a straight, promised to put himself into the power of
twenty five of his Barons, and submitted himself to diverse other dishonorable
Conditions; and this accord was not made in Parliament, but in the field by
force of Arms, there being no Parliament then sitting, and therefore was of no
force, nor was ever kept.

These Articles of the Barons were much like those the two Houses sent the King
to Beverly, Oxford and New Castle; the Covenanters imitate these Barons in
their affectation of Piety, for they called their General the Marshal of the
Lords Army, and of his holy Church, and these persuaded their Chiefs that they
led the Battles of the Lord of Hoasts, but these transferred not the Crown to
another Prince, as the Barons did, but have taken away both his Crown and Life,
having long before declared by writing to their King, that they dealt very
favorably with him if they did not depose him, and that if they did, they
should not exceed the Limits of Modesty, nor of their Duty. This Judgment was
pronounced in the House of Commons without contradiction that, The King might
fall from his Office, that the happiness of the Kingdom did not depend upon
him, nor the Royal Branches of his House, and that he did not deserve to be
King of England: The Authors of these Opinions are declared in a Declaration of
his Majesty's. Dec. Aug. 12. 1642.
In one point the Barons and Covenanters are very different; for the Lords that
remained with the Covenanters were without power, all places of Honor and
Trust being taken out of their hands by their Inferiors, and at last their
House abolished by the Commons, so that in stead of producing this War of the
Barons, the Covenanters should rather have alleged the Seditions and
Commotions of Watt Tyler and Jack Straw, poor Artisans, and followed with
people of the same rank; for these persons and the Cause of the Covenanters are
far more alike.

Behold here with what authorities the Margins of their Books are stuffed!
Behold the Examples which the politicians of the times present to the Gentlemen
of the Parliament for to teach them what they ought to do; those infamous
actions which were abhorred by the ages following them, are become the
supporters of ours; and despair, which makes men snatch up any sorts of
weapons, forces our enemies to justify their actions by the examples of
Rebels and Paricides; it is not for nothing then that these Histories are so
often alleged, though nothing to the purpose, and it is not without cause that
they print them apart; for not being able to justify their actions, they have
declared their intentions, and made the King to see what he sholud trust to, if
he fell into their hands: Certainly, if there had not been a design laid to
come to that, both to prepare the people and intimidate the King, those
incendiaries who by these horrible examples, and their Maxims of State
grounded thereupon, teaching the deposing of Kings, should have been hanged
long since with their Books about their necks: For so many men which are
studied in the Laws of the Kingdom, and are at the helm of affairs, cannot be
ignorant of that which King James of happy and glorious memory, marks in his
Book of the Right of Kings, that in the time of Edward the Third, there was an
Act of Parliament made, which declared all them Traitors, who imagined (it is
the word of the Law) or conspired the death of the King; ^on which Act the
Judges grounding themselves, have always judged them for Traitors who dared
but to speak of deposing the King, because they believed that they could not
take away the Crown from off the Kings Head without taking away his Life. It
was heretofore a crime worthy of death to speak, yea to think evil against the
King, and moreover the Word of God which is to be obeyed, forbids us to speak
evil of the King, no not in our thought; but now it is the exercise of devout
Souls to write Meditations upon the deposing of their King.

CHAP. VII. Declaring wherein the Legislative Powers of Parliament consists.
HAving no better Authorities in all the Examples of the Ages past, they
establish a New one, which by the unlimited largeness, supplies what it wants
of length of time; for when we require to be governed by the Laws, they answer
us, that the Parliament is the Oracle of the Laws; that it is for that great
Court to declare what is Law and what is not, to interpret the Laws, to
dispense with them, or to make new ones.

That themselves are the Parliament, excluding all others; and that since they
have declared that this War is according to Law, and that such Maxims as they
give us, are fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, we must remit our selves to them,
and receive for Law what they ordain.

But because strangers may read, who have no knowledge of the Government of
England; for to examine this Imperious reason, we are obliged to declare here
what we know touching the present affairs.

We have learned to acknowledge the Parliament (...) England for the Supreme
Court of the Kingdom, that can make and unmake Laws, and from whose Judgment
there is no appeal: But of this Court the King is the principal part, and it is
he that renders it sovereign; the two Houses in all their Legislative Acts
acknowledge him their true and sole Sovereign, the House of Lords only can evert
the Judgment of the Courts of Justice, but not their own, without the consent
of the King and the House of Commons; the House of Commons is not a Judicial
Court, having not power to administer an Oath, inflict a Fine, or imprison any,
but those of the^r own House; and these two neither apart nor together, cannot
make a Law; but when they would enact any thing, they both together present a
Writing to the King in form of a request; if the King approves of them; the
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal answers for the King in these French words, Le
Roy le veult, and then it is made an Act; but if the King refuses it, he
returns answer, Le Roy S'avisera, and the business passes no further: Before
the consent of the King, the proposition of the two Houses contained in the
Writing, is like unto that which the Romans called Rogatio; but when the King
grants it, they may then give it the name of Lex; and in effect, it is but a
request before the pleasure of the King makes it pass into a Law, and was never
other before this present Parliament.

Therefore the English Lawyers call the King the life of the Law, for though
the King in Parliament cannot make any Law without the concurrence of the two
Houses, yet nevertheless it is his Authority only that gives it the strength and
Name of a Law; and they are so far from having any Legal Authority in their
Commands, without the consent of the King, that the customary right gives them
not so much as a Name, neither takes any Cognizance of them.

To say then that the Parliament has declared this War lawful, and that the
Orders of Parliament are Laws, is by an ambiguous term to abuse the ignorance
of the people; for by the Parliament they understand sometimes one House,
sometimes both; and sometimes the King and both Houses together; it is thus that
men understand them, when they speak of the Supreme Court of Parliament, and of
Acts of Parliament; for the King was ever accounted the first of the three
Estate, without whom the two other had not power to conclude any thing
lawfully, for all their Authority is derived from him, not only for a time, but
by a continual Influence, which being interrupted, the power of necessity
cease^h.

These three together have power to interpret the Laws, to revoke them, and to
make others, therein properly lies the Oracle of the Laws. A Judicious Writer
of the Royal party, calls the union of the three Estates, the Sacred Tripos,
from whence the Oracles of the Law are pronounced.

When any one of these three are separate from other, the other two stagger and
are lame, nor cannot serve for a firm foundation for the safety of the State,
and satisfaction of the Subjects Conscience.

But let us assume the business higher, you cannot more vex our Enemies than to
tell them this Truth, that the Monarchy which is at this day, began by
Conquest, this is that which by no means they will endure to hear of, but would
persuade men that it began by an Election and Covenant, which indeed had never
any being but in their own Fancies. If they would be believed for this, they
should then produce some Records. For the bold conjecturers are less credible
than all the Histories, which assures us of three Conquests in this Kingdom,
since the Romans and Picts, Namely, that of the Saxons, Danes and Normans.

Moreover, those that would abolish this Office and Dignity, destroy that of
their own Laws, for all the Lands of the Kingdom are held of the King by right
of the Sword, as appears by the nature of Homages and Services that the Lords
of Fiefes owe to the King, when William the Conqueror took possession of the
Kingdom, strengthening the Right of his Conquest by the last Will and
Testament of Edward the Confessor; he declared himself Master of all the Land,
and disposed of it according to his pleasure.

His Son Henry the first eased the People somewhat of the severe and unlimited
Government of his Father, and confirmed to the English their ancient
privileges, which since after long and bloody wars, were anew confirmed, and
the Quarrel determined by that wise King Edward the first, who having as much
valor as wisdom, in condescending to the Rights of his Subjects, knew well how
thereby to preserve his own, for after all, the Sovereignty of Kings remained
inviolable, and those preroga^ives were preserved which were only proper to him
who is not subject but to God alone. Such also is the Court of Wards, by which
a great many Orphans of the Kingdom are in Wardship to the King, and almost all
the Lands appertaining to him until they be of Age. In this thing the Kings of
England exceed all other Christian Princes. This being such an essential mark
of absolute Sovereignty that there cannot be a greater. Certainly, if this
Monarchy had begun either by Election or Covenant, the Subjects would never
have given the King so vast a power over their Estates and Families.

Amongst the privileges of the English, these three are the principal. That
the King cannot make a Law without the consent of his Estates. That no Law made
in Parliament, can be revoked but in Parliament; and that the King can levy no
moneys of his Subjects be^^des his ordinary Revenues, without the concurrence
of the Two Houses, in the intervals of Parliaments; the King according to his
Supreme Power may make Edicts seem burdensome to the Subjects, or to impair
their Laws and Privileges, they humbly present them in the next Parliament,
and the K. when the complaint appears just un^o him, eases them; for to make
their requests pass for Acts without the pleasure of the K. they cannot,
neither can the K. make new Acts in Parl. without their consent.

In the mean while, the King makes not them partakers of his Authority, but
assembling them in Parliament, he renders them capable to limit his Authority,
in Cases that appertain to their cognizance; for there are many cases wherein
they are not to meddle at all, in the point of the Militia, and for fear they
should forget that, even this power they have to limit the King, comes from the
Authority of the King, and he can take it away from them when he pleases; for
when he breaks up the Parliament, he retires to himself the Authority that he
gave them to limit his; and moreover if they stretch their privileges beyond
the pleasure of the King, he has power to dissolve the Parliament, and after
the word of the King is passed which discharges them, and sends them away,
they have not power to sit or consult a minute.

Whence Bodinus (well versed in the nature of the States of Christendom)
concludes the King of England to have Sovereign Authority; The Estates of
England, Bodin. de Repub. lib. 1. cap. 8.
says he, cannot be assembled nor dissolved, but by the Edict of the Prince,
no more then in France and Spain; which proves sufficiently that the Assemblies
have no power of themselves to command or forbid a thing; and he laughs at the
ignorance of Bellaga, who affirm the States of Arragon to be above their King,
and yet nevertheless confesses the States cannot assemble nor separate without
him; Illud Novum and plane absurdum, That (says he) is New, and altogether a
most absurd Doctrine: And therefore it was that which occasioned them, who had
a design to overthrow Church and State to labor to draw a promise from his
Majesty, that the late long Parliament should not be dissolved without the
consent of both Houses, well knowing, that without that granted, the King when
he pleased might have overturned their designs; which they having obtained,
showed by their Actions that they thought themselves then privileged to do
what they would without his Authority, and thus it is with us at this day.

Yet so it is, that they themselves do confess that this grant did not alter
the Nature of the two Houses, and the Gentlemen of the Parliament have often
protested that they would not make use of this Act of Grace to the disadvantage
of his Majesty: so then if there were no Sovereignty resident in the two Houses
before this grant, there is no more after, and the pretended Fundamental Laws
not written, that parts Sovereignty between the King and his Subjects, yea that
transport it wholly to the people, are much to be suspected of falsity, since
they never appear; but since the promise they obtained of the King (both to his
and their great damage) to perpetuate this Parliament as long as they pleased,
and since they have begun to exercise the Sovereignty by force of Arms. Thus
the new Nobility after they had obtained the Firss by right or wrong, produce
Coats of Arms and Titles which were heretofore unknown.

They maintain this their New Sovereignty by a Maxim of Stephanus, Junius,
Brutus, Rex est singulis Major and universis Minor, That is to say (as they
expound it) That the King is the Sovereign of Particulars, but the
Representative body of the State is greater then he, and have Sovereignty over
him; and all their Writers (and amongst others the Observator on the Kings
Answers) attribute Majesty to the Commonalty, and not to the King or Supreme;
if this be true, it is very strange how this Representative Body of the State,
the Parliament, have left it so long time to the Kings, the Court of Wards, and
many other Rights of Sovereignty, which they have enjoyed without
Contradiction, until that present Parliament.

This vile Maxim then being destitute of all proofs from the Laws and Customs
of the State, ought to be despised; but moreover it is also void of all reason,
for if the English be subject to their King in Retail, are they not in Gross;
if in pieces, not in the whole? being born Subjects, have they power to give
the Sovereignty to their Deputies or Parliament men, and make them Chief? that
is to say, can they give them that which they have not? And seeing also that
they cannot assemble in Parliament without the King or Supreme Magistrates
Writ; this Writ of the Kings does it render them forthwith Sovereigns above the
King? The style of the Writ calls them, ad Consul. andum de quibusdam arduis,
to consult with him, about some difficult affairs, and not to master him, and
to dispose of his Authority.

And since they call this great Court, the Body Representative of Subjects,
they must needs then be Subjects, otherwise they should not represent them who
sent them, and that which the King accords to, should be granted to Sovereigns,
but his Subjects should receive no benefit thereby: He who will well examine
this Proposition; That the Sovereignty over the Sovereign rests in the
Representative body of Subjects, shall find it full of contradictions, and to
destroy it self.

Bodin. de Repub. l^b. 1. cap. 8.
They cannot bring any probable reason (says Bodin.) that the Subjects ought
to command their Prince, and that the Assembly of Estates ought to have any
power, unless when the Prince is under age, or distracted, or captive, then the
Estates may depute him a Regent or Lieutenant. Otherwise, if Princes were
subject to the Laws of the States, and Commands of the people, their Power were
nothing, and the Title of a King would be a Name without the thing; moreover,
under such a Prince the Commonwealth should not be governed by the people, but
by some few persons equal in their Suffrages, who who would make Laws and
Edicts, not by the Authority of the Prince, but by their own; who for all that
come and present him humbly with requests, every one apart by himself, and all
in a body making show of Faithfulness and Obedience, these things are as
ridiculous as can be imagined: thus says Bodin. Behold here the Form of State
of our Covenanters in their beginning, so drawn to the life by this learned
Person, that one would say, he took the very Copy from them: In effect, when
(under a Monarchy) a Faction in an Assembly of States shall take upon them the
Sovereignty, the State change not into an Aristocracy nor Democracy, but into a
pure Obligarchy, which is the worst of all Forms of State, and but the
corruption of others. The Royal Power being once usurped, it is not then the
greatest, nor the best, nor the most, who govern the affairs; but some few
unquiet and ambitious persons, who love contention, and know how to fish in
troubled waters; and as these men deceive the King with a false Idea of
Sovereignty, so they deceive their companions, persuading them that the have
part in their Authority, because they have voices in the House, for in such
Assemblies where the choice of persons, is more by hap then Judgment, the
Suffrage is to all, but the Power is in a few. The same Author, numbering the
Sovereign and absolute Monarchies of Christendom, places England and Scotland
amongst them; and says, That without all Question, their Kings have all the
rights of Majesty, and that it is not lawful for their Subjects neither apart
nor in a Body, to attempt any thing against the Life, Reputation, or Goods of
their Sovereign, be it either by ways of Force or Justice; De Repub. lib. 2.
cap. 5.
although he were guilty of all the crimes a man could imagine in a Tyrant.

For the Subjection that the Parliament owe to their King, we can have no
better witness then the Parliament it self; for that disloyal maxim, that the
body of the State is above the King, is contradicted by the ordinary style of
their papers presented to the King by this Body: The Two Houses most humbly
beseech their Sovereign Lord the King, and they qualify themselves, the most
humble and loyal subjects of his Majesty. It Is the Presentative Body of the
Kingdom who speaks, and nothing by way of Complement, but Duty. This Preface
has an excellent Grace in the beginning of a Declaration of the Two Houses to
their King, wherein they tell him, that they deal favorably with him, if they
do not depose him, and that they may do it without exceeding the limits of
their Duty and Modesty. This discourse is like the Locusts of the bottomless
pit, Revelations 9. which had the faces of men, but the tails of Scorpions; and
therefore to avoid this disproportion, in their Articles presented to the King
at New Castle, they left out the Qualification of Subjects.

The ordinary Preface of Statutes do lively express the Nature of the three
Estates: The King by the Advice and Consent of the Prelates, Earls and Barons,
and at the instance and request of the Commonalty has ordained, etc. For it is
the King alone properly that ordains; the Peers as Counselors advise and
Consent, the Commons as Suppliants require and solicit. The Parliament held in
the twenty fourth year of Henry the Eight, speaks thus: By diverse ancient and
authentical Histories, and Chronicles, it is manifestly declared that this
Kingdom of England is an Empire, and for such has been known in the world,
governed by one Sovereign Head, having the dignity and Royal greatness of the
Emperial Crown, to which there is a Body Politic joined, composed of all sorts
and degrees of people, as well Spiritual as Temporal, who are bound next to
God, to render unto him Natural Obedience. If the Body Politic be naturally
subjected to him as to its Head, it is contrary to Nature, that it should be
subjected to the Body Politic; and his maxim, R^x est universis minor, is
condemned as false by the Parliament; they knew not in those days what it was
to make the Body of the State march with its head downward, and feet upward,
but they were careful to maintain the Head in that eminent place where God had
set it; and hither also tend the words following, That the chief Sovereign is
instituted and furnished by the goodness and permission of Almighty God, with
full and entire Power, Pre-eminence, Authority, Prerogative and Jurisdiction,
to execute Justice, and put a final determination in all Cases to all sorts of
his Subjects within this Kingdom; and that many Laws and Ordinances, had been
made in preceding Parliaments for the full and sure conserving of the
prerogative and pre-eminence of this Crown. These good Subjects, could not find
words enough, nor consult of means sufficient according to their mind, to
defend the Authority of their King, esteeming (and well they might) that the
happiness and liberty of the Subjects lay in the inviolable power of their
Sovereign, that the greatness of the State consisted in that of the Prince, and
that there is no other way to crown the Body, but to place the Crown upon the
Head.

This style is very far from that of the nineteen Propositions presented to the
King by the Two Houses in the beginning of the War; which required that all
matters of State should be treated of only in Parliament, or if the King would
treat of any Affairs in his Council, this Council should be limited to a
certain number, and the old Counselors cashiered, unless such whom it pleased
the Two Houses to retain, and that none hereafter should be admitted without
their approbation; that the King should have no power in the Education and
Marriage of his children without their advice; that all great Officers of the
Crown, and the principal Judges, should always be chosen by the approbation of
the Two Houses, or by a Council authorized by them; the same also in Governors
of places, and in the Creation of Peers, which has since been denied to the
King in effect. And as for the Militia, they would have the King wholly put it
into their hands, that is to say, he should take his Sword from his side and
give it them, which he could not do without giving them the Crown; for the
Crown and the Royal Sword are both of one piece; so also for the point of
Religion, these propositions take from him all Authority and liberty of
judgment, yea, even the liberty of Conscience; for they require that his
Majesty consent to such a Reformation as the Two Houses should conclude upon,
without telling him what this Reformation is. Let all the world here judge if
these men speak like Subjects; they had reason to present these Articles with
their swords in their hands, but the King had more reason to draw his to return
them an answer.

All these propositions are founded upon one only proposition, which passes
amongst them for a Fundamental Law, That the King is bound to grant to the
People all their Demands: but this is a Fundamental in the Air, and made void
by the practice of all Ages since Eng. was a Monarchy, and by that Authentical
Judgment of the States assembled under Henry the Fifth; 2 Hen. 5.
That it belongs to the Supremacy of the King to grant or refuse, according to
his pleasure, the Demands that are made to him in Parliament: And in stead of
the House of Commons, being as it is now the Sovereign Court, a thing never
heard of until this present Age; The House supplicated Henry the Fourth, Ola.
magna charta Diar. Hen. 4.
not to employ himself in any Judgment in Parliament, but in such cases as in
effect appertained to him, because it belonged to the King alone to judge,
except in cases specified by the Statutes.

The same House under Edward the Third, 3 Edw. 3.
acknowledged that it did not belong to them to take Cognizance of such matters
as the keeping of the Seas, or the Marshes of the Kingdom; yea, even during
the sitting of Parliaments, the Kings have always disposed of the Militia, and
Admiralty, of the Forts and Garrisons, the Two Houses never interposing or
pretending any right thereunto, they declared ingeniously to Edw. the First, 7
Edw. 1.
that to him belonged to make express Command against all Force of Arms, and to
that end they were bound to assist him, as their Sovereign Lord.

They declared also to King Henry the Seventh, that every Subject by the duty
of his subjection, was bound to serve and assist his Prince and Sovereign Lord
upon all occasions: by which they signified, that it was not for them to meddle
with the Militia; but that their duty as Subjects bound them to be aiding and
assisting to him.

The Learned in the Laws tell us, that to raise Troops of Horse or Foot without
Commission of the King, or to lend Aid, is esteemed and called by the Law of
England, to levy war against the King our Sovereign Lord, his Crown and
Dignity: In this point all that is done without him, is done against him, and
this is conformable to the general Right of all Nations; As for the Royal
Estate (says Bodin.) I believe there is no person that doubts that all the
Power, both of making Peace and War, belongs to the King, since none dare in
the least manner do any thing in this matter without the Command of the King,
unless he will forfeit and endanger his Head. If the Two Houses were
privileged to the contrary by any Statute, we should have heard them speak it,
but for what they have done, we see no other Authority then their practice.

Therefore none ought to wonder if this their new practice has less Authority
with persons of a sound judgment, then these practices of all ages past: and
if we cannot persuade our selves that without the Authority of the King they
cannot abolish those of Parliaments Authorized by the King, let them not then
make such a loud noise with the Authority of Parliament; It Is in obedience to
that Supreme Court of Parliament that we so earnestly strive to preserve the
Princes Rights: those Acts of Parliament are in full force which have provided
with great care to defend the Royal Prerogatives, judging aright, that the
Sovereignty is the Pillar of the public safety, and that it cannot be divided
without being weakened, and without shaking the State that rests upon it; But we
leave the reasons of the form of this Estate to them who formed it, contenting
our selves to obey the Laws, until the same Authority that made them alters and
changes them.

This Authority being that of the Prince sitting in Parliament, we hold not our
selves bound by that which passes in any House or Council without him, and
against him, accounting that where the Princes Authority shines not, their
power is eclipsed; above all since the Houses at Westminster were reduced to
the fourth part of their number, Ut igitur in naturalibus Capite de truncato
residuum non Corpus sed Truncum appellamus, sic in politicis sine Capite
Communitus nulla tenus corporatur. Fortescue cap. 13.
and the lesser part (the major part being frighted away) and filled their
vacant places with persons of their own judgment, without the Kings Authority;
if the Houses had ever any Power without him, it was like the light of the Moon
without the Sun, Exiguum and malignum Lumen, as the Astrologers call it, it was
a little light which did naught but hurt.

Our great Lawyer Fortescue speaks well, that as a Natural Body when the Head
is cut off, is not called a Body, but a Trunck; so in the Body Politic, the
Commonalty without a Head, cannot any way incorporate or make a Body.

CHAP. VIII. How the Covenanters will be Judges in their own Cause.
BUt was there ever any thing more unreasonable then this proceeding? They
would that the judgment of the Lesser part of the Two Houses without the King,
and against all former Parliaments, should be received, yea, in their own
Quarrel; and that in the Controversy, whether the King has Authority above
this Assembly, or it above him, this Assembly will be judge; it is for them
(they tell us) to declare what is Law, and to make the Law: Now that Assembly
declares, that their Authority is above the King, that their Arms are just, and
the Kings unjust; and that the Representative Body of the State cannot err in
Law, and that it is your duty to stand to their judgment.

These people would be ashamed to confess where they have learned thus to
reason: Is it not of him who said, Dic Ecclesiae, hoc est tibi ipsi; Tell it to
the Church, that is to say, to thy self; and truly to confute them, we will do
them the shame, to employ the same words we make use of against him, changing
only the persons.

In the present Quarrel, Judge of Controversy, cap. 5 p. 103.
one of the Controversies is, Whether the Two Houses at Westminster, without
the King, are the Sovereign Judges in point of Law. In this Controversy should
the Two Houses be Judges, they should then be Judges in their own Cause, and
should be assured to gain their process. Item, if it be disputed whether they
can err in this Controversy also, they would judge they could not err?
Should they be Infallible Judges of their Infallibility? Who beholds not in
this an evident contradiction? That it must be, that he that disputes whether
the Two Houses can err, must address himself to the Two Houses, as to Judges
that cannot err, to judge this Question; so likewise in the Question, whether
the Authority of the Two Houses be above the King, it is certain that the Two
Houses cannot be Judges, since by this same Question their Authority to Judge
is called into doubt, the one pretends, that the difference has been decided
and judged by the Authority of a Sovereign and infallible Judge; it is certain
that hereby he renders the wound incurable, the quarrel eternal, and beyond all
terms of reconciliation.

It matters not to say, that between two parties that pretend to the
Sovereignty; there can be no Judge, but that the strongest must carry it; for
if the two parties desire peace, they may choose Arbiters. The King or Supreme
being the Natural Sovereign of his Enemies, and he who gives vigor to the Laws,
has desired notwithstanding, that the difference should be determined by the
Laws, he pretends not to infallibility: He has also often chosen his
Neighbors for Arbiters, and has fully satisfied them by reasonable offers,
and such as are worthy of him; witness the Report that the extraordinary
Ambassadors of the States Generals made to their Lords, for which the
Parliament of London declared their great discontent in writings: The King
being to render account of his Actions to none but God alone, submitted himself
notwithstanding to Reason and Piety, remitting himself wholly to the Ancient
Laws and Constitutions of his Kingdom.

He has often protested, and oft-times published, and in this difference taken
all Christendom for Arbiters; but what? in the Question whether his Subjects
can make a Law against him, and whether they have right to make war on him, and
would also that he should remit himself to their Ordinances; yea, even those
which they have made without him, against his will, and against himself; and
that he should acknowledge them for Supreme Judges in their own cause, without
other Arbiters then their will: Now they have had their wills wholly, and have
been Judges and parties both together, a privilege that belongs to God alone*
to whose Supreme Court we appeal.

CHAP. IX. That the most Noble and best part of the Parliament retired to the
King, being driven away by the worser.
THat which does strongly persuade us to believe, that the Privileges of
Parliament, which they would extend even in infinitum, have an ill foundation,
is because we have seen them opposed by the better part of the Parliament, both
in Quality and Dignity: For besides the King, an hundred seventy five of the
House of Commons, and the best qualified, withdrew themselves from amongst
them, and of the Lords eighty three, so that scarcely the third part remained
at Westminster. Almost all the Gentry wholly followed the King; and when we consider
the persons, the Condition and Revenues of those that withdrew themselves, we
cannot see that they had any need to fish in troubled waters, or to warm
themselves at the Great Fire that began to slame, as those had that remained.
Without doubt that great Body of Lords and Gentlemen of the Kingdom loved
their Liberty, and would never have assisted the King to have obtained an
unlimited power, break their Privileges, and impose a perpetual yoke of
slavery upon them and their posterity.

When need was, these Members of Parliament assembled themselves, and the King
deferred to their Councels as much as their Privileges required: Whereupon
those of the Parliament of London were extraordinarily vexed, maintaining that
the Name and Power of Parliament, was from that time fastened to the place
where they sat, which is a point that we will not dispute, how strange soever
it be; but we would have them remember, that they have had their sitting in
other places, and have not for all that thought they had left their Authority
at Westminster; and we dare answer for them, that if the Lords and Commons
which held with the King, had driven them away, and taken their place, they
would soon have changed their Opinion.

Besides this strong consideration of numbers and persons, all those who know
that the King is the Fountain of Authority, and that without him there is no
more lawful Power, then day without the sun, would never make question which
were the true Parliament, that which acted with him, or that which rose up and
fought against him. But alas since, force and necessity has constrained many
poor Lords to return and bow to their unjust power.

It would be too long to relate all the reasons that moved in the beginning, so
many persons of Honor to withdraw themselves from London, in the general they
loved their Religion, their King and Country; and could not consent to the
general disorder of Church and State, nor hinder it in gainsaying.

For a Sample of their proceedings, which they used to drive them away, we will
only commend to the Judicious Reader the Petition (...) the baser sort of
people of London, presented to the House of Commons, and by that House, to the
House of Lords, Anno 1641.
To exhort the Lords to sit no longer apart from the House of Commons, but to
make one whole and entire body together, and to join with them, and that they
would agree to an equality in the State, to procure an equality in the Church,
and for a while to forsake their power of Lords to subdue the pride of the
King; adding withal, That if they gave not a speedy remedy to the obstructions
which retarded the happy progress of the great pains they took, they should be
forced to have recourse to the Remedy they had in their hands, and to destroy
the Disturbers of their peace, requiring the House that they would publicly
declare to them who they were.

Judge ye in what Commonwealth these people lived, who durst present such a
Petition, and if there appeared not a sworn hatred against all Greatness and
Superiority, and a design formed to change this Noble and Ancient Monarchy into
a Commonwealth, like that of Munster. Oh what impudence! to dare to solicit
the House of Lords at one blow to lose both their Rights and Honors, to
consent to an equality in the State, which was to debase them, and even to put
them in their shirts, and oblige them to depose the King, and to render him
like to the meanest of the people: For observe, they would have an equality in
the State, like unto that of the Church, where all Ministers are Companions.
The Royal Dignity they call pride, and would seduce the Nobility, which is the
Kings right hand, to mine the head from whence their honor takes life and
motion; and this urged with Menaces to destroy them, and Bravado's that the
lives of the great ones were in their hands. Behold here that of the Prophet
Isaiah fulfilled, Isa. 3.5. The base shall behave himself proudly against the
Honorable.

These Petitioners in ^he Title of their Petition qualified themselves, The
poorest of the people, and such indeed they were; so little in their condition,
that a great person offended would have scorned to have taken notice of them,
and yet so strong in their number, that there was neither greatness nor power
that could resist them; in this double regard they were chosen, to speak aloud
the intentions that their Leaders would, but durst not otherwise make known,
and that they might bear the blame without danger, as proceeding from the
insolence and ignorance of a brutish and ill bred people.

Notwithstanding the charity of the House of Commons discharged this poor
people of the blame, and took it upon themselves. This Story is related in the
Kings declaration of August 12, Anno 1642.
For these Gentlemen, did they not in a body themselves present this so
unworthy a Petition to the House of Lords, witnessing thereby that the
Petition, and the seditious souls of those people which clamoured at their
doors, was a work of their own. Oh how will they palliate over this vile
action? All the water in the Sea cannot wash away their shame, to favor so
villainous a Petition, in stead of making the bearers feel the effects of their
just indignation. This base multitude might have been frighted and dispersed by
an angry look or word of this great and Noble House of Lords, but this
rascality had friends in the Parliament, who emboldened them to rise, thereby
to make use of their assistance: For the same day (the seditious Rabble
remaining there to serve them who sent for them) the Ordinance to take the
Militia from the King, which had twice been cast out of the Lords House, was
again presented to them the third time by the House of Commons, with
threatenings, giving them openly to understand, that if the House of Lords did
not join with the Commons in point of the Militia, those amongst them that were
of the Commons opinion, should do wisely to make them publicly known, that so
they might distinguish their Friends from their Foes. This being seconded by
the great cries of the mutinous people about the House of Parliament, the most
part of the Lords arose and left their places, and amongst the Lords who
remained, those who were for the Militia, for fear or otherwise, carried it by
some voices.

Soon after many of both Houses withdrew themselves without ever returning; it
was time to part company, when thy could not Vote without hazzarding their
lives or Consciences: For the Names of the Lords and Commons which pleased not
the Zealous party, were posted up to make them flee, or to be torn a pieces by
the enraged multitude.

And thus the small party of the two Houses drove away the greater; as a few
Hornets which dispeoples the whole Hive; being assisted herein by the insolent,
hypocritical and meaner sort of people, which were at their beck, through the
Industry of some seditious Preachers of the populous Parishes of London, where
the Brownists and Anabaptists abounded.

By the same Instruments the Lords had been before constrained to pass the
Ordinance for taking away the Bishops Votes in Parliament.

By the same Instruments also the King was driven from his House and chief
City, when the Factious affrighted a peaceable and disarmed King, arming the
people, and manning out Vessels of War on the Thames, besieging the Royal
Palace, under color of being a Guard to the six Members, whom the King had
accused of high Treason, to conduct them to Westminster, in spite of him; but
the King some hours before retired himself to save his life, and returned not
after.

In requital of the many good services of the people, their Masters at
Westminster permitted them all kind of liberty, and indeed they taught the
people that lewd licentiousness, who before were kept in obedience by an
excellent Government, and could hardly be brought to become so vile and
insolent; but there is nothing but in time one may learn, by exhortations and
examples; and it appeared by their actions, how well they had profited in this
Art, for when the House of Lords would have reproved them, the House of Commons
were offended with the Lords, and made this open profession to them, That they
should not discourage their friends, and that they had need of their service.
And thus these Masters and the Factious people, granted one another mutual
liberty, and they forgave the people their passed Insolences, on condition
they would commit new ones.

But when the honest and most understanding of the City came in a good number
to petition the two Houses to hearken to peace, and satisfy the King, they
were severely rebuked, as seditious; and these Gentlemen let them know that
they loved no noise but of their own making. Behold here the ways whereby the
Parliament of London obtained their absolute power! Behold the Foundations they
laid for a most holy Reformation!

Posterity will be ashamed of the Actions of their Fathers all Foreign Nations
will abhor these proceedings; remorse and sorrow may in the end enter into the
hearts of the Londoners, when they shall behold themselves the sole object of
public Execrations and curses. Those of Gaunt and Paris have only reason to
pardon them, when they shall remember their Baracado's, and the estate of the
Nobles during the holy League.

CHAP. X. A Parallel of the Covenant with the holy League of France, under
Henry the 3d.
WHo so shall compare the holy League of France with the English Covenant,
shall find that they are sisters, daughters of the same Father, and that the
younger is to the life after the Image of the Elder; in both you shall find an
Oath of mutual assistance to extirpate Heresy, without the Authority of the
King, and which at last is turned against the King himself: A Jealousy without
ground of the Religion of their Sovereign, and a War of Religion against a King
of the same Religion, which they would make the world believe was a Heretic. A
League with strangers, and Armies raised in the Kingdom against their natural
Prince, who gave them no other occasion of the War but his too much Gentleness.
A King submitting himself to reason, offering himself to remedy all the
grievances of his Subjects, and a people refusing to admit him to bring a
remedy, and resolved to give order without him, the King driven from his chief
City, which he had honored by his ordinary presence. The fire of civil war
blown about by seditious preachers. The superstitious people tributary to the
ambition of some particulars, weak Conscience instructed to cut the throat of
their King, for the love of God, and to gain Paradise; fastings frequent,
Devotions doubled, Prophetical Inspirations, Examples of Angelical Holiness,
and all this to persuade the superstitious people, that God favored their
Seditions as his cause, and that their Leaders took Counsel of none but the
Holy Ghost, and had no other aim but the setting up of the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ: Writers under pay to write scandalous libels against their King; the
people fed with lies to drain money out of their purses, one while amazing them
with fears where there was none, another while flattering them with false hopes
and with forged news: A Parliament in the principal City, but in it a small
number, who wanting the Royal assistance, support themselves by granting
liberty to an inveagled people, and by power of rich and foolish Citizens.
Nobility scorned; Artificers and Banquerouts bearing the sway, all Order Divine
and Humane overturned, the ancient Laws and Customs broken, and new
fundamental Laws never heard of before, in their places. In brief, it appears
at this day, that the Devil marches abroad, and walks in the same paths he did
about fifty years since.

CHAP. XI. The Doctrine of the English Covenanters paralleled with the Doctrine
of the Jesuits.
SInce the League of France and the English Covenant were both made upon
pretense of Religion, it is not unworthy our pains to consider the conformity
of the Doctrines they employed to maintain both the one and the other, and how
the Jesuits Maxims were the chief support of the Covenant.

Both in the League and Covenant, the people were encouraged to take up Arms
against their King, by this opinion of Car. Bellar. who teaches, Bell. de Con.
l. 2. c. 19
that in the Kingdoms of men the power of the K* comes from the people, because
it is the people that makes the King, and that the people do never so transfer
their power over to the King, but they retain it in habitu, and so that in
certain cases they may in effect reassume it again, which was also the
judgment of Navarrus, whom the Cardinal highly extois.

And thus also the Author of the Observations upon the Kings Declarations, who
is the Master of the Sentences with the Covenanters, teaches us, That
originally the power is in the people, who are the fountain and efficient
cause, and that the Authority is not in the Prince, but secondarily, and
derivatively: All these State Philosophers are full of School terms, but little
reason; and he adds, That this Authority founded by the people, cannot be
dissolved but by that power which gave it constitution. Which is as much as to
say, That the people may take away the Kings power and authority when they
please.

Another of the Sect, but more ancient tells us; That Princes and Governors
have their authority from the people, Gilby lib. de obedientia, p. 25. and 105.
who when they find it convenient, may resume and take it from them again, as
every man may revoke when he please his own procuration, or warrant, but this
reason shall by and by be examined and refuted.

The Cardinal explains himself more clearly in that which before he had written
in covert Terms, saying, That a King, such as he there describes, Bellarm. l.
3. De Pontif. cap. 7. Goodman p. 144. and 149.
may, yea ought, by the consent of all, to be deprived of his Authority: and
Goodman is of his opinion, That evil Princes ought to be deposed, and that this
alone belongs to the inferior Magistrates to put in execution.

We learn from Doctor Charron that the French Leaguers eluded the strength of
S. Paul's Texts, Charron in his Christian Discourse about the end of his Book of
Wisdom.
which forbids the opposing of Sovereigns in saying, That the commands had
regard and respect only to the State of the Christians of those times, because
they were not then strong enough to make resistance. I have before showed how
Bellarmine, Buchanan, and the Champions of Covenant, make use of the same
reason and exposition.

But to clear the way, and make it smooth to come to deposing of Sovereign
Princes: These two parties are wont to absolve their Subjects from their Oaths
of Allegiance. Emanuel Sa the Jesuit says, Emanuel Sa in voce Tyranaus. Knox
to Engl. and Scotl. 78.
That the people may depose their Prince, even after they have sworn perpetual
obedience to him. And Mr. Knox says, That if Princes prove Tyrants against God
and his Truth, their Subjects are free from their Oaths of Allegiance, etc.

To the excommunication and deposing of the Prince, ordinarily there follows
execution according to the Authentic Bull: Papa Urban. causa 23. Qu. 5. Can.
Excommunicatorum. Buchanan de jure Regni p. 70.
That its not Homicide to kill an excommunicated person. The French League
produced two examples in the persons of their Kings; and this accords with the
Doctrine of Buchanan, That Ministers may excommunicate Princes, and that a King
after he is cast into Hell by Excommunication, is unworthy to live, or to enjoy
life upon earth: But observe in passing, the Reformed Churches do not teach
that the Excommunicatio Major do cast any person into Hell, but only excludes
them from the outward communion of the visible Church, and in this, as in other
things, Buchanan has showed himself to be less skilled in Divinity, then in
Poetry.

The best excuse which can be alleged in his Defense is that which Mr. Du
Moulin lends him, which may also serve for Mr. Knox, Hyparaspishes, l. 3. cap.
10.
That if he has written any thing which passes moderation, we must (...)
attribute it to his Religion but nature; for its most certain both these were
hot headed men, and had a great Antipathy against Monarchy.

As for the doctrine of King killing, which is a familiar doctrine amongst the
Jesuits, and is often their shame and reproach; they to render us as odious as
themselves, and by way of exchange, allege and quote in their writings the
passages of Buchanan, Knox and Goodman, who together with them teach the same
Doctrine. That cunning Jesuit Petra Sancta is very curious in searching into
their writings, whom that excellent person Mr River answers, and tells him, that
none amongst us approve or allow those wicked Maxims, Jesuita vapulans, cap.
13.
and imputes the cause to their supposed persecution, which had exasperated
their spirits, and to the hot heads of the Nations of this Island.

After this so wise and charitable a reprehension, coming from a person of such
eminency; men of learning amongst them, ought at least to have learned modesty,
since they refused to learn obedience of their Parliaments, which condemned
these Doctrines of Knox, and Buchanan by their public Acts, or by the
determinations of their principal Divines, who have learnedly refuted them; and
also by considering what great pains Mr. Bloudil, Mr. Valade, and other
judicious and learned men of Foreign Churches, have taken to wash off the
filth of their doctrines and behaviors, which have exceedingly scandalized the
Evangelical profession; after so many Iterated saving advertisements, one would
have thought they should have preserved themselves from falling into the same
offenses, and from giving new occasions of rejoicing to their enemies, and of
shame to their brethren; but behold of late worse then ever, their hot heads
have produced such new effects of violence, as gives a challenge of defiance to
the very Jesuits themselves.

Sions Plea, page 240.
The Author of Sions Plea, animates the people to war and to pull down the
Bishops, speaking thus, Smite neither small, nor great, but the troublers of
Israel, wound that Hazael in the fifth Rib: Yea if your father and mother stand
in your way to prevent you, dispatch them suddenly, pull down the ensign of the
Dragon, set up the standard of Jesus Christ. What? If the father of the State
stand in your way, now when ye are busy in this holy cause, must he be
dispatched? no doubt but they would tread upon him to make way, and would serve
the Son, as they had done the Father; it is a point resolved on by the same
Author, They must strike the Basilike vein, none but that can heal the Pluresie
of State, which is as much as to say in good English, that they must cut the
throat of the King for the public good. This Author were a good Scholar of
the two Jesuits, Guignard and Scribanius, had he not too grossly borrowed
their Terms, for (say they) France was sick, Anticorum. Amphith^atrum Honoris.
and they must cut the Basilike vein to heal her; and Scribanius, that they
committed a great error on S. Bartholomews even that they cut not that vein.
That is, that those of the Guisian Faction spared the lives of the King of
Navar, and the Prince of Condie.

Oh rare Flowers of Diabolical Rhetoric! Oh the shame of Christian Religion!
Is this the simplicity and meekness of the Gospel? Is this the way to guide
Conscience into the way of peace, and to set up the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, or
Christ on his Throne? If S. Paul were alive, doubtless these men would even
maintain to his face, that he understood not the nature of the spiritual
Kingdom, when he said, Romans 14.7. That the Kingdom of God is righteousness,
peace and joy in the Holy Ghost: And when he read this lesson to the
Christians, Let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to which peace ye are
called in one body.

They would have taught him that the Kingdom of Jesus Christ ought to be set
up by the murdering of Kings, the destruction of the people, and the o^erthrow
of States, and would have sent him to their Catechize to be instructed, That
the Parliament Soldiers at the present ought not to consider us as their
Fellow-Citizens, or their Parents, or their companions in Religion, but as
Enemies of God, upholders of Antichrist, and therefore their eye should not
pity us, nor their sword spare us.

These are the words of that abominable Catechism published by Authority, The
Soldiers Catechism composed for the Parliaments Army by Robert Ram, Minister,
published by Authority, page 14, 15. of the seventh Edition.
for the use of the Covenanters Army: Oh behold the principles of Faith,
wherewith these dull souls are instructed: Behold the Bread of Life wherewith
their Divines feed the consciences of the poor people, Jer. 23.4. I have seen
in the Prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing, they commit adultery, and walk
in lies, they strengthen also the hands of evil doers; Israel, the days of thy
visitation are come, thy Prophets are fools, and thy men of Revelations are mad.

To these prodigious Doctrines we will join that Aphorism in the book
entitled, Altar Damascenum, That all Kings have a natural hatred against
Christ: If ye would believe this man, every one that loves Christ, must bear an
irreconcilable hatred to all Kings; was there ever a more seditious and
execrable Maxim: after such a Doctrine pronounced by an Author of such
account, should we ask who has put weapons into the hands of this
superstitious people against their Sovereign, for these poor miserable people,
hate the King for the love of God, yea, many account him an Enemy of Jesus
Christ, even because he is a King.

That we may the better discover by what spirit this man is led, observe how he
deals with his natural Prince, he calls King James of most happy and glorious
memory, Infestissimus Ecclesia Hosts, the most mortal enemy of the Church;
without doubt these who read this, will question what Religion this man is of,
who so qualifies the incomparable Defender of the Faith, who has so vigorously
and sincerely maintained the truth, that if there were a Christian in the
world, who knew not thar great Prince, neither by his admirable writings, nor
by the Renown of his Piety and Wisdom, and should hear him called the most
spiteful and mortal Enemy of the Church, he might well imagine that King James
had turned Turk, and changed the Churches of his Kingdom into Mosques, and
sold his Christian Subjects for slaves to the Moors.

It were to do wrong to the testimony that himself has given, by the Immortal
Monuments of his Religious Wisdom, and by his truly Christian and Fatherly
Government, to undertake here to defend him against so unequal an Adversary,
wherein the injuries spoken of this excellent King, turns to the ruin and
perdition of him that spoke them, like unto the bitings of the weasel, who
consumes his teeth by gnawing of steel.

Certainly when the Divines of France, defend in their writings, the Confession
of Faith of his Majesty, against the Doctors of the contrary Religion, they
account not that King, a most mortal enemy of the Church. That most holy
Confession confirmed by the practice of that great Prince, will serve as a
bright shining light in the Church in after Ages, and cover the memory of them
who injured and reproached him with perpetual shame.

But for the present, th^se rare Adages which curse the best of Kings, and
Royalty in general, are gathered as choice and golden sentences. Witness this
other, which comes from the Authority of his Companion, as great a liar as
himself, who has this passage: He erres not much who says, Vindiciae Philadel.
that there is in all Kings a mortal hatred against the Gospel, they will not
suffer willingly the King of Kings to govern in their Kingdoms, yet God has
some amongst the Kings who pertain to him, but very few, it may be one in an
hundred. But since he is upon the number, instead of counting a hundred Kings
one after another, let him account only a hundred years without going out of
England, and we entreat this good man to consider what Kings have reigned over
this Kingdom within this hundred years, and let him in good earnest tell us,
which of them he would leave to God, and which he would give to the Devil; let
them consider the piety of him, whom God has made a Saint, and they a Martyr,
let them find if they can in all his Kingdom, a man more just and meek, more
temperate and religious, and let envy and rebellion, who finding nothing to
bite at, in the life of this Monarch, burst asunder at his feet, and hide
themselves in their own confusion.

Let us say the same to the Observator upon his Majesty's Declarations, who
speaking of all Kings now reigning, but with a particular application to his
Sovereign says, That to be the delight of mankind (as Titus Vespasian) is now
a sordid thing amongst Princes, but to be tormentors and executioners of the
Public, to plot and contrive the ruin of their subjects, which they ought
naturally to protect, is now accounted a work worthy of Caesar. If reviling and
speaking reproachful words against the King were blasphemy, according to the
style of the civil Laws of Israel, 1 King. 21* 10. then this impious person is
a Blasphemer in the highest degree against the sacred Majesty of Kings, and
moreover exceeding ridiculous as well as wicked, to appropriate this
description to his King, whose known piety, justice and clemency deserved
rather the title of the delights of mankind, then that Emperor upon whom the
love of the people conferred it: The like I may speak of the Kings of France
within these fifty years, all the Lists of the French Kings furnishes not such
excellent Princes, wherefore Aphorisms of Rebellion, could never have been
pronounced in an age more proper to give the Authors the lie.

The Lord rebuke these black souls, who curse God in the person of his
Anointed, their sentence is written, and their qualities painted out to the
life by St. Peter, 2 Pet. 2.10, 11, 12. who despise Dominions, presumptuous
self-willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities, whereas Angels
which are greater in power; bring not railing accusations against them before
the Lord; but these are natural bruit beasts, made to be taken and destroyed,
speak evil of things which they understand not, and shall utterly perish in
their own corruption.

I might heap up many more passages of our enemies, which teach murder,
rebellion, and hatred of Kings, in which they seem to dispute with the very
Jesuits themselves, this description of their devotion, A seditious piety,
Usurpations des Papes c. 5. page 81.
a factious Religion which would be Judge of the consciences of Princes, who
abhor their Religion, because they hate their Government, who make good
subjects, and good Christians to be things incompatible.

Whosoever would weary his patience, and behold how ingenious the Covenanters
have been even to exercise the patience of God, and insult over the persons and
authority of Kings, let them read their Sermons which were daily printed by
authority, after they had preached them before the House of Commons, wherein
the filthy Torrent of seditious Eloquence; and the fantasticalness of a Bastard
Devotion were employed to tear apieces the King, to disfigure him in odious
colors, and stir up the people to all cruel and bloody courses against him,
out of which books we might collect thousands of Modern Authorities in favor
of the wickedness of these times, which passed from them as Doctrines of
Religion; but we esteem our selves worthy of a better employment, then to be
poring on Carrion, and stirring in sinks and puddles: That which we have cited
out of known Authors shall suffice to let the world see with whom we have to
do, and that we are called to the condition of S. Paul, to fight with beasts.

CHAP. XII. How the Covenanters wrong the Reformed Churches, in inviting them
to join with them; with an answer for the Churches of France.
AS it is the vice of those who are stricken with the Leprosy, to endeavor to
infect others, so the Covenanters* like to them, labor by all means possible
to spread abroad the poison of their impiety: Those who have preached and
published their most infamous Doctrines, which renders Christianity hateful
both to Turks and Pagans, were so bold as to address their public Declarations
to the Reformed Churches of France, the Low Countries, and Switzerland, as if
they made profession of the same Doctrines; they had the impudence to invite
these so pure Churches, to have society with them, and to pray them to esteem
the Cause of the Covenant, that of all the Churches. In this the Assembly of
Divines at London were employed by their Masters.

The Epistle of the venerable Assembly of English Divines, and the Deputies of
Scotland, to the Reformed Churches of France, the Low Countries, and
Switzerland, etc.
That which makes this Temptation less dangerous, is, That the Letter they wrote
upon this subject to their Neighbors, could very hardly be understood: This
Venerable Company of Divines of Consummate Knowledge, and the Flower of
Eloquence of that Party, writ a Latin Letter to the French, Flemens, and
Switzers; wherein there wants nothing in the Outward but Language and Common
sense, a most worthy Cover for the Inward; for so evil a drogue there needed
not a Better Box. This Epistle, amongst a ridiculous affectation of
Criticismes, Greek and Poetical phrases, and many Rhetorical Figures, is here
and there filled with Solecismes, Barbarismes, and the like Grammar Elegancies,
like a foundred horse that goes up and down; and it is pity to behold h^w their
Eloquence stumbles in Capriolinge.

This piece of Latin was much admired, and many praises heaped upon the
Authors, and public thanks, by special command, given to them by the House of
Commons, so much is knowledge valued in this Reformed party. It Is likely many
hands contributed to the composing of it, for it is a patched discourse, made up
of diverse pieces altogether unlike one another, and goes by leaps and skips, as
an empty Cart in a craggy and stony way, I will not burden my discourse, with
the faults of Children. I will only give you a taste in the Margin.

For the Margin.
In the Title Litterae a Conventus Theologorum in Anglia, a barbarous phrase.

The same, Prout Ordinaverat Honoratissima Domus Communium; Ordinare, does not
signify to Command, but to put in Order. Honoratissima is wholly barbarous.

In the first Page, Diu est ex quo credidimus calicem hunc quem epotandum
vindex Dei manus exhibuit vestris auribus inso^uisse. Rare Tavern Eloquence, to
make the Cups and Goblets to sound.

In the second Page, Reformationis impedimenta, They would have said,
Hindrances of Reformation; These Masters knew not that the Plural Impedimenta
signifies Baggage.

In the same, Eo usque profecit sceleratissima factio, Surely they should have
said, progressa est, for proficere signifies to advance in that which is good.

In the same period there is a Solecisme, Eousque profecit, ut oportet, they
should have said oporteat.

There is a Solecisme of the same nature in the third Page, Hosce cum gens illa
rejecerat, they should have said rejecisset; I wish these grave Divines would
learn that the Prepositions ut and cum govern the Conjunctive in the
signification they give it.

In the second Page, Coenobia Angliae tolerata, this is another Solecisme, for
according to their sense, they should have said, in Anglia; in these words
there are yet more incongruities in the Truth, than in the Grammar, for both
God and men know that it is false, that there has been any Convent or
Monastery tolerated in England for above these eighty years.

In the third Page, Missi hinc trans Alps, mandatari and abi ipsa Roma recepti
nuntii, there can be nothing spoken more barbarous nor more false.

In the same Page, Dicam dicere, they have heard speak of Dicam scribere, which
signifies to appeal in Justice.

In the same Page, Injurias in apricum proferre, Excellent Elegance, to put the
injuries in the Sun.

In the fourth Page, Natio altera triumphasset in alterius sanguine; they
should have said, de sanguine.

In the same Page, Deus qui rodentem seusim tineam prius egerat rugientem
Leonem induit, that is to say, that God had played the person of a gnawing
moth, which is a very strange conception. Let these Divines correct either
their sense or their Latin.

In the same Page, where they would say, the Principals of Ireland, they called
them Principulares, which is a word of Campaign, and does not signify that
they would say, and yet the true word is Principulos.

In the fifth Page, Delitendum, they would have said, deli^escendum: They
should do well to read over their Conjugations again.

In the same Page, undique in stead of ubique.

In the same Page, Cluet in stead of Cluit, and yet the word is nothing worth
in prose.

In Page the sixth, Sacratissimam, the word is barbarous.

In the same Page, Gladius Anglicam saginatus carne, that is to say, the sword
fatted with the flesh of the English, the word saginare is not proper, but for
a creature or beast that a man feeds; its a very extravagant fancy to fat a
sword as a hog.

In the same Page, That which the Irish had invaded by Arms, they call quod
nacti sunt, as if they had met with it by chance or h^zard.

In the seventh Page, Modo evenire possit, ut Ecclesia redimeretur: Its a
Solecism, they should have said, redimatur: This people are wholly out of Tense
and Mood.

In the same, Veritatis pedissequi sumus and amas^i puritatis; amasius is a
dishonest word, and pedissequi ridiculous, and both the one and the other very
improper: Behold the sense in English, We are Lacqueys of the Truth, and
Paramours of the Court of purity; these are lofty imaginations, fit to
entertain the brave wits with.

A little after they enrich the Latin tongue with a new word, Remonstrantias,
peradventure in their next Edition they will consider whether they should write
Remonstrantias or Remonstrationes.

There is also a Solecism; they make use of the Adverb utroque, which is an
Adverb of Motion, as if it were an Adverb of Rest.

In the eighth Page, Potestati sum^nus, its a barbarous word, and is found in
no good Author: But I think not my self bound to write out all their faults,
the most part whereof has this commodity, that the intricateness and obscurity
of their style hinders our sight.

The next time they write to strangers in this style, I counsel them to send an
Interpreter with their Letter; for this Latin Monsieur Salmasius the Prince of
Learning of this age, could not understand: And in the mean while, these Gray
Beards should do well to employ some time, when their State Affairs will give
them leave, to learn their Grammar, that strangers may not laugh at their
childish Eloquence.

And for the present they are obliged in Charity (for this their Epistle being
printed and sent to seventeen States and Churches beyond sea) to some stranger,
who out of compassion sent it good Latin, but it was a year and half after:
It Is pity he spoiled their work, for he should have left the form and the
matter, the one being suitable to the other.

Now should we impute their Latin to their want of knowledge, did they not in
this their Epistle tell us, That they were a most venerable Company of
excellent persons in Wisdom, Learning and Piety. The same also sufficiently
proved by the Testimony of some of their company, which were Members of the
same Assembly, Mulus Mulum fricat.
in which the other are not behind them in requital, and in magnifying their
persons and actions to the Skies.

It Is the old custom of this Faction to commend one another, and when they
print any Book, they borrow of one or two of their Friends Epistles and
Prefaces in commendation of the Work, wherein ordinarily they give the Author
excessive praises: Never did the Bishops assume half the Titles that they give
one another. As the Dunghill Cocks have the greatest Combs, so the meanest
spirits are most arrogant and proud, taking on them many high Titles. A great
man in France compared such kind of persons to the old Writings, full of
abbreviations, saying, that where there are many Titles, there is little
Learning.

But we will labor to decypher their Latin so far as may serve our present
purpose, for which the last Interpreter will much help us. They pray the
Foreign Churches, Liceat interim apud Fratres quos salutat haec Epistola,
dilectissimos innocentiae nostrae testimonium and in sacris eorum coetibus
quandocunque opus fuerit Apologiam obtinere.
but almost in a commanding way, that they would recommend their cause to God
in their public prayers, and require it sine condition, without any
condition, and will not be refused, and they would have them make Apologies for
the innocence of the Covenanters in their Assemblies. Must the Churches then of
France for to content them, without considering the salvation of their souls,
the safety of their persons, make public prayers in their Assemblies for the
Covenanters? Preach to the people that their War is lawful and holy? and that
after being questioned by the Magistrates of a contrary Religion, constantly
maintain that it is the cause of God, whatsoever may happen to their Goods,
Lives and the profession of the Gospel?

But behold here that which is worse, in the conclusion of the Oath of the
Covenant, which they sent with their Epistle to all the Neighbor Churches,
they invite them earnestly to take this Oath or the like: And above all, they
invite those Churches who live under the power of a contrary Religion: The
Invitation is in form of a Prayer, That it would please God to incline by their
examples, the other Churches that groan under the yoke of Antichrist's Tyranny,
to associate themselves with this Covenant or the like. For to take then their
Summons in their own sense, that is to say, That the Churches of France to
please them, would make a Covenant against their Sovereign; expecting, as a
thing which they need not doubt, that the English Covenanters would overcome
their enemies in an instant, and would be ready at the day appointed, to
succor their Confederates beyond the Seas, with their victorious Armies,
before their King justly provoked, should ruin them. The Covenanters
Declarations, especially in the year 1642. flatter these poor Churches with
this hope, and through all their discourse clearly resolved to go forth and
pull down Antichrist in all Countries, and make a general conquest for Jesus
Christ. These are very like the Messages that John of Leyden sent to Munster,
to make all the Commons in Germany to rise, and all the world if it were
possible.

Not that the Leaders of the Covenant considering their strength and interest,
thought themselves capable of so vast a design, but according to my opinion,
they had two ends in making this so open a profession: The one, to draw to
their party the weak and passionate, who in enterprises, have regard to the
luster and promise of the design, and not to the possibility of the execution.
Of such spirits the great Herd of the world is composed, who in the great and
public Motions, suffer their fancies to be bewitched with Poetical hopes,
incompatible with the nature of the affairs.

Such was the promise of another Declaration, which lul'd the imaginations of
the adherents, That this War would bring them deliverance from all their
sufferings and fears, The Scots Declaration in the year 1644.
and be the beginning of a new world of joy and peace, which God would create
for their consolation. For this new world of peace and joy which was but three
skips and a stride off, as they thought, The Scots now feel it.
they found such besotted spirits who cast themselves headlong into a Gulf of
evils, without bottom or bounds.

The other apparent end was to gain credit to their party by the applause of
Foreign Churches, to fortify themselves by the powerful association of the
Low Countries, and to try whether the French of the Reformed Religion were so
ill affectionate as to take up Arms against their King, without ever caring
what should come after, when they were once engaged in a war wherein formerly
they had ill success. And these people were so void of charity and humanity,
that they were content to buy an unprofitable reputation to their party, by the
certain ruin of those they invite to alliance with them: As he that cared not
to cut down his Neighbors Oak, were it but to make himself a pick-tooth.

For suppose that the French Churches should have suffered themselves to be
gained by their persuasions: In what condition were they in to succor them?
Could they have furnished Money, Arms, Men and Shipping? Had they the means to
put out the Fire, when they had once kindled it? All the Succors that these
Gentlemen could give them, would be to declare the Votes of the two Houses,
That the Arms of the Churches of France were Defensive and Just, and those of
their King, Offensive and Unlawful: Or have Declared his Majesty fallen from
his Dignity and Crown of France, as they declared those two Illustrious
Princes, Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice, Sons of the late King of Bohemia,
excluded from Succession in the Palatinate; which Vote shall take place, when
the Masters of the Covenant shall have Conquered the Palatinate by their Arms,
in spite of the Forces of France, the Emperor, and Spains, and they become
sole Arbiters of the Empire. Before the Covenanters come to the end of this
design, a little too far off, these brave Princes will have leisure to make
their peace, and many things may intervene, which will induce their Judges to
abate of their so great severity.

For to persuade these poor Churches to cast themselves headlong into ruin,
the Assembly at London, in their Epistle labor to exasperate them, by the
remembrance of all that they had suffered, and persuaded them that all Churches
on this side, as well as on the other side of the Seas, were concluded to be
ruined by the same Agents; that after the Churches of England and Scotland
should be devoured, they would then fall upon their Neighbors; and that it was
not against the men, but against the profession of the true Religion, and
against Godliness, that their Enemies made War: Whereby they would make the
Neighbor Churches believe, that King Charles confederated with the Pope to
ruin the Reformed Religion, and that after he had dispatched his own subjects,
he would do the like to his Neighbors of the same Religion.

There needs no great measure of the Gift of discerning Spirits, to judge by
what spirit these Grave Divines were led, who take such pains to send their
Brethren to the slaughter, within and out of their Kingdom, and to make the
Doctrine of the Gospel a Trumpet of Sedition, to arm subjects against their
Princes, and put all Christendom into a flame of bloody and unnatural wars.

And therefore they had reason to confess themselves thus to Foreign Churches,
they beseech them to excuse them that they had not writ sooner, alleging
(according to the second Interpretation of their Friend) That since they were
assembled, they found themselves so amazed with the Wine of Astonishment, that
God had given them to drink, that they had wholly forgot their duty: But in the
Addition which they disperse amongst all the Churches, they do not acknowledge
themselves only Attonitos, amazed, but Ebrios, drunken; and both in the one and
the other they had great reason. Oh the force of Truth! Oh the wonderful
Providence and Justice of God, to draw from these subtle and crafty souls,
their own condemnation! How is it possible that so many choice and picked
Divines, whereof this Assembly was composed, should be so blinded, as to let
pass from them so shameful a Confession in the name of all their Body, and of
all their Party, to be divulged through all the Churches of Europe? And yet we
are herein to praise God, that in this their astonishment, he has given them a
little interval, that they came to their senses to make this acknowledgement.

They needed not to specify to us in what they were forgetful of their Duty;
their comportments justify their words, that they had wholly forgotten it. It
appears also that they had forgot their duty to God, their King, their
Country, and to the Church from which they received their Ministry, and to
which they had sworn Obedience, and toward them also to whom they write: For
if they had born any Brotherly affection, they would not have been so forgetful
as to write to them, and in such a style, and by a public Declaration. They
would have taken heed to render them odious and suspected without cause, and to
draw upon them persecution, from which there could proceed no other fruit,
unless to make them Companions in their miseries; for to render us Companions
in their crimes, we hope they shall never obtain. But these Divines, and their
Masters who employ them, shall find themselves deceived in their design, to
induce the Reformed Churches of France to shake off the yoke of their King,
under color of shaking off the yoke of Antichrist.

The fidelity and peaceable conversation of these Churches, does take away even
the shadow of such things from their Superiors, whose justice is such, that
they will not condemn the Subjects of their King for the offenses of strangers,
but will be more careful to protect the innocent, then their ill neighbors are
active to render them blameworthy and unhappy. The King and his Council need
not fear the French of the Reformed Religion will take the Oath of the
Covenant, to which they are invited with so much earnestness and craft: For to
speak of them in the terms of one of their beloved Pastors, They take no Oaths
to others, but to their Sovereign Princes, Usurpation des papes.
they cast not their eyes on a stranger, they hold that it is not for a Subject
to find occasion of disobedience in the Religion of his Prince, making Religion
a Match to give fire to Rebellion, they are ready to expose their lives for the
preservation of their King against whomsoever it be, were it one of their own
Religion; whosoever should do otherwise, should not defend Religion, but serve
his ambition, and should draw a great scandal upon the truth of the Gospel.
This is the Doctrine wherein they are instructed; this is the Profession in
which all good Frenchmen of the Reformed Religion will live and die.

But if strangers, whose heads run round with the wine of astonishment, will
force the Churches of France to drink of their Cup, they will use the French
freedom, refuse to pledge them, and behold their zeal to press them to do as
they do, with despite and compassion: Let them not think it strange that they
run not with them into the same excess of riot, they do not offend them, for
whilst they have this strong wine in their heads, they keep their sobriety, and
are filled; beseeching God to show mercy upon those who would seduce them. Now
as it is the custom of drunken persons, who would draw others into the same
excess with themselves, and to drink according to their pleasure, to make them
believe that they have seen them themselves in that condition; so the English
Covenanters to defend their actions, and augment their Party, allege very
often to the French Churches their wars for Religion, the remembrance whereof
is very sad; and to use this Argument to seduce them, is no other thing then to
counsel them to be miserable because they have been so, and to go with their
eyes shut, and run the remains of their broken vessel against the rock where
they were shipwrackt.

Moreover, its very unjust in them to impute to the whole body the actions of a
party; for in the late wars all the Churches on this side the River Loyre,
continued in their obedience, and very near the half of the other Churches. The
people were carefully preserved in their duties by their faithful Pastors. This
holy Doctrine which condemns the resisting of higher powers, and commands to
wait patiently deliverance from God, and to suffer for righteousness sake, was
most pressed and urged in their Churches; and whilst some of the Religion were
in Arms during the minority of the King, they preached at Paris, Their strength
was to sit still. Isai. 30.7.

There fell lately into my hands an Epistle well penned, which was sent to the
State-Assembly of Rochel, in the beginning of their sitting, to incline them to
peace, and the obedience of his Majesty. Behold here a passage of it.

I think it very profitable for you to be informed the truth, what the opinions
and dispositions of our Churches are, by persons that have a particular
knowledge of them: You are now debating (Gentlemen) of the separation of your
Assembly for to obey his Majesty, or of its subsistence, and to give order to
your affairs; I am bound to tell you, that the general desire of our Churches
is, that it would please God to continue peace unto us under the obedience of
his Majesty, and that seeing the King is resolved to employ his Armies to make
you obey, they promise themselves so much of you, that you will do what
possibly you can to avoid this tempest, and yield rather to necessity, then
enter into a war, wherein the ruin of a great part of our Churches are
certain, and into a trouble wherein we may behold the entrance, but cannot see
the issue, and that ye will take away the pretext from them who drive on the
King to fall upon us. Those that fear God desire that if we must be persecuted,
it should be in bearing the Cross of Christ, and for the profession of the
Gospel. In brief, I assure you that the greatest and best part of our people
desire you to decline this unjust enterprise.

Here is not the Authority of a Single Person, it is the testimony of the
greatest and best part of the Churches of France, it is a general Declaration of
the Churches, and of those amongst them who feared God, that the duty of
Christians persecuted is, to bear the Cross, not Arms. It Is then very falsely
and injuriously done, that the example of the French Churches should be so
often and importunately alleged by the Covenanters to justify the Subjects
resisting their Sovereign, since that ever in the time of war, the greatest and
best part were against it.

A French Divine, who loved both his Religion and King, found himself so
pricked by this reproach made to the generality of his Party, that he prayed us
to insert here this expression of his judgment, and of the soundest part of
the Churches of France. The war for Religion in this Kingdom is a wound yet
fresh, and ye can hardly touch it, but ye will hurt it, and make it smart; and
its very sore against my will that I must touch it: But I am constrained to it,
by the frequent Declarations of the Covenanters, who have nothing so strong nor
so frequent for to move the people to take up Arms against their King, as to
propose to them the example of the French Churches, as a pattern which they
ought and are bound to follow. Would to God that in leaving us there, they
would have given us liberty to hold our peace; but since they will not give
over publishing abroad, and making all places ring with our calamities, the
remembrance whereof we rather desire should be for ever buried, since they
impute the actions of some few to the generality of our Churches, and even to
Religion it self; and since that they allege our errors, for to exhort us to
return to them again, and since they change the subject of our repentance and
sorrow, into rules for their imitation, and into precepts of the Gospel. Is it
not now high time to speak, and prefer the Interest of Gods Glory, and of the
Truth of his Word, above the credit of men whatsoever they be, yea, and of our
own too. Let God be true and every man a Liar, Romans 3.4. Confess thy fault, and
give glory to the Lord God of Israel, Jo. 7.19. Mr. Rivet was not ashamed to
call these our stirrings, culpam nostrorum, Jesuita vapulans, cap. 26. Art. 2.
the fault of his Countrymen; and this was spoken as a Champion of the truth,
to confess it so freely, that it was both to our sin and damage, wherein (as
he himself declares) he agrees with Monsieur du Moulin, who in his second
Epistle to Monsieur Balzak, makes the same confession in equivalent terms. Such
was the Piety and ingenuity of these godly and learned persons, that all their
care and pains was to defend the Truth only, and not their persons.

It would be a great honor for the Churches of France with one consent
publicly to declare that they judge all wars of Subjects against their
Sovereign, unlawful, and to exhort their Brethren of England to Obedience and
fidelity to their Prince, then for to preserve the credit of some of their
party, and suffer their actions to serve as snares to the weak consciences of
their Neighbors, and of pretext to those who labor to corrupt the Doctrine of
the Gospel.

My self being a member of the Reformed Church of France, doubt not but I shall
be owned and approved to give an Answer for them to the Summons of a strange
Covenant.

Its a very great affliction to us to behold the famous Churches of Great
Britain to destroy themselves, An Answer for the Churches of France.
for controversies without necessity; and which might have been easily
composed. And that which touches us most, is, the danger of the Truth, which
is much weakened by these divisions; for its to be feared, that in your
contending and striving one with another, you over-turn not the Candlestick of
the Gospel, and that God being provoked, takes not away his saving Light, which
was not given to lighten you one to fight against another.

We will not enter into the causes of your quarrels, and could wish that you
had left out the remembrance of ours, and had not employed the unfor^unate
actions of your poor Neighbors, which anguish and terror produced, to serve
as example to your people to take up Arms against their King. They were but the
lesser part of our Churches, that were involved in that party. The signal
testimonies of our fidelity to the Crown, ever since the reducing of Rochel,
and other places which were moved in our hands, do efface the memory of the
troubles moved in their behalf; and the cause of these motions being equitably
considered by sober and moderate spirits, would beget pity rather then hatred:
For if just fear could justify Arms against their lawful Sovereign, those of
our Religion who bare Arms in this occasion, could represent to you, that when
the King demanded back again the places that he had granted them for their
security, they had great occasion to fear, that with these places, they should
lose the security of their consciences and lives, in which they were happily
deceived: For the late King who was as gentle in making use of a victory, A
rare pattern for a Conqueror.
as valiant in gaining one, ever labored more to comfort, than to punish, and
compassion stifling his anger, made them know that the strongest place for the
security of Subjects, is the Clemency and Justice of their Sovereign. Oh these
Royal Virtues were eminently manifest in him, whom God had given you for your
King! Who being the Defender of the Reformed Christian Faith, and publishing
his most holy Profession, with such protestations which gave us full
satisfaction, we cannot see, how you can allege the example of our taking up
of Arms, should they be the most just of the world, having not the same
subjects of fear. The security of your consciences and lives were without
question. But you are not the first whom ease and long prosperity has carried
to the same impatience, to which others have been driven by affliction.

And since then ye address your selves to us to give you advice: We beseech you
consider, that to take counsel of your Friends, it must not be when their
swords are in their hands, and their enemies before them; but when they are
quiet and at peace: It Is not from our Soldiers, but our Divines, that you
should enquire whether you should draw your swords against your Prince, if you
refer your selves to them, they will all conclude for the Negative. For whilst
our Wars continued, whereof you have too good a memory, not one of all our
Divines maintained those dangerous Maxims which is now defended by your
Sermons and Writings: They that say most for their Party, excuse it, and lay it
upon necessity.

It Is not from any of our Books that ye have drawn these vile Maxims, That the
Authority of the Sovereign Magistrate is of Humane Right. That the people is
above their King, That the people gave the power to the Prince, and may take it
away when they please, That Kings are not the anointed of the Lord, That if the
King fail in performing the Oath at his Coronation, the Subjects are absolved
from their Oaths of Allegiance, That if the Prince falls from the Grace of God,
the people are loosed from their subjection, That for to establish a
Discipline, which they account to be the only Kingdom of Jesus Christ, Subjects
may take up Arms against their Prince, That Kings are to be judged before their
Subjects, That the Civil Government ought to be formed according to the pattern
of the Ecclesiastical, which is not Monarchical. This Maxim tends to the
abolition of Royalty in all States.

In all the Writings of our Divines, ye find no such matters, but such as teach
Subjects Loyalty, Humility, Obedience and Patience. All agree together with the
ancient Christians, and say that prayers and tears are the weapons of the
Church. Buckler of Faith, Sect* 182.
We never spoke of deposing our Kings, and do not believe that any man living
can dep^se the King, or dispense with their Subjects Oath of Allegiance. If any
of ours speak otherwise, we are ready to disavow it.

Very often those that teach well are seduced to do ill, being overcome by
temptation, and yet very few ever go so far, as to teach ill to justify their
Actions; God has kept us hitherto from that: And although it may happen unto
us, as unto others, to break the Commandments of God, Mat. 5.19. but we hope
never so to be forsaken of him, to teach others to do so; Th^n is the evil
desperate when vices become manners; and yet more evil, when the evil manners
become Doctrines, that poor souls are instructed to sin for Conscience sake. Oh
observe! that there is not a more certain sign of a people forsaken of God,
than this.

Therefore with the same liberty you invite us to maintain your Opinions by a
public Association, we earnestly beseech you to correct your own, and condemn
all your Maxims, contrary to sound Doctrine, Enemies to the peace of States,
Majesty, and the safety of Kings, taking heed of drawing reproach and
persecution upon the profession of the Gospel, and to render your neighbors
suspected for the faults of others. Also that you re-establish the use of the
Lords Supper, intermitted in diverse places these many years, that ye give order
for children to be baptized, and that there be no more aged persons rebaptized.
Vindication of the Royal Commission of Jesus Christ.
That they print not any more that all Churches which baptize Infants, are a
faction of Antichristians, that none teach any more that the Sacraments are not
necessary, and that for a quarrel of State, they dispossess not faithful
Orthodox Pastors of their Benefices, to put Heretics in their places.

As for the quarrel ye have against Antichrist, we should be very glad to join
with you, provided that ye observe these two conditions; the one not to call
Antichrist that which is not, for we gather by your Epistles and Declarations,
that you give the Title of upholders of Antichrist to many of our Brethren,
whose confession agrees with ours, and with whom you ought to bear, and with
Charity amend their faults on condition that they may deal the like with you.

The other condition is, That ye fight against Antichrist by lawful ways
prescribed in the Word of God; namely, by the Spirit of his mouth, that is, by
the power of the Gospel; for as they were not the warlike Engines of Joshua,
but the Trumpets of the Sanctuary that made the walls of Jericho to fall down,
so it is not the Cannon, but the Trumpet of the Gospel which is required to
pull down the walls of Babylon. These are the weapons of our warfare, which are
mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.4. they are
not carnal: And besides Divine Authority, experience should have have taught
you, that God blesses not these designs of pulling down Antichrist by the
Sword: It was the Epidemical Frenzy of Germany now sixscore years since,
which turned into smoke and confusion.

Indeed if our King should Covenant in a just quarrel against Antichrist, and
Lewis the 14th assume for the devisoe of his Money, that which Lewis the 12th
stamped upon his Crowns at Pisa, Perdam Nomen Babiloni^, we would with a great
deal of cheerfulness follow him in this War, but we cannot approve of a
Covenant or League against Antichrist, made and agreed upon in spite of the
Supreme Powers, who choose Chiefs other then their Sovereigns. For such Leagues
or Covenants are the open Rebellion of Subjects against their Prince. Upon
which, the Observation attributed to Bullinger is very remarkable, and which
should extremely move you, That the Anabaptists began with the destruction of
Bishops, accounting as you, the Office and dignity of Bishops was an
appurtenance of Antichrist, but they ended with the destruction of Magistrates.

Our Churches look upon the predictions of the fall of Antichrist, and the
establishment of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, as objects of their Hope, and not
as Rules of their Duty. They govern not themselves by Prophesies, but by
Commands, and make Conscience of transgressing the Laws of God, out of zeal to
advance his Kingdom; so leaving to God the execution of his counsels, we keep
our selves in a peaceable obedience to our Sovereign; and in doing that we
yield obedience to God, who commands, to submit to every Ordinance of man for
the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2.13. and to pray for Kings, and for all that are in
Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty, for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God, and our Savior,
1 Timothy 2.2.

If we embrace your Covenant, or make one like it, we cannot obey these
commands of the Gospel; for to Covenant without permission of our Sovereign,
would be to Covenant against him; to take up Arms in the Kingdom, without him,
or against him, comes all to the same thing. What? Cannot our sufferings which
you remember so often to us, persuade you from following so dangerous a
Council? for we retain and persevere in the Instruction given us, Buckler of
Faith, Sect. 182.
that we must not remedy an evil by sin, nor defend Piety by Disloyalty; God
has no need of our sins to defend his cause; the preservation of the true
Religion is the Cause of God, and his work, which he will never forsake, and
even then when all humane means seems to fail, he watches for the preservation
of his Church, which if he is pleased to afflict, its our duty to humble our
selves; and when he is pleased also to raise her up, we need not carry to his
help Sedition and Rebellion.

In fine, We love the King that God has given us by duty and inclination,
trembling at the mention of your Covenant; and the younger his Majesty is, the
more we account our selves bound to endeavor to preserve peace in his State,
hoping that when he comes of years he will acknowledge the services we have
done him in his Minority, and that he will consider with what Fidelity and
Integrity his Subjects of the Reformed Religion have cast off the instant
solicitations of Strangers, conceiving they can never be good Christians,
without being good Subjects; and that to obey their King, and to offer up their
Goods and Lives to his service, is a great part of the service they owe to God.

The English Covenanters may receive this Answer as the Answer of the Churches
of France, until they have disavowed it by a public Declaration.

CHAP. XIII. The preceding Answer confirmed by Divines of the Reformed
Religion, with an Answer to some Objections of the Covenanters upon this
Subject.
TO the end it may better appear, that the preceding Answer for the Reformed
Churches of France, is drawn from the Model of their Doctrine, behold here some
few passages.

Calvin speaks thus, Institut. l. 4. C. 20. Art. 29.
If we be persecuted for piety by a wicked and sacrilegious Prince, before all
things let us remember our sins, not doubting but God sends us these scourges
for our sins; by this, our impatience will be bridled by Humility: Moreover
lets remember that it is not for us to remedy these evils; and that all that we
have to do, is to beg help of God, in whose hands the hearts of Kings, and
motions in Kingdoms are. He said a little before, Art. 25.
That the Word of God bound us not only to be subject to Princes that are
worthy of our duty, but to all Princes whatsoever and howsoever they came to
the Sovereignty, and although they do nothing less then perform the duties of
good Sovereigns.

Com. upon Dan. c. 4. v. 19.
In his Commentary upon Daniel, Let us learn, says he, by the example of the
Prophet, to beseech God for Tirants, if it shall please him to subject us to
their inordinate pleasure; for what though they be unworthy of all Offices of
Humanity, yet nevertheless because it is by the will of God that he commands,
its our duty to bear the yoke patiently, not only because of wrath, as Saint
Paul admonishes, but also for Conscience sake, otherwise we are not only
Rebels against them, but against God.

Instit. l. 4. c. 20. S^ct. ult.
This Lesson is of the same Authors, Let this be ever in our memory, that the
same Divine Authority that gives Authority to Kings, establishes also the most
wicked Kings: Oh let never these seditious thoughts enter into our spirits,
that we should deal with the King as he deserves, and that it is not reasonable
to yield the duty of Subjects to him who will not perform the duty of King to
us. Which is notwithstanding the arguing of the Covenanters.

Pet. Martyr Clas. 4. loc. 20.
Peter Martyr an Italian, but a Minister in those Churches our enemies invite
to associate with them, is not less contrary to them. Expounding that place of
the Proverbs, By me Kings reign, says, That under the name of Kings, the Text
understands also Tyrants: Whence he collects this consequence, Therefore
learning hence that thy K. is established by God, beware thou never conspirest
any seditious thing in the State, all that thou must do when thou art
oppressed, is to appeal to the Tribunal of God, there being no other superior
power to whom a Tyrant ought to obey.

He says also very pertinently, and worthy our best observation, That then
when God Would chastise the Kings of Judah for their sins, he did not do it by
the Jews, but by the Babylonians, Assyrians, and Egyptians, showing by the
conduct of his justice and providence, that it is not for subjects to take
knowledge of the faults of their sovereigns, but that they ought to leave them
wholly to God, who has other means in his hand to punish them, and reduce them
to their duty.

Surely if Calvin and Martyr had lived in these days, and were benificed in
England, they would eject them out of their benefices for this troublesome
doctrine, which hinders the progress of the holy Covenant, and fills their
consciences full of scruples, whom they instruct to rebel against their
Sovereign for the Lords sake.

And above all Monsieur Deodat^ would be very ill dealt with by them, for being
Author of that excellent Epistle sent from the Church of Genevah, to the
Ecclesiastical Assembly at London; in which your good King is highly praised
for the justice and clemency of his proceedings in this present quarrel; the
popular tumults condemned, which forced him to retire from his Parliament, and
these Gentlemen earnestly entreated to dispossess their spirits of all factious
inclinations, and to wash off this foul spot by which they have and do defame
the pure profession of the Gospel, giving occasion for the world to believe,
that the reformed Religion has a secret hatred and antipathy against the
Majesty of Kings and sovereign authority; against this Epistle, our enemies
vomited out many outrageous words in their books, maintaining that it was
supposititious and invented by some profane Atheist. Behold here the thanks
that this great and learned person, and the reverend Ministers his brethren,
received for their charitable and truly Christian counsel.

And this is further to be observed, that the Assembly at London having sent
their Epistle and Oath of their Covenant to seventeen foreign Churches,
whereof the Churches of France made but one, they make no noise of the Answers
they received, which does evidently testify they did not satisfy them, and
that they durst not produce them, for fear of making it appear that the
generality of the reformed Churches were ashamed of their actions, and
condemned the insurrections of Subjects against their Sovereign under pretense
of reformation.

En fundum and fundamentum totius paracidialis doctrinae. Potestas a populo
Regi data est fiduciaria.
This Divinity of Rebellion being founded upon one only Maxim, that the power
of Kings is of humane and not divine right, and that their right to the Kingdom
is but a paction between them and the people. Its much to purpose to produce
here what the Churches of France hold hereupon, and how they refuse the reasons
of the Jesuits which are the same with the Covenanters: Behold the last Chapter
of the Buckler of Faith, which is a garment so fit for the size of both
parties, that after the one has made use of it, the other may put it on,
Section. 183.
they need change nothing but the persons.

Tho. 22. qu. 10. Art. 10.
Thomas the Prince of the School Divines, says, that the power of Princes and
Lords, is but of humane institution, and comes not from God; to whom we may
join Cardinal Bellarmine in his Book against Barkley and Monsieur Arnoux,
Dominiu^ and praelatio introducta sunt ex jure humano, and Qu. 12. Art 2.
Dominium introductu^ est de jure gentium quod est jus humanum. Casabon in
epist. ad frontenem ductum Jesuitam.
who upon the second Article of our confession, calls the power of the
Magistrate a humane law, conformable to the Apothegme of reverend Father Binet
the Jesuit, who told Mr. Casaubon, that it were better all Kings were killed,
than a confession should be revealed, because the power of Kings is but an
humane right, but confession is of Divine right.

The Reasons they bring for this opinion, are,

1. That the first King that was raised in the world, namely Nimrod, was raised
by violence, and not by the ordinance of God.

2. That the most part of the Empires and Kingdoms that ever have been, came by
conquest, one Nation overcoming the other; or by some Prince, whose ambition
moved him to pick an unjust quarrel with his Neighbor.

3. That Emperors and Kings are established by humane ways, whether they come
to the Crown by hereditary succession, or by election, since there is no
extraordinary revelation, nor no rule in the Word of God, that a Nation are
bound to follow rather Succession which is hereditary, than that which is by
Election.

4. That there is no express command of God, to obey Henry rather than Lewis,
or to acknowledge this man rather than that for King.

5. That for these considerations, the Apostle St. Peter calls our obedience to
Kings, an Ordinance of man; saying, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of
man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto
Governors, etc. 1 Pet. 2.15.

These are the ordinary reasons of the Covenanters, if they should disavow
them, their Books would witness against them, for they are full of them. But I
would they could get them out of the Schools of the Jesuits, and come and learn
the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, which speak thus:

We on the contrary maintain, that Obedience to Kings and Magistrates is of
Divine right, and founded upon an Ordinance of God, for which purpose those
passages serve, which commands obedience to Kings, and the higher Powers, as to
Persons whom God has set up, and whom we cannot resist, without resisting God.
There is no power but of God, the powers that be, are ordained of God,
whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God, Romans
13.1, 2.

Item, We must be subject, not only for wrath, but also for Conscience sake, V.
5, 7. And Saint Peter, in that place they object against us, wills that we
yield our selves Subjects to Kings for the Lords sake. So that although
Nebuchadnezzar was a wicked King, and a Rod in the hand of God, to destroy the
Nations, notwithstanding God speaks thus to him by his Prophet Daniel, Thou O
King, art a King of Kings, for the God of Heaven has given thee a Kingdom,
power, strength and glory, Dan. 2.37. Moses the first Prince and Lawgiver of
Israel, was established by an Ordinance of God, and Joshua after him, Number.
27.18. Saul, the first King of Israel, and David his Successor, were anointed
by Samuel, and consecrated to be Kings, according to the Ordinance of God, 2
Kings 9. God sent to Jehu, a Prophet, for to anoint him King of Israel. Its God
that girdeth the loins of Kings with a girdle, Job 12.18. God is he that
governs, or as our Translation read it, God is the Judge, he pulls down one,
and sets up another, Psalm. 75.7. The Lord raises the poor out of the dust,
and lifts the needy out of the dunghill, that he may set him with Princes,
Psalm. 113.7, 8. Certainly, if the providence of God extends it self even to the
feeding of Fowls, and giving food to the young Ravens, when they cry unto him,
Psalm. 147. Yea, as to number the very hairs on your head, so that not one of
them falls without his Providence, who believes, that when God will establish
or set up a man on the top of mankind, and make him Head of Millions of people,
the counsel of God does not intervene, and that he leaves not all things to go
at adventure and by chance.

"The reasons they allege against so evident and "apparent a truth, are lame
and interfere.

1. They say, that Nimrod, Hunc ordinem, Regendi inturbavit* Nimrodus, qui novo
Titulo principatum acquisivit scit. Jure Bello. Nimrod arripuit insuetam primus
in populo Tyrannidem, Regnavitque in Babylone. Hier. in Trad. Hebraic. ad Genesis
10. v. 10.
the first King in the World was raised by violence: But that is false, that
before Nimrod there was no Sovereign Prince in the World. Before Nimrod, the
Fathers and Heads of Families, were Kings and Priests, and Sovereign Princes of
their Families; For after the Flood men lived five or six hundred years; So
that it was easy for one man to behold five hundred, yea, a thousand persons
of his Posterity, over whom he exercised a paternal power, and by consequence a
Sovereignty, for there was no other form of Royalty in the earth; whose
children and servants being joined together, one Family could make a great
Commonweal: And even in the time of Abraham, then when the life of man was
shorter, we read how Abraham was called by the Children of Heath, a Prince of
God, Genesis 23.6. that is to say, a mighty Prince; and of his own Family he drew
out three hundred and eighteen Soldiers, to whom if we join the Maidservants,
and those servants who were not fit to bear arms in war; ye cannot but confess,
that although he had no children, yet his own Family were capable to fill a
good Town.

2. They object to us also, that the most part of the Empires and Kingdoms,
have had their beginning by Conquest and violence, and therefore not by the
Ordinance of God: And that if the Conqueror had invaded the Country of another,
by the Ordinance of God, the Inhabitants of the Country had offended God in
opposing and resisting him. Upon which, I say, that those Inhabitants in a
Country whom a strange Prince will invade, do well to oppose and resist him,
and if in this defensive war, the Usurper is slain, he is justly punished. But
if he become Master of them, and if all the ancient Possessors of the Kingdom
are extinguished, and the States of the Country assembled contrive a new form
of State, and all the Officers throughout the Kingdom give to the new King an
Oath of Fidelity, then we must believe, that God has established such a Prince
in the Kingdom; then, I say, the people ought to submit to the Will of God,
who for the sins of Kings and People, transfers Kingdoms, and disposes of the
events of Battles according to his good pleasure.

3. It matters not to say, that Princes, who enter Kingdoms by Hereditary
Succession, or by Election, come in by ways introduced by Custom, and not by
the Ordinance of God: For the Question is not by what ways or means a Prince
comes to the Kingdom, but whether, if being once established by the Ordinance
of God, we are bound to obey him? Our Adversaries indeed would have the Power
of Parliament, of Divine Right, although the Members of Parliament enter by
Election, and oft-times by close and underhand dealing, and by some crafty
Caballe.

Let them hold that the Parliament is by Divine Right; it appears by their
authentic Catechism, that they teach us this Doctrine: Page 5. It Is a gross
error to say, that the King is the Supreme Power, but that power appertains to
the Sovereign Court of Parliament, which not to obey, is to resist the
Ordinance of God: But let us hearken to a better Author.

4. That if there be no Command in the Word of God to obey Henry rather then
Lewis, etc. It Is sufficient that there is a command for to obey the King, and a
command to keep our Oath and Fidelity we have sworn, and by consequence to be
faithful to the King to whom we have taken the Oath of Allegiance. There is no
more command of God found to enjoin us particularly to obey the Parliament that
began November the third, 1640* to which nevertheless, our adversaries,
accounted themselves to be subject by Divine Right. So that if this
consideration should take place, it would follow, that none of them that are
now in the world, are obliged by Divine Right, to fear God, or to believe in
Jesus Christ, because the Scripture has not particularly appointed Thibalt,
Antony or William, that they should fear God, and believe in Jesus Christ; It
suffices that the Word of God contains Rules, which bind particulars without
naming them.

S. Peter truly in the place before cited calls the obedience we owe to Kings,
a humane Ordinance, and that either because Kings command many things, which in
their nature are not of Divine Right, as their commands which forbid wearing of
gold or silver, or the like things on their apparel, or because they attain
this power by certain humane means introduced by custom, which notwithstanding
hinders not but their power may be founded in the Word of God, when they are
once established; for as we said before, the Question is not of the means by
which a Prince comes to the Kingdom, but what Obedience is due to him, after
he is once instaled. And therefore Saint Peter after he had called this
Ordinance an humane Ordinance, commands us to subject our selves for the Lords
sake, and to obey his command.

Whosoever makes the Authority of Kings depend upon the institution of men, and
not upon the Ordinance of God, lessens their Majesty more then three quarters,
and takes from them that which secures their lives and Crowns, more then their
Guards, or mighty Armies, which plants in the Subjects hearts, Fear instead of
Love and Reverence. Then the fidelity and obedience of Subjects will be firm
and lasting, when it shall be incorporated with piety, and accounted a part of
Religion, and of the service we owe to God.

This foundation being over-turned, that the Authority of Kings is but an
humane Ordinance, that which they build upon it, must necessarily fall; for to
reason thus, that the people may take away their Authority from the King,
because they gave it him, is to prove one absurdity by another; as if one
should prove the Moon might be burnt, because its made of wood. For to say the
people gave the power to the King, is to imagine that which never was, no not
in Kingdoms which are Elective. The People give not the King his Authority,
for they cannot give that they have not, but he defers his obedience to Henry
or Charles. But this Prince being elected, receives his Authority from God, as
the beginning and source from whence all power flows. By me Kings Reign, Pro.
8.15. And there is no Power but of God, Romans 13.1. None ought therefore to take
this Power which God has given him.

Thus the Wife choseth her Husband, and gives him a promise of obedience in
marriage, but it is not she that gives him his Authority, that comes from
above: And there is as great an absurdity to say, that the People may depose
the King, because they choose him, as to affirm, that the Woman may put away her
Husband, or subject him to her, when she shall judge expedient, because that
she made choice of him: For the woman loses the liberty of her choice by the
bond of marriage, and the People likewise lose the liberty to revoke their
choice when the Prince Elected is declared King. It Is a strange consequence to
say that the people may take away the Kings Authority, because they have sworn
obedience to him, the Election is no other thing. And it is a reason that
overthrows it self, to say that the people may take from the King his
Authority, because they gave it him: For put the case that it were true that
the people gave Authority to the King whom they Elect; since then the people
have given away their Authority, it is no more in them. This maxim being once
admitted, that it is lawful for every one to take back again what he has
given, it would break the Laws of Society, and fill the world with injustice
and confusion: But let our enemies know, that although the Authority of the
King had not begun, before the Oath of Allegiance, which this Parliament took
in a Body at the beginning of their sitting, yet the Body of the State made
thereby an irrevocable gift of their obedience to the King, and from this Oath
we draw a better consequence then theirs; namely, that they cannot dispose of
their obedience since they have given it to the King: So that were their
reasons good, they would be of no force, but in Kingdoms which were Elective,
and make nothing against King Charles; for neither he, nor any of the Kings his
Ancestors in all ages past, ever came to the Crown by Election.

It Is not to purpose to allege the Oath the King took at his Coronation, as an
agreement and paction made with his people, equivalent to an Election; for the
King receives not his Kingdom at his Coronation, he is King before his Crown
is put on, and therefore Watson and Clark, who conspired against King James of
glorious memory, were justly condemned as guilty of High Treason, although they
alleged that the King was not then Crowned, and it was judged by the Court,
that the Crowning was but a ceremony, for to make the King known to his people.

It Is the like also in France, I judge (says Bodin) that no man doubts but the
King enjoyes before his Anointing, the possession and propriety of his
Kingdom. Before this ceremony, the King enjoyes as fully all his Rights as
after, and according to the Laws of France and England, the King never dies,
whilst there remains any of the Royal Blood, for in the same hour that the King
expires, the lawful Heir is totally invested of the Kingdom. Wherefore the
Eldest Son of Edward the Fourth, who was murdered by his Uncle Richard, is
by general consent numbered amongst the Kings, and named Edward the Fifth,
although he never wore the Crown, nor took any Oath, nor exercised any
Authority. Henry the Sixth was not Crowned but in the ninth year of his Reign,
and yet before his Coronation, many were attainted of High Treason, which could
not have been done, if he had not been acknowledged King.

In the Oaths of the Kings of France and England, at their Coronation, there is
no image of stipulation, covenant or agreement betwixt them and their subjects.
They receive not their Crowns upon any condition, and their people owe their
obedience, whether they perform or violate their promises. This Oath is a
laudible custom, profitable to bear up the Authority of the Prince, by the
love of his Subjects, and to give to the people this satisfaction, that the
King whom God has given them, has an intention to govern them with Justice
and Clemency, and to preserve their Rights and Liberties.

If the King by his Oath should bind himself to fall from the Right to his
Kingdom, when he should violate his Promises, he would then be lesser after
his Oath then before; and surely if the Kings did believe they should diminish
their propriety by their Oath, they would never take it; and to show that their
Authority depends not of their Oath, but their Oath of their Authority, the
Kings of England form it at their pleasure. Very hardly shall you find three
that have taken the same Oath without changing some things. That which was
presented to Henry the Eighth, which is to be seen in the Rolls, was corrected
by his own hand, and interlined.

And moreover, the Oath is made to God, and not to the People, and binds the
Conscience of the Prince, but does not limit his Sovereignty; if the intention
of this solemnity were to make a stipulation or agreement with the people, the
people at the same time should also take a reciprocal Oath, and in a paction of
such importance, there should also pass some public contract, things which are
not practiced; so that hereby it evidently appears, that this imagination of
the enemies of Monarchy, have not any foundation neither in Law nor Custom.

Some persons think they speak very finely, in saying that the Authority of the
King is an Usurpation of the Sword, confirmed by Custom, and that if they
could gain their liberty by the sword, and confirm it by custom, their Right
would be as good as his; and upon this they Philosophy upon the Resolutions of
States, which are in the hand of God, and teach us to follow the course of his
Providence.

But by speaking thus they commit a double error, against conscience, and
against prudence.

As for conscience, the ancient constitution of the State confirmed by so many
ages, Statutes, Oaths of Allegiance, do suffice to learn all Christians that
live under this Monarchy, that it was God that established it, and that by the
command of God, they are bound to defend the State under which they are born,
and whom the Body of the Kingdom has sworn to maintain. These discourses of
following the Providence of God in matters of Revolutions of States, are then
only seasonable, when the Royal Blood is extinguished, or when Usurpation has
gained prescription through length of years, but not when they are near to
overthrow the Estate, and ruin the King; these considerations are good when
the evil is done, and out of remedy, but not when they are acting ill, and when
the obedience and loyalty of the subjects may remedy all. The providence of God
will never serve for excuse of the wickedness of men; let us do that which we
ought to do, and leave God to do what he pleases; and above all, these
moralities of revolution of States are worst in their mouths, who labor to
make this revolution in the State, for it is their duty to prevent this
revolution with all their power; posterity may excuse themselves by the
providence of God in following a new form of State, whilst those that
introduced it, shall be condemned by his Justice.

Besides all this, there is a great want of prudence in this reasoning, for in
quarrelling the Rights of the King as usurpations of violence and custom, they
teach the King to quarrel at their liberties and privileges for the same
reason; yea, and by one much greater, for the Privileges of Parliament are
much newer then the Royal Authority, and the King may say they were obtained by
force after many long and bloody wars: he might cast off all prescription
gained upon the unlimited power of the first Norman Kings, and put himself into
all the rights of their Conquests by another. Wise subjects who would keep
their privileges, Neque unquam libertas gratior extat quam sub Reg. Pio.
ought by all means to preserve peace, for there is nothing renders Kings more
absolute then war. Under a Royal Estate the principal means to preserve the
peoples liberty, is to maintain the only authority of the King; dividing it
amongst many, they do but multiply their Masters: For its better to have one
evil Master, then many good ones.

CHAP. XIV. How the Covenanters have no reason to invite the Reformed Churches,
to their Alliance, since they differ from them in many things of great
importance.
WE wonder exceedingly how our Enemies dare solicit the Reformed Churches to
Covenant with them: From whence comes this great familiarity? Is it because of
their great resemblance one with another? Its that we cannot find. As for
obedience due to the King, which is the principal point of the Covenanters, we
have made it already appear, that the Divines of the Reformed Religion are as
contrary to the Covenanters, as they are to the Jesui^es, their Brethren and
Companions in blood and war.

This point being denied them, they care not much for the society of any Church
in other points of Doctrine. This is the first and great Commandment of the
Covenant, to obey the people against their King, maintain but this their
fundamental maxim, and they will give you leave to choose your Religion, but in
many other things this faction differ from the Reformed Churches.

Concerning the Doctrine of the Lords Day, they have a great quarrel against
Calvin, who is so far from constraining the Church to a Jewish observation of
the Sabbath, that he accounts that the Church is not subjected to the keeping
of the seventh day, a passage which Learned Rivet alleges and appro^^s;
Calvin. Institut. l. 2. c. 8. Rivet Explicatione Decalogi precep. 4.
and to both these, does Doctor Prideaux, since Bishop of Worcester join; who
in a discourse of the Sabbath, complains that the English Sabbatarians lean
toward Judaisme, and go against the common received Doctrine of Divines; never
considering into what captivity they cast themselves, in establishing the
observation of the seventh day under Christianity, by the authority of a
Mosaical Precept. Master Primrose, Minister of Rohan, has writ a very Learned
Book full of profound knowledge, upon this Subject; where amongst other things,
he proves at large how all the Reformed Churches are contrary to this opinion.

Although God has no need of the error of men to establish his service, we so
much love the reverence due to that holy day, that we would not lightly quarrel
at any thing thereupon. Let every one enjoy his Opinion, so that God may be
served, and the day which is dedicated to him, be not violated, neither by
profaneness nor superstition. But since the Covenante^ in this point are so
contrary to the Reformed Churches, and have so often condemned it by their
writings, the Assembly at London did very ill to plead conformity with these
Churches in this Article, and complain to them of the Liberty the King gave to
poor servants to sport on Sunday after Divine Service.

So also for the Festivals, although Mr. Rivet declares his desire, that those
days which carry the Names of Saints, should be abolished in England, Rivet
about the end of his Exposition of the 4 Command.
because of the abuses of these Festivals in the Church of Rome; nevertheless
he acknowledges and commends the Protestation of the English Church hereupon,
that they observe them not for the Service of Saints, but for to glorify God,
in imitation of the Primitive Church, by the memory of those whom God was
pleased to serve himself by, to build up his Church, and exceedingly blames
those who accuse them of Idolatry for this observation.

King James of happy and glorious memory, speaks thus in his Confession of
Faith; As for the Saints departed, I reverence their memory, in honor of whom,
our Church has established so many days of Solemnity as there are Saints
enrolled by the Authority of the Scripture. The Festivals of Saints scarce
exceed the number of the Apostles and Evangelists* Monsieur du Moulin his
Champion defends this Confession of his Majesty. Indeed (says he) we condemn
not this celebration of the memory of Martyrs and Saints; we find the custom
good of the English Church, who have days set apart for the commemoration of
the Apostles: And a little after he gives the reason why the French Churches do
not follow their example, Because living in a Country where Superstition
abounds, the people would be easily drawn to abuse them, and be tainted with
the common contagion. The Prudent and Religious acknowledge with him, That in
this the Churches have liberty to govern themselves, according to the
exigencies of time and place; and that if in the English Calender there be some
festivals which might well be passed by, and whereof there might be some fear
of the consequence; these things ought to have been fairly represented, with
the humility of subjects, and the charity of Christians, and not defame the
reputation of the English Church, as idolatrous, and a member of Antichrist,
nor reform the Church and the King by the Sword, since the Reformed Churches in
this point acquits them, and the example of the Primitive justifies them.

But although they make a great show of their agreement with other Churches,
they make but use of them in some points where they like and approve of, and
spare not to accuse them of idolatry as well as others when they please. It Is
that which they do without naming them, then when they reject, as gross
idolatry, the observation of the memory of the days dedicated to the Nativity,
Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ, and the sending of the Holy
Ghost into the Church. Behold here the Opinion and Practice of the Reformed
Churches, declared by that Godly and Learned Festus Hominius, Disput. 1. These.
3.
Its a thing of very great profit to the edification of the Church, to
commemorate and press solemnly to the people at certain ordinary times the
principal manifestations of God, and his most signal Benefits to his Church,
since that the Primitive Church, even in the times of the Apostles, dedicated
certain days to the Anniversary Celebration of the Nativity, Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ, and sending of the Holy Spirit. Its very
well done to retain the practice of the ancient Church in a thing which is not
simply indifferent, but singularly profitable to edification, provided that
none attribute superstitiously any Sanctity to be in the days; and impose not
upon the consciences of Christians a yoke of absolute necessity, contrary to
the Liberty of the Gospel.

Our new Reformers cannot affirm in sincerity that the Clergy of England
attributed any Inherent Sanctity to be in the days, or made use of them to
impose a yoke of absolute necessity upon their consciences, there was no need
then to abolish them with such rigor, not to scandalize so many pious souls,
nor resist a vain fear of superstition by insolence and profaneness, which is
a remedy worse then the evil. The day of the Nativity in the year 1644* was
changed by an express public Order into a Fast, which was the first time since
the Apostles that there was any Fast kept that day in the Christian Church, and
because many would not Fast, they sent Soldiers into their houses a little
before dinner, to visit their Kitchins and Ovens, who carried away the meat,
and eat it, though it was a fasting day, who were exempted from fasting,
Senatus-Consulius scelera pa^rantur.
provided they made others fast; such insolences were ordinary, if we may call
them insolent actions which were done by Authority.

And as for Easter day, on which and the days following the people are
enjoined by Act of Parliament to receive the Blessed Sacrament; the devotion of
the people in many places have been opposed by violence. We have heard of a
Parish, where by main force the Bread and Wine was taken away from the people,
who were assembled at Church for this holy action. Behold their ways to change
the times, and to reform abuses, which is to resist a supposed superstition,
with a true and manifest one, and to make Sacrilege fight for Religion.

Lets pass to other differences: The Reformed Churches do not believe as they,
that all significant ceremonies excepting in the Sacraments, are unlawful; for
then, it would follow that to keep off the Hat, and kneel at Prayer, should be
unlawful, for these are ceremonies which signify reverence; whence many of the
Covenanters for this reason refuse to put off their Hats, or kneel at prayer,
without being taken notice of, and reproved by authority.

Also the Reformed Churches do not believe as they, that to be tied to written
prayers, or forms of prayers in the Administration of the Sacraments, is to
bind the Spirit of God, many of the Covenanters are come so far as to call the
usage of forms of prayer idolatry; yea, even the use of the Lords Prayer, which
the most part of this faction refuse to say; although by a special privilege
its permitted the Minister by their Directory to make use of it if he please;
for its not commanded him.

According to this Directory (as they call it) that is to say, an instruction
how the Minister should govern himself in the Church. The Minister must not say
the Apostles Creed, nor repeat the ten Commandments of God, whereby the people
shall be without any form of what they are to believe, or what they are to do;
therefore in the families of most part of this faction, they reach no^ their
children neither the Creed, the Lords Prayer, nor the ten Commandments; and as
for the children which have learned these holy forms, they teach them to forget
them: Above all things, they take a special care that the Minister ties not
himself to any form of words, as a thing of dangerous consequence, and which
has a taint of Antichrist. Henceforward then there will be no uniformity in
the Divine Service, nor no more help for the infirmity of aged Ministers, nor
for the understanding and memory of simple and dull Auditors, who cannot
comprehend at the first aboard what the Minister says, but had need to be well
accustomed to him.

Also there will be no more bounds to devour fantastical spirits, which is the
principal vice of this Nation: Every Church will have a particular Order, or
rather will have none at all; for the Pastor has liberty to alter it every
time he pleases, nothing being forbidden but to make use of the long
established forms, by the Authentical Acts of many Parliaments, sanctified by
the public devotion of so many years; and composed by the first Reformers,
persons excellent in piety and wisdom, whose books these are not worthy to
carry after them.

If these Directors had had any fear of scandalizing the Churches, whom they
invited to associate with them, they would never have abolished the custom
received in all the Reformed Churches, and generally in all the Christian
Churches of the World, who have certain forms for the public Service of God.
If they had born any respect to Antiquity, and to the universal consent of the
Christian Church in all ages, and in all places, they would not have begun in
this age a custom so prodigiously singular, as to banish out of the Church all
forms and orders of prayers, the Apostles Creed, and the ten Commandments.

There rests yet some Liturgies of the ancient Churches, and Hymns used in the
Public Service, as the eighteenth Canon of the Council of Laodicea, That the
form or Liturgy of prayers Morning and Evening ought always to be the same.
There has not, nor ever was there a Church, who had not some forms of prayers,
but above all for the higher Powers, but that being abolished in England by the
Directors, we need not wonder if many Ministers of the new Edition have long
since forgot to make mention of the King in their prayers, and those that pray
for him, do it in odious terms, thrust on by a perverse and malignant zeal,
telling God a long story of the sins they impute unto their King, as if they
would pour all their choler into the Bosom of God. If any amongst them should
thus pray for his Father in the Pulpit, Lord grant Repentance to my Father of
all his extortions, perjuries, thefts, murders and adulteries, they would
account him a fool, or exceedingly wicked, but against their King all things
were permitted. Behold the fruits of abolishing the Divine Service, and the
liberty of the Prophetique Spirits of the times, fomented by public order.

CHAP. XV. Of Abolishing the Liturgy, in doing whereof, the Covenanters oppose
the Reformed Churches.
AMongst their reasons for the Abolishing such good prayers in this time of
Rebellion, this none of the least, because in the Liturgy there are diverse
clauses which ^each the people the Sovereignty of their Prince, and the
obedience they owe unto him. There the King is called our most Gracious
Sovereign: This would give the Minister the Lie, if after that he should call
him a most cruel Tirant, as it was their custom: There they pray, that it would
please God to strengthen the King, that he might overcome all his enemies,
which were to pray to God for the ruin of their holy Covenant: there God is
called the only Governor of Princes, which would contradict the Doctrine and
Practice of the times, which gives other Governors to Princes besides God, and
subject the King to his Subjects.

There they pray to God that the Subjects of the King may duly consider whose
Authority he has, namely Gods. If his Subjects duly come to consider this,
they would lay down their Arms which they had taken up against him, for fear of
fighting against God, and would reject the instruction taught them, that the
King holds his Authority of men.

There they pray that the Subjects of the King may faithfully serve, honor,
and humbly obey him, a prayer of a most dangerous consequence, and would
utterly spoil the affairs of the Covenanters, if the Lord should hear them.
There they also pray, the Lord would so bless the King, that under him we may
be godly and quietly governed, but it is not under him but without him, that
they would govern us, there being not according to their saying, any means to
live godly and quietly under his obedience.

In the same manner they pray for all those who are established in authority
under him; but according to the form of the State turned the bottom upward, as
the Presbyterians would have it, they must now pray for all those established
in authority over him. It Is also a most dangerous clause in that same Prayer,
which prays to God to punish all wickedness and vice, and to preserve true
Religion and Piety. For if this Prayer were once heard, the Zealots of the
State who draw their swords against the King, and the Preachers of Rebellion,
would be constrained to make their Speeches to the people on the Gallows, and
their hypocrisy would be unmasqued, and they rendered the public object of
contempt and scorn, and the Brownist and Anabaptist sent into the Islands of
America.

Also the Prayer that God would give peace in our days, would be very
unsuitable to the Intentions of the Covenanters, who preach no other thing in
substance, then that Text ill applied, Cursed is he that withholds his sword
from shedding blood.

They have therefore voted it a point of prudence to lay aside the Liturgy out
of their way, which is so contrary to their politic intentions; as for
Conscience and the Government of the Church, which is dislocated and dismembered
by this Abolition of the Divine Service, they will then consider of, after
these Gentlemen have served themselves of the general disorder, to build
themselves an Empire in the confusion.

Its most certain that in this change God is far worse served, there are indeed
some certain Ministers capable without the Divine Service, to make prayers full
of Edification, and truly every Minister of the Gospel ought thus to be
prepared, but how many are there amongst them who for lack of being tied to
certain prayers in public, abuse the patience of God and holiness of prayer:
Charenton the name of the Protestant Church at Paris.
If the Judicious Auditory at Charenton, should but hear what tales and news
these people tell God, the insolent familiarity whereby they discourse and
reason with him, their Maledictions against their King, their humorous, mad and
fantastical tricks, which pass for sallies of zeal, they would mark out
lodgings for them in the petites Maisons (with us here called Bedlam) which
might exempt them from the Chatelet (but with us from Newgate.)

Certainly as Liberty ought not to be a Cloak of maliciousness, so it ought not
to be a door open for folly. The Libertine and capricious humor of the Climate
in matter of the Service of God, should have taught these Directors to have
restrained this licentiousness rather than to have let loose the rains, and the
importunity of those that demanded this liberty, should have the more induced
them to refuse it. But what? those who accorded this most pernicious liberty,
were the same persons who only demanded it.

The profane contempt wherewith they used this so holy Liturgy, ought not to
be imputed to the Insolency of the Soldiers, but unto the Instructions which
were given them. The Parliaments Soldiers Catechism published and recommended
by special Authority, teaches them to tear it a pieces wheresoever they find
it, Page 22. Calling it a most Abominable Idol, and a Nurse of Ignorance and
blindness, which foments an Idle, Lazy and dissolute Ministry, and that
therefore they should reduce it to Ashes, as Hezekiah did the Brazen Serpent,
as the occasion of much evil and an object of Idolatry.

But seeing in so great a change they oppose the general consent of their
Church, and that for one whom they please hereby, they offend more than a
hundred.

They labor to turn the eyes of the ignorant people toward the Churches
beyond the Seas, hoping as well they might, that looking so far off, they could
not know what they did. The Authors of the Directory affirm, In the Preface to
the Directory.
That by a long and sad experience they find that the English Liturgy is
offensive to the Foreign Reformed Churches. And they add a little after, That
it is to answer the expectation of those Churches, that they reject the
ordinary Liturgy. Oh our good God! these persons do they meddle to preach the
Truth? Because that France and England are separated by Sea and Language, do
they think their people shall never be informed the truth of the opinion of
their neighbors touching the English Liturgy, nor the manner of their practice
in matter of their public Service? I hope they will leave to others the
practice of this Maxim, Lie boldly, although you be refuted after, there will
remain some impression upon the spirits of the hearers; And therefore we will
believe charitably, that the most part of these Divines knew not what they
said, but referred themselves to the Faith of others, and hoping that after
they are better informed, they will change their opinion, we will say to them,
as St. Paul to the Galatians, I have confidence in you through the Lord, that
ye will be none otherwise minded, but he that troubles you shall bear his
judgment, whosoever he be, Gal. 5.10. Since then they speak of their long
experience, let us take it from the beginning, soon after the Liturgy was
compiled, it was sent to good Cal^in who thus writ to the Protector of England,
as for the form of prayers, and Ecclesiastical ceremonies, Epistola ad
Protectorem Anglia.
I much approve that they should be established as a certain form from which it
may not be lawful for the Pastors to go in the execution of their charge.
Behold two points very contrary to the Covenanters, the one that he very well
approves of the Book of Common prayer, and the Ecclesiastical Ceremonies; the
other, that there ought to be a certain form of Divine Service, from which it
should not be lawful for the Pastors to digress: Will they not say in reading
these words of Calvin, Durus sermo, this is a hard saying, who can hear it?
What cruelty is this, to undertake to bind the Spirit of Zeal? and to dare to
speak of a Rule to them, who will stand fast in the liberty Christ has made
them free, and will not again be entangled in the yoke of bondage, for they
make use of this Text for that subject; we will leave them this Text of Calvin
to ruminate, and pray them not to begin the date of their long experience, till
after his Decease.

Bucer Scripta Angl^eana, p. 455.
Martin Bucer will yet shorten it some years, he speaks thus to the Churches of
England of the form of their Divine Service, I give thanks to God who has
given you grace to reform these Ceremonies in such a purity, for I have found
nothing in it, which is not taken out of the Word of God, or at least is not
contrary to it, being rightly interpreted.

That which the Directors and their party find most to be reprehended in this
Book, is of so small consideration with Beza, that he wrote thus to those who
were so enraged against it, The Surplice (says he) is not a thing of such
importance, that Ministers should be so scrupulous, Beza ad quosdom Anglicarum
Ecclestarum fratres.
as to leave their Function rather than wear it, or that the people should
forbear to ^eed of the bread of life, rather than hear their Pastors preach who
wear them. And as for receiving the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper
kneeling, Music in Churches, and things of the like nature, he says to them.
That these are such small and indifferent things which should not much trouble
them. Behold here their long experience much shortened, for its little above
forty years since Beza died.

Gualter and Bullinger likewise commending the English Liturgy, condemned the
affected tenderness of some who made use of it for a cloak of their Sedition
and Rebellion, speaking thus in an Epistle which they both jointly wrote to
their discontented Brethren in England upon this Subject, That if any of the
people persuade themselves that these things smell of Popery, let them learn to
know the contrary, and let them be perfectly instructed, and that if the
clamours of any of them raise up troubles amongst the multitude, let them
beware lest in doing so, they draw upon your necks a more heavy yoke, and
provoke no^ his Majesty, and bring not many Ministers into such dangers out of
which they shall find no means to escape. This advertisement might well be
turned into a Prophecy, and these persons who falsely allege the Reformed
Churches are offended with the Liturgy of England, repent too soon that they
had not followed their exhortations, and submitted themselves.

Now the King has offered to exempt tender Consciences from the observation of
certain things which offend them; yea to submit the whole Reformation to a
lawful Synod: But in stead of receiving this Gracious offer of his Majesty,
they persecute him and his Clergy with all violence; manifesting thereby that
it is not our Reformation, but our destruction which is capable to content
them, and these tender Consciences which tremble at the sight of a Surplice, or
the sound of an Organ, are strong and lusty enough to commit murder and
Sacrilege; like the Pharisees, who strained at a Gnat, and swallowed a Camel.

His Majesty made a Declaration to all the reformed Churches, of the sincerity
of his Profession and intention to live and die in the holy Religion which he
had maintained, and because the Factious of his Kingdom had used all their
endeavors to alienate Foreign Churches from the Church of England upon the
outward of Religion, his Majesty remembers them there how at the Synod of Dort
both the Discipline and Liturgy of England was approved by word and writing by
the most eminent Divines of Germany, France, Denmark, Sweden and Switzerland,
as appears in the Acts of that Synod, and yet nevertheless the Covenanters at
this day, are so impudently bold as to publish that by long and sad experience
they have found that the English Lyturgy was offensive to the Foreign Reformed
Churches. Where is their honesty? Where is their sincerity? Do they hope by
these wicked ways to draw down a blessing of God upon their cause? The Truth
which they pretend to advance, must it be established and set up by lying?

By all this then it appears that their long experience comes to nothing, but
if they are wanting in the old experience, let them produce the new. Where are
the Foreign Churches that require of them the abolition of the public
Service? Would they could cause them to speak for themselves: By Foreign
Churches they cannot understand the Scotch Church; for since the beginning of
this war, the Covenanters would not acknowledge them for strangers, for fear of
being reproached for inviting and bringing in Foreign Forces, and keeping them
under pay in the Kingdom. And as for other Churches, we account the experience
of the Authors of the Directory do not much exceed ours: Now we have not known
any Protestant stranger ever made it any difficulty to join in the public
prayers of the Church of England, except some walking Anabaptists, as in London
they have lately made to appear; and neither in France nor the Low Countries,
we never knew or understood the least trace of dissension hereupon, and if the
fashion of some Particulars amongst us displease other Churches, they do not
less displease ours.

The Reformed Churches are better instructed than lightly to quarrel at the
exterior circumstance of Divine Service, where the substance is whole and
sound; they have learned to speak after Calvin, Confessio Ecclesiarum
Gallicarum inter opus^ula Calvin.
in the Confession presented in the Name of the Churches of France to the
Emperor and Princes of Germany, We acknowledge that all and every Church have
this right to make Laws and Statutes, and for to establish a common Policy
amongst them, provided that all things be done in the House of God decently and
in order, and they owe obedience to these Statutes, so that they do not
inthrall the Conscience, nor impose Superstition, and those that refuse this
are accounted by us seditious and wilful.

Beza goes yet a little further, In his Epistle before alleged.
and maintains that in the outward of Religion, Many things may, yea ought to
be born, notwithstanding they are not justly commanded.

St. Augustine has an Epistle upon this Subject, which is a Golden Epistle,
Tom. 2. Epist. ad Januarium.
wherein he instructs Januarius of the indifferency of Ecclesiastical
Observations, as of the times of Fasting, and the diverse customs of receiving
the Blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper. All things of this kind (says he)
have their Observations free, and for this there is no better of Discipline for
a grave and prudent Christian, then to do as he sees them do in all the
Churches whither he goes, for that which is neither against faith and good
manners ought to be held indifferent, and ought to be observed according to the
company with whom we live and converse; and hereupon he reports how his Mother
being come to Millan found her self in great perplexity, because they did not
fast on the Saturday, as they did in the Church from whence she came, and he to
resolve he, went to ask counsel of St. Ambrose Archbishop of Millan, who
answered him* When I (says he) go to Rome, I fast on the Saturday, when I am
here I fast not on that day, do ye the same: Into whatsoever Church ye go,
observe their customs; if you your self will not give offense to persons, and
will that no person should give you offense. All Protestants of Europe except
the Faction of the Covenant, govern themselves thus, in whatsoever place they
are, they join with the Reformed Church, whatsoever their form of Discipline
be, which as some say is diverse in all Nations.

To this grave counsel of S. Ambr. S. Austin adds a Character to the life, of
the imperious and scrupulous humor of our melancholy zealots, whom one would
think had an intention to paint them out: I have often perceived (says he) with
much grief and sorrow, that many weak and infirm persons have been much
troubled through their Contentions, wilfulness and superstitious fearfulness at
some of their Brethren, for doing some things which could not be certainly
defined by the Authority of the Holy Scriptures, nor by the tradition of the
universal Church, nor by the utility that might thereby come for the bettering
and amendment of our lives; only because there is some matter for their
conceptions to reason and discourse upon, or because they think the farther
they go, or are able to separate themselves from the Customs received, is the
most exquisite and nearest to perfection, moving such litigious and idle
Questions, that they make appear to all, that they will never allow of any
thing well done unless they do it themselves.

The Reformed Churches take and give this Liberty, that every one form an
outward Order of Divine Service according to their prudence, and its more to be
wished than expected, that there should be one and the same order throughout
all Churches. But I know, not any Church that reject and cast off all certain
Forms as the Covenanters. The Declaration following made some few years since,
by persons of account in the Churches of France, is notable.

As for the Ceremonies and Customs of Ecclesiastical Service and Discipline,
Sententia Quorundam Ecclesiae id Gallin pastorum eximiorum edita a D. Johanne
Duraeo Londini, An. 1638.
no judge convenient to leave to every Church his own, without altering or
changing any thing. One day when it shall please God to perfect and confirm
amity amongst these Churches, we may be able by an universal council and
consent, to form a certain Liturgy which may be as a Symbol and Bond of
Concord. The Churches of the Covenanters ought to be exempted out of this
Number, for the Liturgy is become to them an Apple of Discord, which has made
them quarrel with all Churches of the world; being in this point like unto
Esau, whose hands were against every one, and every ones hands against him.
Therefore the Directors refute themselves by a manifest contradiction, then
when by their public Declaration they tell the people, that it is to conform
themselves to the Reformed Churches, that they prescribe not an ordinary form
of public Prayers and Administration of the Sacraments. Seeing that it is a
thing most notoriously known, that all the Reformed Churches have certain Forms
of Prayers: But they do as if they should apparel themselves with Green and
Yellow, because the Ministers of France apparel themselves with black: It Is the
Doctrine of the Brownists, which now predominate in England, that for to have a
Liturgy or Form of Prayers, is to have another Gospel: Now after all this,
Barrow Refut. 224
Do they not well, think you, to court the Churches of France, and to make a
great noise of their conformity with them, having so openly condemned them? and
their phanatical Frenzy in this point is proceeded so far, that neither the
Lords Prayer, nor the Ten Commandments, nor the Apostles Creed, are repeated
in their Churches, nor are taught their Children in their Houses; much less any
Form of Catechism: Behold here a Faction who reject the Books of Christian
Religion: An horrible and unheard of thing in all ages, and in all Churches
since Christianity entered the world. And dare these people speak of Reformation
and Conformity with the Reformed Churches?

CHAP. XVI. Of the great prudence and wisdom of the first English Reformers,
and of the fool-hardiness of these at present.
IF these directors who boast themselves of a new Light, had had at least the
light of Prudence, they would have considered that they had to deal with
popular Spirits, who were accustomed to a good and holy Liturgy, but since on
a sudden interdicted the use, they could not but think they were suddenly
transported into another Gospel, for the people are dull, and fastened upon the
exterior, and that if they be once fastened to a form of devotion which is
good, although below perfection, there is occasion to praise God that the
people have any taste of devotion, even in any Form, and it should be cherished
and encouraged. And if there be any thing in this Form to be amended, it should
be done so mildly and dexterously, that the people be not exasperated, and the
change made in the outward skin of Religion, make not the substance distasted;
for the most part men's spirits penetrates not much further than the
superficies, as indeed no further did theirs who came to reform us with the
sword. Its a very dangerous thing to overthrow an Order wherein the Devotion of
the people has taken root. For besides the disorder that follows commonly in
the Church and State, they shall find that in transplanting Devotion into a new
soil, they cause it to die; some being profane, others desperate and
atheistical.

For an exemplary conduct of Christian prudence in this great point of public
Reformation, all after ages will admire the English Reformers under the Reign
of Edward the Sixth, who intrapt the people, as Saint Paul beguiled the
Corinthians, who confessed that being subtle, he caught them by guile, for to
establish the Doctrine, so as it is contained in the Confession of Faith in
English Church, and agrees with that of other reformed Churches, they kept
themselves from going openly and suddenly against the inclination of the
people, above all in the exterior, which although it is of less importance,
has notwithstanding a very strong influence upon the common people. After the
Reformation was concluded upon by the Prelates and Nobles, Mattins were said in
the Cathedral Churches at their accustomed hours, with the same Garments they
were wont to wear, and the same ordinary singing, but the Hymns and Psalms they
read in English, and their Scriptures were not read in pieces, but by whole
Chapters, and Prayers were put to God only in the Name of Jesus Christ, and in
a known tongue; a thing which did much content the people, and much edify
them, and being accustomed to these things, they passed by the Mass. Sermons
became more frequent, simply instructing the people in the Truth and Holiness
without any bitterness or contest; whereby they gained the spirits of the
people by charity, which is the only method for to decide controversies, and in
a short time, that which Superstition had drawn over the Service of God, was
insensibly abolished, and there was a general conversion of the Kingdom wrought
without any noise.

This prudent way wrought better effects than all the combats of Religion,
whether fought by Armies or Letters, which have been since above these hundred
years: Their enemies of the Church of Rome would much rather the Reformers had
disputed concerning the Doctrine and Discipline, and that they had set upon
them with their utmost strength.

Our melancholy and peevish Zelots would have done no great good upon them by
the ways they now take, if this task had fallen into their hands; for such a
great work there was need of better notions of piety and prudence than the
fundamental Maxims of the reformation at present, The Book called Christ upon
his Throne, p. 23.
That the purest Religion is that which has least conformity with the Church
of Rome. That for to do well, they must do quite contrary to that which the
Church of Rome does, and hereby they make all that remains of the Institution
of the Apostles to become Antichristian, because the Papist has practiced
them. Maxims which are only proper for poor seditious Spirits, whose nature is
like the Crab-fishes, who know not how to go but backward. Religion consists
not in negation, the saving Truths are affirmative, and it would be a dangerous
rule to believe altogether contrary to that which the Devil believes, which
would oblige us to deny the Divinity.

For so high an enterprise, which is equally as necessary as dangerous, there
is required clear, seeing judgments, firm and stable, ready and charitable; who
are able to penetrate and dive into the inside of Religion, and discern the
meat from the shell; who without bending the Truth to the times, know how to
accomodate their work to the nature of men and affairs; and who have the
discretion recommended by Saint Paul, Prove all things, hold fast that which is
good, wisely distinguishing betwixt the Apostolical Institution, and the rust
that is grown on it through length of time.

These excellent persons manifest to the world that they well understood this
secret, that the matter of Religion is a thing rather adored than known by the
people; but the Form and Ceremony is that their eyes are fixed upon, and which
fills their spirits, and he that pleases them in the exterior, shall easily
prevail with them for the inward of Doctrine.

Now it appears that Superstition is always of the same Nature, although she
changes her object; for the Fanaticall zeal of the people of the Covenant
being fleshed and egged on to destroy the exterior Order, perceived not in the
mean while that they undermined the foundations of Faith; For we find amongst
our enemies, many different Sects; Some denying the Trinity, the Incarnation of
the Son of God, and his Divinity, who nevertheless agree altogether to hate
and abolish our Lyturgie with the sword, without contending amongst themselves
for these essential differences; neither are they moved for these monstrous
errors, which directly oppose the glory of God and salvation of men; so much
are men for the most part children, yea brutish in matters of Piety, fastening
themselves upon appearances, and not upon things, considering more the garment
then the body of Religion.

The vulgar being every where of this disposition, God showed great favor to
the ignorant people in times of our Fathers, to put them into so good hands,
who knew how to lead them mildly to the Truth, without exasperating them for
the Discipline. For to provoke and irritate them, was not the means to instruct
them.

Let all the world judge if the Reformers at present follow this example, and
whether they search to instruct or to provoke the people; for after we have
made the best and soundest party amongst them to confess that the Doctrine of
the Church of England was good and holy, and they be demanded hereupon, why
they persecute the King and his people with such rage? They pay us with this
miserable reason, that the people are affectionate to certain things as
necessary, which are not necessary, and they would wean them from this opinion:
And must they for this drown three famous Kingdoms in blood, and snatch the
Crown from off the Head, and the Sword out of the hand of a good King?

We may well tell them that they undertake an impossible thing; for there is no
Religion, no Nation, nor almost person, who is not lodged there; but they
themselves, are they not more superstitious in this point, than those whom they
would correct? For what greater superstition, for to make a necessity to
contradict and oppose things; where there is no necessity, yea to account the
abolishing of things not necessary, so necessary, that for it they will
massacre the King, and bathe themselves in the blood of the Church and State.
Can there be in the world a more pernicious superstition? No verily, if they
consider that this superstition, kills the soul as well as the body. For those
from Whom they take the use of their holy prayers, have great cause to fear
they will also take from them their Religion, whereupon some have Fallen into a
desperate Melancholy; if they deal thus with us, because they have a greater
measure of light then we, it is much to be desired that they had a little more;
that they fall not into the offense condemned by S. Paul, and through thy
knowledge shall thy weak brother perish for whom Christ died, but when ye sin
against the Brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ, 1
Cor. 8.11, 12.

Heretofore this faction would be spared in their disobedience to the
Ecclesiastical Laws, pretending tenderness and weakness of Conscience; but now
that they are become Masters of the Laws, they regard not our weakness, but
force us to follow their fantasies, without considering our doubts and
scruples. The King by the Articles of Uxbridge, offered them liberty of
Conscience, but they will not give neither the King nor his subjects the like
liberty: Either take the Covenant or leave your Benefice, was the choice they
gave many Ministers.

Allege to them the great and deep affliction of the people, because they had
taken from them their Common Prayers, their Forms for the celebration of the
Sacraments, and of Marriage, their customs of receiving the Sacrament at
Christmas, Easter, and Pentecost, and the decent manner of burying their dead,
with some Prayers and Texts of Scripture, which put the living in mind of their
mortality, and raised up in them an assurance of their resurrection. They will
answer you, that these observations are not necessary, and mock at the
affliction of the ignorant people: But we hold that it is necessary to obey
God, who has commanded us to do nothing whereby thy weak brother stumbleth, is
offended, or made weak, but be such as give none offense, neither to the Jew,
nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God, Romans 14.21. Also the imaginary
danger which they fear of things that may come to pass, is a thousand times
less then the present scandal and offense done to pious souls, to behold all
Ecclesiastical order overthrown, and Liberty given to profane and fanatique
spirits, to whom any thing is permitted, unless to obey the King, and the
orders established by Lawful Authority.

But let us pass to other offenses: There are many more besides the violation
of Orders, the very substance of Religion is endamaged. What care do many
people take to Baptize their children? How do they reprove them that Baptize no
more in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost? Is it notpermitted
to every one to Baptize or not Baptize their children? and Baptism is it not
refused to many Infants, which are presented to be Baptized?

These new Reformers find so many difficulties in the capacity of their
Parents, that they are constrained many times to carry their children far from
their dwellings to be received into the Christian Church; for it is one of the
Errors of the Times, that if the Father has not Faith (that is to say a Faith
after their mode) the Infant must not be Baptized; In stead whereof the
Reformed Churches in Baptizing Infants, consider not the Faith of the Parents,
but of the Church in which they are born; and the Doctrine, not according as it
is believed, but according as it is taught, Fidem non subjectivam sed
objectivam. For if they must be certain whether the Father has Faith, they
should also be certain that he is the Father of the Infant, which the Charity
of the Church questioneth not.

Also it is an ordinary custom amongst them to rebaptize aged persons, and to
plunge women naked into the Water until they say they feel faith.

The abuse of the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper is yet worse, because
it is more universal, and maintained by the body of their Divines. We beseech
all lovers of the Christian Religion to enquire themselves of these Ministers,
how long time they have forborne to receive or administer this holy Sacrament?
when was it that the heads of the Covenanters received it? when is it that
their Soldiers were partakers of it, those zealous murderers, whose
assassinations and plunderings are steeped in piety? Is it because they dare
not receive the body and blood of our Lord, with hands defiled with rapine and
innocent blood? But this reason cannot serve for the Churches where the
Ministers are laid hold on, and forbidden to administer the Sacrament where
they are Ministers. How many Churches are there where there has been no
speaking of a Sacrament these fifteen or sixteen years? And is it not for them
to mock God to make a Directory of the manner of receiving the Lords Supper,
and not to make use of it, yea by force to hinder execution and performance of
it?

Our Lord Jesus has commanded us, To do this in remembrance of him, 1 Cor.
11.26. But behold here persons, who impose a necessity not to do, because they
know not those who are worthy, and therefore they hinder others to obey Jesus
Christ, taking by force the Bread and Wine from the people, who were assembled
to communicate, and carried away the Minister out of the Church, for fear he
should administer the Sacrament. These actions cry to heaven, and will one day
draw down a just vengeance. These proceedings make us fear, least they rank the
Lords Supper amongst the superannuated ceremonies which must be abolished; for
in many Churches where the Covenanters are it is not used, which is a horrible
thing to hear; the Church of God, since Christ's time, never before brought
forth such examples.

Certainly since Jesus Christ would, that we should do this in remembrance of
him, until his coming again; if he should come now, he would find it very
strange, that they had left before his coming this celebration of the memory of
his death, which he had so expressly commanded, and it is to be presumed that he
will receive no reason against his Command: for the coming of Jesus Christ is
the only reason which ought to make this holy Ordinance cease.

By this scruple, that they dare not administer the holy Supper, but to those
alone whom they know to be worthy (which is the general pretext of their party
for their total abstinence) they condemn not only the Reformed Churches, who
exclude none from the holy Communion, unless they be ignorant and scandalous
persons, but also Jesus Christ, who administered to the Disciple that betrayed
him; even then when he was plotting his treason in his heart.

By this also they even bind themselves not to celebrate the Supper of the Lord
until they be inspectors and lookers into Conscience, that is to say, Gods: For
otherwise they cannot be fully satisfied of the worthiness of persons, and all
those who have a holy desire to partake of the Lords Table, shall not be
admitted, until these principal Clerks of the Councel-Chamber of God have
formed a Church, which consists purely of Elect.

Its great pity when men will be too wise, and introduce Laws of Severity into
the Church which God has not required at our hands: These men should meditate
on the Text of Solomon, Eccles. 7.16. Be not righteous overmuch, neither make
thy self over-wise, why should thou destroy thy self? Or otherwise, Why
should thou draw desolation on thy self? Thus the Pharisees by an
impertinent wisdom and affected Authority, and a sublime Divinity of Chymeras,
were confounded in the vanity of their understandings, and drew desolation upon
themselves, and their Church.

But yet there is a mystery of Iniquity under this scruple, which does deeply
stain the Divines of the Covenant; for their Masters foment them for to advance
their affairs, and it is easy to see, that if they once become the strongest,
they will exclude from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper all those who cannot
banish from their heart the love of their King, and the Church wherein they
were born and brought up: In a Sermon preached before the House of Commons, and
printed by command, By Mr. Francis Cheynall.
we learn that their Party will no more communicate with the Antichristian
Faction; the Preacher explains himself, and tells us he means all those that
adhere to the King in this quarrel: They have many times preached that none
should receive the Lords Supper, but those who had taken the Covenant; yea,
they have spoke aloud, that the Oath of the Covenant, and the Lords Supper
should be administered together, so that the Communicants must swear upon the
Body and Blood of our Lord, and upon the hope of their Salvation, that they
would be Rebels to their King as long as they live; and the Blood of Jesus
Christ must be employed for the same use, the cup of man's blood which the
confederates with Cataline drunk round one to another, in taking the Oath of
Conjuration to murder their Superiors, and ruin their country. But this
design is not yet ripe for execution, they defer it for a time: In the mean
time, these Gentlemen and the Spiritual Fathers deny themselves the Seal of
their Union with Jesus Christ, and hereafter they will dispose of this
Sacrament according as the necessity of the Covenanters do require. They forgot
to put down this Article of their reservation in the Epistle they sent to
foreign Churches, but in inviting them in general to conform themselves unto
them, they exhort them to this amongst the rest. What? Must the Reformed
Churches then abstain from the Lords Supper, and choose to interdict the
Ordinance of Jesus Christ, rather then put themselves in danger of administering
to the unworthy? Must the Universal Christian Church be gulled by their
scruples, composed of the folly of some, and the malice of others? Must all
believers in the World hold their Faith in suspense, and deprive themselves of
the Sacrament of their Union with Jesus Christ, until the Covenanters of
England have found a proper time to make use of the Body and Blood of Christ,
to bind together a wicked faction, and have made the mysteries of Salvation
their footstool for ambition.

Rather then suffer by a criminal complacency, that Religion should be so
destroyed, and that these horrible things should pass for Doctrines of the
Reformed Churches, let all those who bear this title, defend the honor of the
Gospel, and thereby a public detestation of so great a corruption. Let all
those who love God testify by a just anger they hate the evil. It matters not
what fraternity these Innovators pretend with other Churches, if they corrupt
the Christian Religion, and invite them to do the like, Familiaris accipere
haud familiariter, let them manifest, they have no fraternity with heresy, and
impiety, repulse boldly the temptation of those who invite so basely to do ill,
that they may have no more courage to return.

But there is one consideration which should mitigate your indignation against
them. A woman at Dover cut off her child's head and alleged this Scripture. The
Quaker that fasted and died at Colchester.
That amongst this most impious extravagansie, there is a malady and disease of
the spirit, for many of this party have their brains dislocated and displaced.
Some whereof have taken their children, and gone and sacrificed them,
pretending a particular command, like that God gave to Abraham; others have
shut themselves up with a Bible, and resolved to eat nothing, because it is
written, That man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word which
proceeds out of the mouth of God. Some have killed their cat, because she had
taken a mouse on Sunday, but deferred the execution until Monday. And there are
women and tradesmen amongst them, who preach by the spirit without call,
knowledge, or premeditation, others who account the receiving of the Sacrament
on their knees, is to communicate at Mass, and that the Surplice is the Smock
of the Whore of Babylon, the Public Prayers Mass refined, the sound of the
Organs, the Hoboyes of Antichrist; ye need not wonder the Covenanters have so
great a party, since fools and Idiots are on their side.

The like weakness is seen in the Epistle of the Assembly to the Reformed
Churches, they highly aggravate the persecutions prepared for all those who
would not bear the mark of the beast, meaning by this mark, their obedience to
the order of Episcopacy, and the use of the Public Service, for the King
required no other thing of them; but as beasts which being cast into the river,
ordinarily swim against the stream, so many of these brutish spirits, think
they can never be saved, but in going against the ancient received customs,
how good soever they be, and make all their piety and honesty to consist in a
sullen and dogged devotion, fantastical and turbulent, which will give no rest
to themselves, nor others.

This scrupulous humor has produced strange effects, witness he that killed
his mother and brother in cold blood, Enoch ap Evan near to Shrewsbury.
having no other quarrel against them, but that they loved the Liturgy. This
was a preamble of the devil, who the year after began this war for the same
subject, in which he made use of the melancholy humor of the people to cut the
throats of their brethren for devotion, according to the instructions before
alleged out of Sions Plea, and the Soldiers Catechism.

In effect their spirit of contradiction, and their bloody inclination, which
has formed this maxim of the times, that the Reformation must be made by
blood, are the productions of a sharp choler, predominant in the Hipocondres or
bowels, whose vapors besiege the animal spirits, which carries them into a
savage rage, which has something of the nature of the Licanthropy.

There is always in the worst parties excellent natures, which are carried
away with the stream, and we know amongst the party of the Covenant, some very
brave men; but the churlish zealots, whose fierceness and number govern even
the Governors themselves, are of weak and malignant spirits, whose temper is
like that of Tiberius, (...), Suet. Tiber.
that is of dung kneaded and wrought together with blood, these are men of sad,
sordid, and reserved natures, which a wild melancholy renders fearful,
superstitious, suspicious and cruel; and when all these ingredients meet
together, ignorance, superstition, presumption and wilfulness, and a flitting
and imperious humor, all steeped in a black and hot melancholy, they make the
most malignant composition of the world, pernicious to Church and State, to
families and all societies, causing every where ruin and combustion, like a
Granado fired, that makes all fly a pieces that is near it.

CHAP. XVII. How the Covenanters labor in vain to sow dissension between the
Churches of England and France, upon the point of discipline; Of the Christian
prudence of the French Reformers, and of the nature of discipline in general.
HItherto we have found no such conformity as might induce the Covenanters of
England to invite the Reformed Churches to espouse their quarrel, for they
every where carefully administer the Lords Supper, they take order that Infants
be baptized, they suffer none to be rebaptized, they suppress heresies,
scandals, the liberty of fanatique spirits, they repeat to the people the ten
Commandments of God, the Articles of the Christian Faith, they make use of
certain forms of prayer in administering the Sacraments, and other parts of the
Divine Service. They teach the people to submit to every Ordinance of man for
the Lords sake, and not to resist Supreme Powers, but to suffer for
righteousness sake; they are free from a capricious weakness in matters of
indifferency which are peculiar to our enemies; also these Churches approve of
the English Liturgy, and without scruple join with it in prayer when occasion
serves; what is there then which should oblige them to associate together. The
Reformed Churches, say they, have no Bishops; but we demand of them, whether
all those Churches which have Bishops are not Reformed? They incline doubtless
to this opinion, for in the title of their Epistle to the Reformed Churches,
they name but those of France, the Low Countries, and Switzerland, they let the
other pass under an etc. If that be their opinion, they have much forgot
themselves in their Copies which they sent to particular States, for they writ
to the Churches of Hesse, and those of Anhalt, which are governed by
Superintendents, that is to say in our Language, Bishops.

In all those Countries subject to the Crowns of Denmark and Sweden, The
Episcopal degree is kept; so almost through all Germany, this degree is
preserved under the name of Superintendent, and in some places (as in Brene)
the name of Bishops remain; although part of these Churches be Lutherans, we
will not refuse them the name of Reformed, there wanting but a little charity
in them, to make both them and us to accord. So likewise in the large
Territories of Bohemia, Polonia, and Transylvania, the Evangelical Churches are
governed by Seniors, (as they call them) who have Episcopal power.

They should not then boast of the consent of the Reformed Churches, nor
complain to them, that the King would not admit a Reformation, which pretends
to abolish the Episcopal degree as an appurtenance of Antichrist, which is in
effect to condemn all Churches where there is any pre-eminence amongst the
Clergy. I forbear to speak of the Churches of Russia, Grecia and India, and of
the rest of the world, whose Doctrine is less known to us, then the point of
their Discipline, which are all governed by Bishops.

But the Covenanters Magisterially prescribe their Discipline to all the World,
although they themselves have none, vaunting themselves of a piety without
pair, and yet will not leave to other Churches any liberty.

Therefore their Declarations give all to understand, that after they have
planted it in England, they will go and do as much beyond the Seas. The
Donatists shut up the Church within the confines of Africa, which then was a
small thing, unfitly applying that Text of the Canticles, Tell us where thou
feedest, where thou make thy flocks to rest at noon, Cant. 1.7. but the
French translation re^deth, to rest toward the south. At present the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ is in danger to be confined within England, whither other
Nations must come and search it, saying, Tell us where thou feedest, where thou
make thy flocks to rest toward the North.

It Is easy to make the consent of the Churches named in the title of the
Epistle to sound high, because they have no Bishops, but to prove their
agreement with the Covenanters in this point, they should do well to make these
two things to appear; the one, that these Churches condemn the Episcopal Order
as unlawful and Antichristian; the other, that these Churches do conform to the
discipline of the Covenanters, things which they will find false.

As for the first, we see not that the other Churches quarrel at the Church of
England hereupon, but pray God to bless them in the order; against this it
matters not to allege the thirtieth Article of the Churches of France
confession of Faith. We believe that all true Pastors in what place soever they
be, have the same authority and equal power under one head Jesus Christ, and
that for this cause no Church ought to pretend any dominion or Lordship over
the other.

He that speaks for the General, expounds this Article, Buckler of Faith, Sect.
124.
Ye must know (says he) that the equality of Pastors in that which is of
Authority to declare the Gospel, and administer the Sacraments, and for the use
of the keys is held necessary amongst all; for Baptism, the Lords Supper, and
the declaring of the remission of sins is of equal dignity in the mouth of
Pastors, whether they be of great or little Authority. But as for
Ecclesiastical policy, we do not hold the equality of Pastors absolutely
necessary, we do not account this Order a point of faith, nor a Doctrine of
salvation, we live (God be thanked) in brotherly concord with our
neighbour-Churches, which follow another form, and where the Bishops have
superiority.

In his disputations of Divinity in the University of Sedam, this is one of his
Theses, We maintain that the Bishops of England after their conversion to the
faith, and their abjuration of Papistry were faithful servants of God, and
ought not to forsake, neither the name nor title of Bishops.

Calvin himself spoke as much before in his Epistle to Cardinal Sad^let,
speaking of the Church of Rome; Let them (says he) establish such an
Hierarchy, where the Bishops having the dignity, refuse not to submit
themselves to Christ, and depend of him as their only Head, and refer
themselves to him, and let them maintain amongst them such a brotherly society,
which is not entertained but by the bond of truth. Then if there be found any
persons who refuse to respect such an Hierarchy with reverence and Sovereign
obedience, I acknowledge and confess him worthy of al sorts of Anathema's

This passage serves for the Episcopal degree in general: Jacobus Lectius
praescriptionum Theologicarum, lib. 2.
This other of Jacobus Lectius Professor at Geneva has a singular regard to
the Bishops of England, He says, That those Bishops only were true and lawful
Bishops, and such as S. Paul writes of in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus;
and we deny not (says he) but there has been formerly such Bishops, and that
there are some now, and that they elect such now in the Kingdom of England.

Beza writes thus to Archbishop Whitgift, Archbishop of Canterbury, March 1591.
In my writings touching the Ecclesiastical Government, I have ever opposed the
Roman Hierarchy, but it was never in my intention to oppose the Ecclesiastical
policy of your English Church, nor to require of you to form your Church
according to the pattern of our Presbyterian Discipline, for whilst the
substance of your Doctrine is uniform with the Church of Christ, it is lawful
for us to differ in other matters, according as the circumstances of times,
places and persons require, and is avowed by the prescription of antiquity; and
for this effect, I desire and hope that the sacred and holy society of your
Bishops will continue, and maintain for ever their right and title in the
government of the Church, with all Christian equity and moderation. Moreover
the Churches, yea the English Bishops render to their Brethren beyond the Seas
the like charity: Thus speaks Famous and Reverend Bishop Hall, In his Treatise
of Episcopacy.
I most cordially respect, and with me our Church their dear sister, those
excellent foreign Churches, who have chosen and followed an outward form of
government, which in every respect, is most expedient, and suitable for their
condition.

With the like charity, an excellent Bishop whose Title of his Book being
without name, binds us not to name him: Having proved that according to the
ancient Institution of the Christian Church, the Bishops always gave the
imposition, or laying on of hands. I write not here (says he) to prejudice our
neighbor Churches, The Serpent Salve, 111.
I dare not limit the extraordinary working and operation of the Holy Ghost,
there where the ordinary means is wanting, without the fault of the persons;
God gave his people Manna so long as they were in the Wilderness, necessity is
a strong pleader, many Reformed Churches live under Kings and Bishops of
another Communion; Others have particular Reasons, why they could not continue
nor introduce Bishops, but it is not so amongst us, speaking of the Church of
his own Country.

A few lines after he adds, As for my self, I am very much inclined to believe,
that the Lord looks upon his people with pity in all their prejudices, and that
there is a great Latitude left to particular Churches in the constitution of
their Ecclesiastical government, according to the exigence of place and
persons, provided that the Divine Order and Institution be observed.

Now after these charitable judgments, the Reformed Churches do not believe,
that which the Epistle of the Assembly of Divines would persuade them; that the
Bishops hate foreign Churches, and reach that without Bishops they could have
no Church nor lawful call of Ministers, so that if any of ours have offended of
late the Reformed Church in the point of Discipline, they are disavowed in it
by their Bishops.

Here is, thanks be to God, a Christian Harmony, the Churches which have no
Bishops say, Let them that would and can enjoy the Order of Episcopacy, let
them enjoy it, far be it from us that we should either proudly or rashly
reprove them for it. The Bishops respect cordially the Foreign Churches, which
have not the same Order, and account the Government established amongst them in
all respects, the most expedient for them. Let both the one and the other hold
themselves there, and let them grant one another the Liberty to govern in the
outward, according to prudence and exigencies; and let them join brotherly
together to maintain the substance of Religion constant and uncorrupted.

It is the council of the Reverend Bishop before alleged, Serpent salve, p.
219.
There are some Plants (says he) which thrive best in the shadow, if then this
form of government without Bishops, agree best to the constitution of some
Commonwealths, we pray to God to give them joy in it, and pray them to say as
much for us. Petimus damusque vicissim. This is spoken Christianly and wisely;
if our enemies had the charity to have said so much, there would have been no
Covenant, neither would they have pulled down Monarchy, for to pull down
Bishops, under color of pulling down the Kingdom of Antichrist: But if they
would that in this quarrel the Reformed Churches should join with them, they
should first have drawn from them a Declaration, that they held the Episcopal
degree unlawful, and a mark of Antichrist, and incompatible with the Gospel;
and that rather then suffer it, they should overthrow the State, and dispossess
your Kings; for less then this persuasion could not induce the Reformed
Churches to espouse the quarrel of the Covenant.

We will proceed no further in this controversy, only because the Covenanters
build their rules of Reformation upon the example of the French Churches, which
the French Reformers never thought of, we beseech all equal persons to consider
the Christian prudence of those that put their hand to this great work in
France, having the Court and Clergy contrary to them.

The best that they were able to do in the matter of Discipline, was to provide
Pastors who should teach purely, and leave them in a simple equality, there
being no question of governing in times of persecution, but to instruct and
suffer; and it being a thing subject to danger and envy, to erect new degrees,
which could not be done without quarrelling at them which were established.
Necessity contributes to prudence, for the Reformation in France having begun
by the common people, and some few of the inferior Clergy, who were opposed by
the Civil and Ecclesiastical Power, we cannot wonder, if the Government which
they established according to the time, was popular; if the Reformation had
begun by Bishops, the Government had been Episcopal; the Priests that were
converted had not power to convert their Bishops; as the English who began the
Reformation, helped by their Authority, the conversion of their Clergy and
people. For the inferior Orbs, having a contrary motion to the superior, have
not the power to make them follow their course: But the superior Orbs carry
along with them the inferior. It was a great matter that the Reformed people
could gain any retrogation against the rapidity and swiftness of the greater
Spears.

The discipline of the French Churches is most commodious to their present
estate, and hardly could there be found a more proper for a Church that lives
under Magistrates of a contrary Religion, in expectation of the reformation of
them who possess the Ecclesiastical degrees. The French Ministers in this
humble and equal order keep themselves in a state of obedience proper to submit
themselves to their Diocesans when it shall please God to convert them, and we
believe that their Fathers did chose this equality, not as an opposition to the
degrees of the Clergy, but as a way to dispose them, and as a plank ready to
invite the Bishops to pass over to their Reformation.

But if the Churches of France should come to maintain this Doctrine of the
Covenanters, that the Order of Episcopacy, is an appurtenance of Antichrist,
and that there is no Kingdom of Jesus Christ, but there where the Ministers
are equal and poor; This would put the conversion of the French Churches out of
all hope. But for as much as we desire the advancement of the Gospel, we keep
our selves from re-inforcing the considerations of flesh and blood, or from
augmenting the reproach of the Gospel; we are not offended at the degrees, nor
revenues of the Clergy, we render not the entrance into the Church more thorny
then it is: For to preach Reformation to a Clergy of a diverse Religion, and
bind them to degrade and strip themselves for to reform them; what other thing
is this, but at once to call them, and to shut the door against them? It Is
true, that notwithstanding all earthly considerations, God may do miracles for
to convert them, but that hinders not but that we should carry our selves
prudently to invite them, and we ought not of deliberate purpose to make new
Barracadoes between them and us, because God can, if he please, break them.

But to the end that the difference of disciplines move no quarrel amongst the
Reformed Churches, this truth ought wisely to be considered, that there is no
entire rule of discipline laid down in Scripture; and that not to have an
outward order in the Church, all the parts whereof not being expressly set down
in the Word of God, is to involve themselves in great difficulties, and shut
themselves up into straight bounds, it is to search that in the Word of God,
which is not there to be found. Let all things be done decently, and in order,
1 Cor. 15. Its a Scripture that may be stretched very far, and which remits to
the Christian prudence of the Ministers of the Word of God, to advise of such
an order which is most expedient for the times and places wherein they live,
provided that nothing be done against Divine Institution.

It Is then necessary that to the Divine Institution the humane should be
joined, and it was never otherwise in Church: Now that which is humane in the
discipline, can never be so well united and fitted with the Divine, that there
may be made of these two, a form entirely regular, and a perfect composition:
It Is like the iron and clay in the feet of the Statue of Nebuchadnezzar, which
could never well join themselves one with another, for the Ecclesiastical
Ordinances are the feet of Religion, bearing on them a head of gold, and a
breast of silver, that is striving to uphold a Doctrine of great price? but they
themselves touch the earth, and are mingled, and there is not such a prudence
and sanctity of Reformation, which can form a discipline purely celestial, nor
join that which it has of humane and Divine in it with such a justness, as to
compose a perfect order, with materials of so different a nature.

This here is the cause of so many faults which may be found in all
Ecclesiastical Order. For notwithstanding the confusion of Schisms and
Heresies, the sharpness of persecutions, the infinite revolutions of States,
during sixteen ages, a pure and divine Doctrine remains in the World, as gold
which is found always at the bottom of the Furnace: The same cannot be said of
the discipline, for that is defective in all Churches, and varieth; yea, ought
to vary according to the times and places, and it has so much of man in it,
that what it has of Divine, is always more or less Sophisticated by humane
inventions; and will be always so, until Jesus Christ has withdrawn his
Church from the earth, and raised it to that great Ecclesiastical Government,
which is the Rule of Heaven.

Surely though there be certain rules of discipline Divine and certain, there
yet remains ever something for Prudence to form, which ought to accommodate it
self to necessity; So bending according as occasions serve, the rules that God
has left, to the wisdom of men, as the Divine be not damnified, and that the
Government of the Church thwarts not that of the State, which is our misery at
this day.

Whosoever shall consider the Kingdoms and Commonwealths of Christendom,
shall find that every where the Religion of the State has a discipline
suitable to the civil Government, the Church taking hold of the State, as the
Ivy that grows about a tree: But the Covenanters pretend the quite contrary,
laboring to form the State to their new pattern of Ecclesiastical Discipline.
Hither tended the Petition of the rabble of London, to the House of Commons;
which was after by the same House in a Body, presented to the House of Lords;
wherein they required an equality in the State, that thereby there might be one
in the Church. An action which will leave for ever to posterity, an infamous
and true character of the intentions of the Covenanters: But in this they have
but followed the Doctrine of their Sect. Reply to Whitgift, page 181.
Cartwright had taught them before, as the Tapestries or Hangings are fitted to
the House, so the Commonwealth ought to be fitted and accommodated to the
Church, and the Government of the State to the Ecclesiastical Government. This
design is wholly void of all prudence and possibility, and being ruinous to the
State, must of necessity be the ruin of it self.

It Is certain that the Doctrine of Religion must not be accommodated to the
State, but that which is humane in the discipline, ought to be subject to
humane Laws, and the authority of the Magistrate, since God demands it of us,
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake: But these men
make no difference between the Doctrine and the Discipline, and would persuade
us, that they have a whole Body of Discipline altogether Divine, and which is
even the substance of the Gospel, without which there is no true Religion, but
it is that we cannot find in the Gospel, but in stead of that, Cartwright, 247.
they prove it by the Sword.

CHAP. XVIII. How the Discipline of the Covenanters is far from the practice of
other Churches.
THere is another point which the Covenanters ought to prove, before they
associate themselves with the Churches of France in matter of Discipline.

They must prove that they have an Ecclesiastical discipline like unto theirs;
For all Churches which had no Bishops, have not for all that the same
discipline. As for the discipline of the Covenanters, they need make none by
theirs, nor receive any from them, for they have none at all, and they take the
way never to have any. If the menaces of the Scotch Army, cause them to make an
Ordinance in favor of the Presbytery, they make presently an honorable
reparation to the Independents; And much of their prudence lies in this, to
accord all to the different Parties, but give them nothing; in making use of
the service of the diverse Sects of Religion, they take no care of their Order,
but of their Liberty to convert all; which will one day turn to their ruin,
and confusion, when they shall have no enemy to unite them. But in the mean
while Religion is destroyed, and all the world behold with astonishment that
the English Reformers have left the Church without any discipline, now these
many years; they have done much worse then he who began to build, but was not
able to finish, for these have overthrown the ancient order, without ever
considering what they would build in the place; and yet they are not agreed
thereupon, they made a great noise of the building they would erect; but this
noise proceeded from their contestation, and their building advanced like that
of Babel, that which the one builded, the other pulled down, and in the end the
division of tongues will make them forsake their work.

It Is an easy thing to ruin, it is a work of ignorance and insolence; it is the
pastime of the devil, and the occupation of his children: Destruction and
unhappiness is in their ways, and the way of peace they have not known, Romans
3.16. And ordinarily those that burn down the house, know not what it is to
build it up, and those who build up a Church or State, proceed by ways and
rules quite contrary to those that ruin them, the sharp and rigorous
proceeding of our enemies wholly to raze the established order, witness they
want knowledge to build an order in the Church; for to this purpose there is
not only required to conceive an Idea of Reformation, but to consider the
matter they have in hand, and how to frame it; For as he is not the best
Engenier who knows best how to make a Regular platform upon paper, but he that
can best accommodate his rules to the nature of the place which he fortifies;
and it would be a strange method to pull down and lay level the place for to
build it again regularly. But its that wherein our new Reformers have labored;
Certainly they neither understand the Theory, nor the Practick of the work they
undertake, and their knowledge goes no further then destruction: It Is true,
many of the Assembly desired the Scotch Discipline, and to establish it,
courted the Scotch Armies.

We also respect these Armies, hoping that God will one day touch their hearts
to defend the rights and person of their Sovereign, and we pray God for their
prosperity: But let them give us leave to tell them mildly our advice of their
Discipline, the wisest amongst us commend the subordination, and concatenation
of their Synods, and do confess that that was wanting in the English Order,
judging that the Synodal Power is not incompatible with the Episcopal; but in
an order well made, both the one, and the other is requisite, and it is
impossible that the English Bishops, excellent in knowledge and piety, who have
lived within these ninety years, should not know this very well, above all
those who were imploid in the Reformation.

But behold that which has hindered the ordinary use of Synods amongst us,
incontinent after the Reformation, it had been to ill purpose to have given all
the Clergy liberty to assemble in a Synod, Papistry being not then well rooted
out of the Priests and Curates, and before the English Church was well healed
of this old malady she fell into a new one, and was infected with a fanatic
and malignant Sect, who made piety consist in overthrowing all order and
superiority in the Church, and to control that of the Magistrate, whereupon
our Sovereigns and their Prelates beholding the body of the Church swollen with
evil humors, and mutinous superstition, continually ready to break forth,
feared least the frequent use of Synods, should not be made use of by the
discontented, to gather and associate a faction; and therefore accounted the
surest way to maintain peace and truth, was to keep these violent spirits in
their duty by the Episcopal rod, assisted with the Royal Scepter, and certainly
this way would have had better success, if they had not let the bridle too
loose for such hard mouths.

The Synod is proper to make Ordinances, and the Bishop is proper to cause them
to be observed: The Synod to hinder tyranny, the Bishop to prevent confusion;
the Synod to determine in point of Doctrine, the Bishop to maintain order and
discipline; the Synod to remedy inveterate evils, the Bishop to suppress
immergent evils; and in the mean while, both the one and the other serve to all
these uses, and ought not to be separated in a Church where there is freedom,
and where the estate upholds the Religion.

But in a Church which lives under a state of a contrary Religion, order must
bend to necessity; and as it is not possible to have all the parts of
Ecclesiastical Government, also there is less need, for common adversity unite
affections, Bodin. Method. Histor. de Repub. Geneva.
and take away many occasions of scandal and disorder.

Such are the Reformed Churches of France, where the order is suitable to their
condition; and the native piety and simplicity of their Discipline is commended
even by those of a diverse Profession.

Now having had leisure to examine their Discipline, we find not that it does
much resemble the Scotch discipline; for the Consistories and Synods of France
have not Ruling Elders, whose voices always carry it, as they do in Scotland.
Their Elders pass not any sentence in matter of Doctrine, neither have they the
power of the Keys to determine Censures: All that Calvin granted them, was but
praeesse moribus, to have an eye to the manners and behavior of the flock in
which they served as Assistants to the Pastors, and this was a commendable use.
But in Scotland the Elders command, for the Lord of the Parish is ordinarily
the ruling Elder of the Consistory, and in some manner is a Lay Bishop, and
although the Minister is always Moderator, its but for form, for the Elders
have the principal power, and being Deputies to the Assemblies, they keep there
the same credit, above all in the General Assembly, where Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls and Barons have their voices, and decide the points of controversies and
the censures of the Church.

We greatly respect the power of Synods, but we require that it be purely
Ecclesiastical, and that it be managed by none, but by those who are appointed
of God; lay persons have not to do, but to assist them, except the King, who
ought to have the exterior power (which the Scotch deny him) to convocate and
dissolve their Assemblies, to suppress disorders, without meddling himself with
the interior or spiritual, for it seems to us a thing unreasonable and
contradictory to it self, that the other Laiques should be admitted to the full
capacity of the spiritual power equal or above the Ministers, and that the King
only should be excluded, and has not so much as the exercise of his temporal
and purely Royal power in the Assembly.

We could wish also that the power of their Consistories and Synods were a
little more limited, for these Assemblies being Courts of Conscience, which
takes cognizance of all the offenses of the Church, they may enclose in their
Jurisdiction, all criminal and civil causes of the Kingdom, there being no
cause which has not in it a point of Conscience: And so hereby it may come,
that the sentences of Judges may be controuled in the Consistory, and the
Officers of the Crown questioned about their managing of public affairs, and
so the Government of the State become purely arbitrary.

And the power of the Ecclesiastical Council being such, the most unquiet and
ambitious will be ever pressing to be of it, whereupon sidings and factions
will abound, revenge and particular interest will turn the balance; There they
will form factions in the State, and parties against the King, for what is
there that they dare not enterprise who have so vast a power, which have no
other limits than the extent of the flitting and moveable conscience of
particulars, which give account to none, who pretend to have their authority
only of Divine right, and therefore are not subject to be controuled? These are
not conjectures nor suppositions, but observations of long experience;
certainly that personal citation which was sent by the National Synod of
Scotland to their King, when he was in the midst of his Armies in England, Feb.
1645. filled Foreign Churches with amazement and scandal: And no less is the
Authority they exercise even over their Parliaments, which having demanded
advice of the Synod, concerning what they were to do with their King, the
Ministers concluded that they should not bring the King into Scotland, and that
the Kingdom of Scotland ought not to espouse his quarrel, for to maintain his
Rites in England, and their advice passed for an Ordinance; after this they
cannot reprove the Bishops for being Councillors of State.

Monarchy which can endure neither Master, nor Companion, can hardly comply
with this Court of Conscience, which gives Laws, but receives none, unless
themselves make them, and limit the King, but refuse to be limited by him, but
the Magistrates of an Aristocratick, or popular Commonwealth will shift better
with them, for this Court pretending an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, purely
Sovereign and Divine, yet nevertheless admit lay men to the participation of
this power; The Lords never fail to be Members of this consistory, and to
govern there. And thus the question touching the Ecclesiastical authority is
Eluded.

Now although above all we desire to enjoy an Apostolical and Episcopal
Discipline, where the Bishop, assisted with the Council of his Clergy governs
the Church, and admits other Pastors according to their degree and quality, to
the participation of the power of ths Keys, yet nevertheless if the revolution
of the State brings in another Discipline, our Ministers submit themselves to
it, not to be Actors there, remembering themselves of their duties and promise
made at their reception of Orders, but to surfer themselves to be governed,
remembering that they are called to preach the Gospel, and whether there be a
good or an evil Order in the Church, or even none at all, the vocation binds
them to feed the Flock and to maintain the holy Doctrine.

But indeed its great pity to be reduced to expect a Discipline of those that
have none, and yet make the Kingdom of Christ to consist in it, for which they
made such clamours, in their licentiousness, and overthrow of all Order and
lawful Vocation in the Church.

The Reformed Churches of France who employ all their Zeal and Industry to
maintain the purity of the Gospel, without contending with any about the
outward Discipline, look upon with contempt and compassion the impetuous
weakness of our enemies, who overthrow the holy Doctrine, and ruin Church and
State for points of Discipline, which is to lose the end for the accessaries,
yea although these accessaries are not good in this regard, there being but two
things to reprove in the Covenanters, their end, and the mean^ which they
employ to attain that end.

CHAP. XIX. That the Covenanters ruin the Ministers of the Gospel under color
of Reformation.
ONE of the points of Reformation for which they labored so much with Cannon
shot, was to abase and pull down the Clergy, which is a work already done
without proceeding further.

As for their greatness, the only thing wherein it consisted was taken from
them in the year 1645. Which was the Bishops sitting and having power to vote
in the Lords House, the rest is a small thing.

As for their Revenues, they are confiscated and sequestered, and even the
Revenues of the Bishops were such as might cause rather pity then envy, except
four or five Bishoprics; the rest were so poor, that for to help them to
uphold their Degree, and pay their dues to the King, Tenths and first Fruits,
his Majesty ever out of compassion, gave them some other Benefices, otherwise
very few would have hazzarded the taking of them, the Bishoprics of England
being like the ruined Monasteries in some Countries, which have nothing
remaining but the walls, with nothing in them.

The children of those parents who had formerly f^tted themselves by the
Bishoprics, have now swallowed the rest, and yet labor to beggar the inferior
Clergy: This is that they call Reformation, and in truth it is the Reformation
of Scotland, where the Tenths of the Clergy are possessed by the Ruling Elders,
above all by the Lords, some of them having the Tenths of whole Provinces.
Therefore ye need not wonder they fight with such Zeal for a Reformation which
is so profitable.

In England ordinarily the great Towns and rich Parishes are impropriated, and
in the hands of Lay persons, the rest of the Benefices have but to provide in a
Mediocrity for Students in Divinity: Those who Reform the Clergy, are those who
possess the Goods of the Church; and besides the Tithes that are alienated,
many of them even make use of the Tithes of the Clergy, with which they are
lawfully invested, terrify^g their poor Ministers with Sequestration, too weak
to contend against them, and force them to injurious and damageable contracts.
How many Patrons are there who sell their Benefices to them who will give most?
And by the infamous Simony of these Gentlemen, who make a noise of Reformation,
the door of the Church is shut to the Clergy, unless they have a golden key to
open it; and thus they prefer profit before conscience: It Is well done of them
to mend that which they have marred, and they of all other have reason to take
in hand the Reformation of Ministers, because themselves have done what
possibly they can to corrupt them.

Of all Liberal Professions, Divinity is the poorest, and have most Thorns in
her way; and therefore Parents find it more profitable to put their children to
a Trade, than bring them up in the Study of Divinity; and yet after all this,
their very poverty seems superfluity in the eyes of envy; and until these
hungry Harpies have caught that little which has escaped the claws of
Sacrilege, they will never leave calling for the Reformation of the Clergy,
that is to say, wholly to ruin them.

The devil who hates the Gospel, labors to ruin i^ by the poverty of those
who preach it, knowing well that the indigence of Ministers brings contempt
upon the Ministry; And that the Rewards being taken away, the Study of Divinity
will be neglected, and then there will be none but the meanest of the people,
like to the Priests of Jeroboam. Poverty abates the courage, and clips the
wings of conception, and oft-times occasions evil designs and Councels in those
whose means are too small for their Degree. To do well in Pulpit, and by
Writing to build up indeed the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and to destroy the
works of the devil, they ought to have their spirits free, and not oppressed
through necessity, Magnae mentis opus, nec de Lodice paranda Attonitae; They
that require, and would a man should do well, and yet will not do well to him,
it is an unjust demand; and many now in England pass the unjustice of Pharaoh,
requiring double the number of Bricks, and yet give to them less straw.

If they allege to us that Jesus Christ and his Apostles were poor, we answer,
that so were their auditors; and the condition of our Lord and his Disciples is
a pattern as well for Layicks as the Clergy. And if the Primitive Church of
Jerusalem spoken of in the Acts, ought to be proposed for an example of the
Ecclesiastical and Civil Government of all Christendom, the Clergy of England
humbly beseech the Gentlemen, our Reformers, to imitate these pious souls, who
sold their possessions, and brought the price, and laid them down at the
Apostles feet. Let them sell their Lands, and bring the money to their Pastors
to dispose of according to their discretion, and the Ministers will part with
their Tithes.

If we were now to speak to the Clergy of England, we would exhort them to love
their Office and their Benefice, and now that God has called them to the Cross
and poverty, to rejoice in their conformity to Jesus Christ, who made himself
poor to enrich us, expecting their reward in Heaven, bearing patiently the
spoiling of their goods, accounting themselves rich enough if God be glorified,
and his Gospel purely Preached, but these Exhortations have an evil grace in
the mouth of them who come to plunder or Sequester them, which is as if a thief
in robbing a traveller, should preach a Sermon to him of Christian patience and
contempt of the world; it is the method of our enemies, who driving their
Ministers from their houses and Revenues, read such Lectures of Divinity to
them.

For the present, some Ministers who have been the principal instruments of
their party, have means and honor, and yet little enough, considering the
great service they have done them. Peter's their great and active agent, had for
a recompense given him, but with great glory and ostentation, two hundred pound
(...) Annum in Land: But who so considers well the geni^ of the Faction will
judge that, that little good they do now to their Ministers, will not long
continue. It were a pleasant thing to consider, if there were not greater cause
of sorrow in it, how of two Ambitions, the simple serves the Ambition of the
crafty; for the Ministers who animated the people against their King, are
people impatient of subjection, who would be every one of them Kings and
Bishops in their Parishes, and during these agitations, they reign in the
Pulpit a time, b^ they are set a work by those who manage the public affairs,
who raise them up and flatter them to the people, until they have done their
work with them, for when these Gentlemen shall have done to destroy Church and
State, and built their Imaginary Throne of Jesus Christ, upon the ruins of the
Kingdom, they will have so strict a hand of the Discipline, that the power and
the profit shall remain with them, allowing their spiritual Fathers a portion
purely spiritual, and will discharge them of those cares which accompany the
riches and honors of the world.

Before these Civil Wars, the Bishops were profitable to all Ministers,
friends and enemies, for those who submitted themselves freely to them enjoye^
their protection, and those who opposed them were respected and secretly
maintained by the adversaries of the Episcopal Order, but now the Bishops are
cut off, there is neither protection nor opposition, that can gain respect or
support to the Clergy. The stubborn and refractory Ministers have struck so
violently at the root of that great tree which they have now made to fall,
after they had been a long time covered under the shadow of it, but they may
assure themselves that it will not be long before they themselves be crushed
under the fall of it, and draw upon themselves a just punishment: They will
then consider too late, that they have been but Instruments to the covetousness
and ambition of others, and in the dissipation of the Goods of the Church, they
shall be dealt with as the Captain of Samaria, to whom the King of Israel
committed the keeping of the Gate, where the Provision was to enter, then when
the people after a long Famine pressed to enter, they shall behold the plenty,
but not taste of it; but be trodden under foot.

CHAP. XX. Of the Corruptions of Religion objected to the English Clergy, and
the ways that the Covenanters took to Remedy them.
WE will answer to the Objections against the King and his Party, and will
begin with the most ordinary.

Now they reproach us with corruption in Religion: in such an accusation we
must have regard to them that speak it; its those who turn the rising up of the
people against their King, into a Doctrine and Article of Faith; its those that
have absented themselves from the Lords Supper for these many years, those who
summoned their King before them to give account of his actions, those who have
committed against his Sacred Person an execrable Paracide, those who will
employ the Body and Blood of our Lord to knit up a conspiracy against their
King. Those who neither teach the people in the Church, nor their children at
home, the ten Commandments, the Creed, nor the Lords Prayer, those who suffer
and make use of all damnable Sects, and punish none; but those who ^each to
suffer for righteousness, and not to resist the Supreme Powers, to all these we
might add many more hateful Truths; but we will not without necessity publish
the evil that may be hid, for we love not to teach evil by representing it:
Whosoever shall consider their belief and practice, will never wonder that such
kind of People find something to say against our Religion. God be praised that
thus opposing us, they make all the world to know that we are not guilty of
their evil opinions; amongst men, blame and praise take their force from him
that gives them. Those who accuse us of corruption in Religion, should do well
to tell us first, amongst the scores of Religions that are, what their Religion
is; for there are many Religions which are together with the Covenanters, and
live together, as so many wild beasts in the Ark, who when they are gone out
thence, will devour one another, or flee one from another, but at present they
all agree to tear us a pieces.

Now to these accusers of Corruption, we present the thirty nine Articles of
our Confession, which they and we have sworn and subscribed, and let their
Consciences judge between them and us, which of the two Parties have violated
and falsified their Oath. How have they observed the thirty sixth Article, in
which they acknowledged that the consecration of Archbishops and Bishops used
in England, and confirmed by Act of Parliament, contains nothing in it, that is
either Superstitious or Impious; and yet now thunder out against this Order as
a mark and branch of Antichrist; Is this to want memory, or conscience? Can
they upbraid us with any thing like unto this, to have opposed in a Body, and
condemned an Article of our Confession. The corruptions which they allege
against us, are falsely so named, or at the worst they are but faults of
particulars. But the Body of the Church has kept and does keep the Confession
of their Faith inviolable. If they produce any we would have brought in any new
Doctrines or Customs, who can produce others that have opposed them, and that
the Religion subsisted entire, whilst they subsisted.

Let them not rob those Divines of their due praise who in the beginning of the
Parliament labored sincerely to confirm the Doctrine, and to stifle the
difference about Discipline. We have before represented with what Wisdom,
Piety, and Vigor, many Bishops and Divines chosen by his Majesty, had lead the
two Parties to accord upon a certain number of Propositions, which contained
the Body of Religion, and what great hope there was, that the point of
Discipline would be amiably composed; and how a Faction, enemies to the peace
of the Church, and jealous least any good should come by the means of the
Bishops, broke off that excellent accord, which could never since be renewed;
persecuting the Prelates with all rigor, never giving them rest, until they had
imprisoned them as Criminals, although they were not guilty of any other crime,
then because they would have terminated the differences of Religion. But this
was to stifle the Covenant in the cradle, and take away all pretext from this
holy Rebellion. It Is not then a wonder if this sin be not pardoned them; it
appears by the testimony of the Reverend Pastors of the Church of Geneva, in
what esteem our Religion was amongst our Neighbors, for in their Epistle to
the Assembly at London, They beseech God that he would restore our Church and
Kingdom to such a high degree of holiness and glory, as it had shined in until
that present: By this they acquit us of the corruption, which they impute to
us, and do obliquely accuse this Assembly, and those that employ them, that by
their means the Kingdom has lost his glory, and the Church her holiness.

Now put the case that the Corruption were as great amongst us, as they make
it, yea put the case also, that even in our Liturgy, composed with so much
piety and wisdom, that there were something to mend, as a Freckle in a fair
Face, and that the Discipline ought to be over-looked; what could there be more
expected of the King and the Clergy, then to submit the Persons and things to
be Reformed? How often had the King offered to join his Authority to the Advice
of Parliament, and a National Synod, to examine and punish the faulty, and
correct disorders, yea and even the Laws themselves, if there were need?

To these so reasonable commands, behold here what obedience they yielded: A
part of the House of Commons, having driven away the other by violence and
popular tumults, and put to flight nine parts of ten of the House of Lords,
besides the Bishops who represented the Body of the Clergy; this small rest, in
lieu of a National Synod, by lawful deputation of the Church, chose some
Ministers of their Faction, for to make use of their Advice so far as it should
please them. These Ministers who had no Deputation, nor Representation, nor
Authority from the Body of the English Church, and having diverse Lay persons
joined with them, who wholly govern them, mould a Religion all new, defame the
reputation of the Church and Confession, to which they had sworn Obedience;
invite to their aid Foreign Churches, as their brethren, and ordain that which
serves the intention of their Masters.

We know that amongst these Divines, there were some men of Merit, Persons
which we know, had it been in their power, would have overcome evil with good;
but amongst pieces of gold, there is many times a great deal of small money,
like unto our clipped half Testors; they are the little heads without learning.

If the two Houses had assembled the body of the Clergy, as was proposed to
them by his Majesty, they had found themselves filled with Orthodox Persons,
and they cannot complain if those persons whom they had most desire to,
received not the public censure of the Clergy, since they would not permit the
Clergy to assemble themselves; neither can they complain, that any guilty has
gone unpunished, for they have taken a sure course, for by the universal ruin
of the Deans and Chapiters, they have involved the innocent with the guilty.

Hearken what the King said hereupon: I was content to accord and render to the
Presbyter (that is to say, to the Body of Pastors) all the right which with
reason and discretion they could pretend in their conjunction with the
Episcopal degree, but to suffer them wholly to invade the Ecclesiastical Power,
and to cut off altogether with the sword, the Authority of this ancient Order,
for to invest themselves in it, it was that which I accounted neither just, in
regard of the Bishops, nor sure nor profitable in regard of the Presbyter
himself, neither any way convenient for the Church or State.

A right and good Reformation might have been easily produced by moderate
Councils, and I am persuaded such Councils would have given more contentment,
even to those very Divines, who have been persuaded, with much gravity and
formality, to serve the designs of others, which without doubt, many of them
now acknowledge, although they dare not make their discontent appear for
finding themselves frustrated of their intentions.

I am very well assured, that the true method to reform the Church, cannot
subsist with the perturbation of the Civil State, and that Religion cannot
justly be advanced in depressing Loyalty; which is one of the principal
ingredients and ornaments of true Religion; for after the Precept to fear God,
the next following is, to honor the King.

I make no doubt but the Kingdom of Christ may be established, without pulling
down mine; and in a time free from partialities, its impossible any should pass
for a good Christian, who shows not himself a good Subject.

The Government of Christ serves to confirm mine, and not to overthrow it, for
as I acknowledge, I hold my power of him, so I desire to exercise it for his
glory, and the good of his Church.

If any one had sincerely proposed the Government of Christ, or understood in
their heart what it required, they would never have been so ill governed in
their words and actions, as well toward me, as one toward another.

As the good ends cannot justify the evil ways, so also the evil beginnings
cannot produce good conclusions, unless God by a miracle of mercy make Light to
spring out of Darkness, Order out of our Confusion, and Peace from our unruly
Passions. This is spoken as a King, as a Philosopher and as a good Christian.

Our enemies to blind the eyes of their Neighbors, made them believe a long
time that they desired such a reformation as theirs, but the hypocrisy of this
profession appeared then, when the King offered to assemble a National Synod,
and to invite the Neighbor Churches to it, whom these people would seem to
imitate. And this the good King would never have named, had he not an intention
to defer much to their Judgment. But of this his Majesty could never obtain an
answer; for it was that which the Independents feared above all, and we see not
that the Presbyterians did any way favor this proposition; the actions both of
the one and the other were such, that it was the surest course for them to
palliate them with Declarations sent a far off, rather then to have them
brought to light here at home in a Synod; and they were very well content to
receive their Neighbors to their Society, but not to admit them to their
Counsel. They have hereby made it appear, that it was not reformation, but the
revenues of the Church they pursued; otherwise they would have embraced the
proposition of his Majesty, and the request of the Clergy, who desired nothing
more then to be heard in a lawful Synod, and to reform willingly, that which
was displeasing to some. But this had untwisted the designs of their enemies,
who then should have had no pretext to ruin the Clergy, and enrich themselves
with their spoils, and take from Monarchy the support of the Church, if the
Ecclesiastics had been reformed.

Then let the rage and invective malice of our enemies greaten our faults in
quality and number, as much as they can, let them make small spots,
imposthumes; Let them paint us out in false colors, and disfigure us like
devils to the eyes of all the world; All that the severest Justice can require
of us, is to amend and freely to submit our selves to the censure of a lawful
Assembly, and then when a great King, who is subject to none but God, shall
come to them, and offer to change that which has been practiced or tolerated,
and to lend his ear to receive better information. O this was a grace capable
to molifie hearts of stone, and to turn the complaints of his subjects into
acclamations of joy and praises.

But they will neither the grace of the King, nor our amendment. To these
offers of the King so sincere and frequent, they answered not but by complaints
and blows, and they consulted not of means to correct us, but to destroy us;
they will not take the pains to cleanse the Church, they will cut it up by the
root, root and branch. It Is the Watchword of the seditious, whereby they
pretend to know those that are of the godly party; and they have also put an
unnatural maxim in the mouth of the furious and blind people, that the
reformation must be made in blood. This they call to renew, or revive the
Church; but it is as the Daughters of Pelias undertook to make their Father
young again, who to that end cut his throat to let his old blood pass out of
his body, but after, it was not in their power to put in new. God keep us from
them who come to reform the Church their Mother with a Sword, and that would
cut our throats to make us young again. Certainly beholding Chyrurgeons coming
to let us blood with a Sword in both hands, we have reason to withdraw into
some safe quarter, and to fear a healing which will not take away the evil, but
in taking away our life.

We dare say for our Clergy, that if it should cost them their lives to redeem
the peace of their King and State, they would account them well employed, and
willingly consent to be cast overboard with Jonas, that their loss might
appease the tempest.

This is of greatest anguish and affliction, to see Murder pass for Piety,
then to suffer in their persons, and they cheerfully wish, that a potion of
their blood could quench the heat of their bloody zeal.

This zeal appeared in the title of Sions Plea, and in the book called, Christ
on his Throne. The first pleads for the Presbyterian, the other for the
Independent. Both of these books have this Text in the Frontispice: Bring those
mine enemies, that would not that I should reign over them, and slay them
before me. By enemies they understand those who will not embrace their
Discipline. And their actions now have, and do make a bloody commentary upon
the Text. That if our Lord Jesus Christ, who poured forth his most precious
blood to spare ours, put not a stop to this flux of blood, these Zealots will
reform England, as the Anabaptists reformed Munster, and as the Spaniards
converted the West Indies.

Let all Christian Churches of the World then know, that the English Church
confesses humbly before God, her infirmities, and acknowledges her self the
defaults which peace and the length of time is wont to bring to the best
established order, and has done her duty to reform, submitting her self to a
general Synod, and the States of the Kingdom under the Authority and conduct
of her good King, and that a sacrilegious and murdering faction, drunken with
the blood of their Sovereign, and the goods of the Church: Having oppressed the
liberty of the Assembly of States, snatched this holy work out of her hands,
and would hear of no other reformation, but her total destruction; introducing
in the place of ancient and lawful order, a Chaos of profane and licentious
Heresies, destructive to Religion and State.

CHAP. XXI. An Answer to the Objection, That the King made War against the
Parliament.
IT IS the ordinary complaint of the Covenanters, that the King made War against
his Parliament, a phrase which seems tacitly to imply, that the King rebelled
against his Superiors; and indeed there are many that understood it so in good
earnest, conceiving the Parliament to be above the King. And hereupon it was
declared by the House of Commons at Westminster, That the Kings coming to their
House was Treason, as if the Majesty resided in the Commons, but how ridiculous
and false this is, has heretofore been showed: and yet they could in no other
sense call the Houses at Westminster, his Parliament, since they had taken up
Arms against his Majesty; doubtless those of both Houses, who adhered to the
King at Oxford, without comparison the more considerable in quality, were
rather his Parliament, for these were for him, and the other against him.

Moreover by this frequent expression, they would frequently signify, that the
King was the Aggresseur, and he that first assaulted them; a thing which they
have much labored to persuade the world, although it be notoriously known that
his enemies had seized upon his Forts, Towns, Magaziens, Ships, Revenues, and
Levied Soldiers, before ever the King had so much as one single company of
Horse, or Foot. When he first came to York, he had not so much as his ordinary
guards, whereas his enemies had all the strength of the Kingdom, they wanted
only God on their side: and this great power encouraged the seditious in all
countries where he passed to entertain him with the same courtesy the
Gergasites received Christ Jesus, beseeching him to depart out of their
quarters, and the good King had then this conformity with his Savior, that he
had not where to lay his head. He was then in a condition to suffer, but his
enemies in a posture to oppose.

When he would in a peaceable manner without Arms enter into his Town of Hull,
he found the gates shut, and the walls garnished with Soldiers, presenting
their Muskets against him; upon this his Majesty levied fix companies of Foot,
and two Cornets of Horse, for the Guard of his Person, but set not up his
Standard until four months after this prodigious act of hostility and
rebellion, having often before endeavored to reduce his Subjects to their
obedience by all reasonable and Christian offers, witness a number of most
excellent Declarations composed and written by himself, wherein the world
beheld the sincerity of his actions, with the piety and candor of his spirit,
worthy so great a Prince.

The Covenanters considering that they could not persuade them who had any
remembrance or common sense, that the King began the War, labored to prove
that although they began, yet their Armies were but defensive; affirming, that
a War undertaken, upon a just fear, was defensive, yea although they struck the
first blow; and that they seized upon the Forts, Magaziens, and Revenues of the
King, because they feared he would make War upon them; That is to say, that
they made War upon him, least he should make War upon them. A reason much like
that of Count Gondomore, Ambassador of Spain in England, who by his cunning and
subtilty had wrought so far, as to have a gallant English Knight to be
condemned and put to death; being demanded what evil he had done that he so
persecuted him: Answered, That it was not for any evil he had done, but for
that evil which he might do.

But the Court that did it, had just reasons, far from the Spanish interests;
but in these men's dealings with the King, were he even a Subject, the injustice
is both without reason, and without example: For, was there ever any Court of
Justice, which condemned a man to lose both his goods, and his life, not
because he had done any evil, but for fear he should.

That which would be most unjust against the meanest Subject, can it possibly
be thought, and reputed a work of Piety and Justice against their lawful
Sovereign? But leaving these persons, who from the beginning had this
Diabolical design, which since they have inhumanely executed; we will believe
of many of the Covenanters, that the intent of their Army was not to punish the
King for the pretended exorbitancies of his past Government, although they
labored by all means to perpetuate the memory, and to stifle those eminent and
signal acts of grace, by which the King had merited the love of his people
beyond all his Predecessors. We are willing also to believe that some amongst
them condemn the Doctrine of Goodman, turned since into sad practice, That
Judges ought to summon Princes before them for their offenses, and proceed
against them, as against other Criminals and Malefactors.

If it were not then for the punishing of what was passed, it was for fear of
the future, they took up Arms, which indeed is the only reason left them. For
after the King had promised to give content to his people, in all their
reasonable requests represented to him, and they had taken the power out of his
hands, then when he would have accomplished his promises; all the reason they
give for so violent a proceeding is, That they durst not trust the King; Which
verily is a most frivolous and injurious excuse. Which is as if one had a
Neighbor that dwelt by him, more mighty then himself, and whose displeasure he
feared, it should be permitted him to watch his opportunity to surprise his
house, seize upon his revenues, and drive from his possessions, to free and
deliver him from fear? But such an action as this from Subjects toward their
Prince, is beyond all comparison more unjust. The Question between the King and
his Subjects, being not, Whether they may with confidence leave the Sword in
the Kings hand? but whether God has committed the Sword to the King to be born
by him?

Now in this their dealings with the King, they give him an evil example, for
by the same reason he may take from his subjects the propriety, they have in
their estates, because he dares not trust them, and finds by sad experience,
they use it for his destruction; And he should have much more reason to do it,
since the Subjects hold their Lands of the King; but the King holds not his
power of the people; Prudence ought not to seize upon Justice. The care of a
man's self cannot give him a right to the goods of another: The duty of a
Christian is not to fortify himself against his fears, but to obey the
Commandments of God: But if his fear and forecast carries him beyond his duty,
he should above all fear him that can cast both body and soul into hell. Yea, I
say unto you, fear him, Luke 12.5. Taking then that which themselves accord,
that the Subjects took up Arms to secure themselves against their fears; Had
not the King as much reason to take up Arms after their example to provide
against his? If he had been their equal, this reason had been sufficient
enough, how much more then being their Sovereign, for the sword that they had
drawn against him, was his own; those Forts, Towns, Ships, Arms and Revenues,
which they employed against him, were his; therefore he had a double reason to
take up Arms, one to defend himself, and another to recover his own rights.

By all Laws Divine and Humane, the King alone has the power of the Sword,
whosoever strikes without him is a murderer. Saint Bernard preaching to the
Knights Templers of Jerusalem; to persuade them from Duells, Sermon 1. of
Duells, to the Templers.
says that two things are required to make a combat just and lawful; The
defense of a just cause, and obedience to a lawful power. The last of these is
the principal, and that alone which gives to Soldiers a just call, for in wars
ordinarily the interests of Princes are only known to themselves, and often the
right and wrong being of two sides, we esteem it not necessary that every
Soldier be perfectly satisfied of the Justice of the Armies of his Sovereign;
but as for obedience to a lawful power, its a condition absolutely requisite to
justify the taking up of Arms of a Soldier, and there is no exception, nor
modification, that can be brought against it.

August. lib. 21. Contra Faustum Cap. 75.
Saint Augustine says, That a just man bearing Arms under a sacrilegious
Prince, may justly obey his commands, if he knows not the war wherein he
serves, is against the Commandment of God, or if he be doubtful of it; So that
the Prince may be faulty in commanding, and the Subject innocent in rendering
the duty of his obedience: According to this wise Council, if it be not
palpably manifest that the commandment of the Prince do transgress the Laws of
God, whom we must ever obey rather then men, the subject in matter of war, be
it foreign or civil, has but one thing to consider for conscience; namely,
where the lawful power is? Who he is to whom God has committed the sword, and
who has power to give it to others, and to whom God has subjected him? in
taking up the sword at his command, we cannot do amiss.

This gives full satisfaction to their consciences who took up Arms and fought
for the King, for besides the goodness of his defense which is just and
necessary, if ever any were, they learn that it is possibly to fight justly for
him, even when his cause may be unjust; but without him it is impossible to
draw the sword justly, much less against him, how just soever the complaints
and fears of the contrary party that draws the sword be. All lawful demands,
religious intentions, specious pretexts, pretended necessities, the public
good (the Masque of all Rebellions) prayers, fastings, Covenanting with God,
all this and much more can never make a war just, which receives the sword from
him to whom God has not given it, and draws it against him to whom God has
committed it.

Therefore the principal of the Covenanters well perceiving this, endeavored
from the beginning to make the King either give them, or lend them the power of
the Militia. In doing whereof, they did much wrong to their cause, for if they
had the lawful power of the sword, why did they then so often demand it of the
King? And if they had it not, why did they draw the sword without the lawful
power, and against him to whom the power appertained by their own confession?
Why else should they ask it of him? They either did injustice to the King to
take from him the Militia, or else they did injustice to themselves to demand
it: Certainly by their importunity for the Militia, they manifestly condemned
themselves, and acknowledged that the Militia belonged to the King, and that
they made the war without his authority, and therefore they had great need of
many Sermons, fastings, prayers, protestations, Oaths upon Oaths, to bind in
many knots this Covenant, which otherwise held by nothing; and to persuade the
people, that instead of the Lawful and Ordinary Power, they had an
Extraordinary one, which was conducted by Revelation.

Rebellion is against nature, Samuel says, Its as the sin of Witchcraft or
Divination, 1 Samuel 15.23. It is composed of such charms which for a time
corrupts the use of reason, but cannot destroy the faculty, but at last the
cloud will vanish and they shall retain naught, but the impression of shame and
astonishment for their past errors, and an earnest desire of an acknowledgment.
This natural notion is imprinted in the hearts of Subjects. That they ought to
obey the King, and that to him pertaines the Power of Peace and War. The very
Name of King will make even Soldiers spring from the ground to serve him, the
Plow-shares shall furnish him with Swords, and the Flayls and long Staffes
shall fight so: his Crown. The Arms which they have ravished from him, shall
acknowledge their Master, and return of themselves to him, as those which were
unjustly taken from Ajax. It Is a very hard thing to fight against nature: This
appeared in the Counties of the Covenanters, wherein whilst the King was
Master, he raised Ten Thousand men in Eight Days, but after the Covenanters
commanded in them, although they levied Soldiers continually, their Forces
ever decreased, and those they listed in the day, disbanded and run away in the
night. That if the secret judgment of God which would chastise us, had not
rendered the people fearful and dismayed for a time, such was their number and
hatred against the Party of the Covenanters, that they had easily dispatched
the Countries against the King, though themselves were disarmed* And it must be
in the end that Nature surmounts the constraint, for the King is the center of
the State, whither all parts tend by their own proper weight, and wherein all
the lines of the common interests terminate.

Their complaints of violence by the Kings Forces, are of no consideration; the
Armies of the King as well as those of the Covenanters were not composed all of
Saints, but these complaints sound ill in their mouths, who lifted up their
hands against their Sovereign, those who had so often planted their Artilery
against the Squadron where the person of the King was, and had shot fifty
Cannon shot against the Queen in her bed, and after all this, cut off the Head
of their lawful Sovereign, can they assume the impudence to complain of our
Soldiers taking away their poultry and killing their sheep? If those who were
in actual Rebellion against their King, had been punished by our Soldiers as
they deserved, they would never have had the power to complain that their
houses were plundered, or that they spoiled and destroyed their Goods: We dare
maintain, that those amongst the Covenanters that suffered less than death,
have suffered less than they deserved; we do not desire that every one should
be punished according to his deserts, for we would not that God should so deal
with us, but that our enemies may know, both by the divine Law, and the Law of
Nations, every person that rebels against his Prince, is guilty of death, Josh.
1.18. and loses his propriety in his Goods and Possessions. Let them know
also, that being destitute of lawful Authority for the war, and drawing their
swords against him that bears the sword by Divine Authority, every stroke they
struck against the faithful Subjects of the King, they committed an execrable
Murder, 1 Samuel 11.12. And every Penny they levied upon them, they committed
Rapine, employing their Robberies to maintain Murder and Rebellion: If the
Names of these crimes offend their ears, the crimes themselves should much more
afflict their Consciences; these terms proceed not from passion, but flow from
the necessary consequence of this Truth, That the war of the Covenanters is
destitute of all Authority, lawful and divine. Oh that every Christian who has
drawn his sword in this sinful cause, would seriously consider how he should
answer it before God and man, and that he may have horror and dread in him for
the evil he has deserved, and yet much more for that which he has committed.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Depraved and Evil Faith of the Covenanters.
BUT we cannot so slightly let them pass with their fore-alledged excuse for
the War, that they durst not trust the King. The cause is evident, which is
because they had taken from him all the ground of reason that might be, that he
should trust them; nothing being more to be distrusted than a Depraved and Ill
Faith: The King permitted them to perpetuate the Parliament as long as they
pleased, he committed himself wholly over to their Faith, Affection and
Conscience; if any thing obliges a man to be faithful, it is to repose an
entire and free confidence in him, and there is nothing more odious and
unworthy the name of man, than to employ that assurance and confidence they
have freely committed to us, to deceive and ruin them. They themselves after
this signal favor, without example, often declared to the world, that if they
should abuse so great a trust to the damage and detriment of his Majesty, they
should be unworthy to live upon the earth, but this was before the Loyal
Subjects had separated themselves from their company. They are then condemned
by their own confession, for that most signal Act of Trust, such as never King
gave to his Subjects, they returned him the most infamous and perfidious Acts,
and base ingratitude that ever Subjects rendered to their King. He that said,
Fidelem si putaveris, facies, the means to make men faithful, was to think them
so, was never known to these men.

In Conscience can ye believe that when the King committed to them this great
power, that he understood it thus, That when he should refuse to do any thing
they requested him, he gave them liberty to force him to do it, or to do it
without him, to take from him his Children, to seize upon his Revenues, to turn
his Armies, Navies, and Forts against him, to make a broad Seal, and to break
his, to dispose of all the Offices of the Crown, to levy Foreign Soldiers,
and bring them into his Kingdom, to deprive his Subjects of their Goods and
possessions, to drive the Ministers of the Gospel from their flocks, to rob the
Church of her Revenues, to overthrow the ancient Laws of the Land, and to make
a Religion all new? After all this, can any man wonder if they durst not trust
the King? For where is the Criminal or Malefactor that dares commit himself to,
or trust the Judge? and where is the Cozener and Deceiver, who being
discovered, dares trust him whom he has cozened and deceived?

If by these vile actions they have violated the trust the King reposed in
them, and if by the Act for the continuance of the Parliament, the King gave
them a power to deal thus with him, we refer our selves to the better part of
the Parliament, who withdrew themselves to the King, abhorring such a
prodigious violation of the public faith, and of the duty of Subjects and
Christians unfaithfulness; they committed the like to the people, who deputed
and committed to them the public safety: For doubtless in their choice it
never entered into the Spirits of them who sent them, to invest them with an
absolute power over their goods and persons, much less over their King, for
they could not give that which they had not, nevertheless they have executed
this power, casting their fellow-Citizens out of their houses and possessions,
and gathered together great treasure out of the rents of the King and his
Subjects, manifesting themselves very liberal of the goods of others.

But they defend these actions by a new Maxim of State, invented upon this
occasion; Some of the principal Citizens of London being oppressed by their
great and often Taxes, came to the House, and represented to them that it was
their duties to maintain the Subjects in the propriety of their goods, and
beseeched them, not to fall themselves into that inconvenience which they were
bound to remedy. The Gentlemen of the House of Commons answered them, that in
truth the Subjects might plead the propriety of their goods against the King,
but not against the Parliament, to whom it appertained to dispose of all the
goods of the Kingdom; but to persuade the people to believe this, is a very
hard task, who rather judged, that the Parliament whom they had chosen, had
violated the public faith and the trust committed to them, and had taken that
into their disposing which was never committed them. Let these Gentlemen never
hereafter speak so loud of their public faith, since they have lost it, nor
ever attempt to borrow more money upon so sorry a caution.

There were none in either Houses who had not often taken the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, by which they acknowledge the King their Sovereign,
depending of none, and had sworn to him loyalty and obedience. They moreover
took the protestation made in the beginning of the Parliament, and imposed upon
the whole Kingdom, wherein also they swear the same thing. The Oath of the
Covenant which was taken after, renewed the same promise, and there they swore
to defend the Person and Authority of the King, and cause the world to behold
their fidelity, and that they would not in the least thing diminish his just
power, and greatness. Consider here (good Reader) Oaths enough to bind them
to perform and keep their promise. But this multitude of oaths is a kind of
proof of their ill faith, for they that swear often, manifest thereby, that
they think themselves unworthy to be believed, and distrust, that every one
mistrusts them; It had been better for them to have been faithful to their King
without swearing: for as in the Grammar Latin, two Negatives make an
Affirmative, these on the contrary in stead thereof, would seem to make two
Affirmatives to make one Negative, and that many oaths to be faithful to their
Sovereign bound them to do the contrary; for in effect these last oaths were
solely employed to ruin the ancient Oath of Allegiance, for if their
intentions had been simply to be faithful to their Sovereign, they needed have
taken no other oath then the first. Therefore after these two new oaths, came
the third, which they called the Negative Oath, in which they caused men to
swear, That they should neither directly, nor indirectly assist the King in
this war. And thus behold in fine the mask taken off, and the intention of
their former oaths uncovered.

There can be no greater symptom of a desperate sick State, then the
multiplication of oaths to form parties and factions; and we may say after the
Prophet Jeremy 23.10. The land mourns because of Oaths.

As for the principals who imposed the Oaths, they made use of them to halter,
and entangle the consciences of the people, for to serve their ambition,
practicing the Doctrine of Lysander, who taught that men ought to be amused
with oaths, as children with bables; and as for the people upon whom the oaths
were imposed, for the most part they took them rather for imitation, then
knowledge, or for fear, or from a blind zeal, or an implicit faith. Moreover
the multitude of Oaths do imbase the dignity, and a people accustomed to them,
respect no more an oath, then their old shoes. Those also that swear often, are
often forsworn, overthrowing one oath with another.

But the Oath of the Covenant has this singular, wherein it surpasses all
Chymera's, Centaurs, Hypogriff^, in extravagance and contradiction; for in
taking it in the sense of the Covenanters, they overthrow this Oath by the Oath
it self? and they forswear that which they had sworr; for in swea^ing that they
would defend the Person and Authority of the King, and make the world behold
their fidelity, according to their opinion they are bound to make war against
him, and by virtue of this Oath, they persecuted, robbed, and after all deposed
him. Oh supreme degree of perfidy, and frantic blindness? Have we not whereat
to mourn and lament, to behold these illuminated Reformers so plunged in the
gall of bitterness, and bonds of iniquity, for to persecute their good King
with all rage and violence, because they had sworn to defend him, and to be
faithful to him.

This Oath was called Covenant, that is to say, Alliance, or confederation,
because those that took it (for at present its forbidden to be taken) pretended
to make an Alliance and Covenant with God: This Oath is yet in vogue in
Scotland. It Is their New Covenant, besides that of the New Testament, and the
modern Canonical Scripture, which is Judge in all cases of conscience, and from
which there is no appeal.

Their ill faith is moreover evident in the composition of this Oath, and
certainly it is the only thing evident in the third Article, which is a
discourse so twisted and interwoven, composed expressly not to be understood:
There they swear to defend the Person and Authority of the King in defense of
Religion and the public Liberty. It Is very hard to say what that signifies,
every good soul who suffered himself to be persuaded to take this Oath,
understood thereby, that to defend the Person of the King, was a necessary
point, both to preserve their Religion and Liberty, and that they could not
fear God as they ought, without honoring the King; and those that took the
Oath in this sense, were bound to fight against the Covenanters for the defense
of their Religion and Sovereign.

But the unworthy companions of the Covenant interpreted it thus, that they
bind themselves to defend the Person and Authority of the King, so far forth as
it is compatible with the defense of Religion and Liberty. Now (say they) we
find that the defense of the Person, and Authority of the King is incompatible
with the defense of Religion, and the Public Liberty; and therefore we are
bound to oppose and ruin the King for the defense of Liberty and Religion. And
thus it appears that this malicious obscurity is a fold of the Serpent, and a
lurking hole of the evil spirit, even the rather when we narrowly consider this
construction, to defend one thing in defense of another, which signifies
nothing, and wants both true Logic and common sense.

The Oath being a profession before God, and the strongest affirmation of all,
had need to have been clear, and couched in such terms, that every one might
have understood it in the same sense they took it; but to insert such
equivocations, was to abuse the Name of God, whom they took to witness, and the
simplicity of the people. He that takes a forked Oath, and understands it not
in the sense that he that gives it, or understands it not at all, swears not in
Truth, in Righteousness, and Judgment, which are the qualities required in an
Oath, for he calls God to witness his hypocrisy, blindness and temerity.

The same Article makes profession of fidelity to the King, and to diminish
nothing of his just Authority and greatness. It Is no new thing for Rebels to
take the Oath of Allegiance to their Sovereign, to combine a faction against
him. The Mutineers in the time of Richard the Second, took an Oath to be
faithful to the King and people, and yet nevertheless made use of this Oath to
stir up the people to ruin the King: And these did the like; and when hereupon
we tax them with unfaithfulness, and breach of their Oath, they answer, and pay
us with a distinction betwixt the politic and personal capacity of the King,
and they tell us that it was against Charles they made the War, and not
against the King, making the King a pure Idea, an Accident without a Substance.
It Is very hard for them to say what became of the politic capacity of the
King, then when they beheaded him in his personal capacity, for they so long
honored him in Idea, that at last they massacred him in substance.

But they forget that in the same Article they had sworn to be faithful to the
Person of the King, and protested to defend his Person and Authority; as things
conjoined and inseparable: So strong is truth, and respect due to Sovereignty,
so natural to Subjects, that even in the Oath which they formed, to confederate
against him, their duty is couched in express terms, which will one day be
produced in judgment against them.

But in good earnest have we not much to wonder at, and to acknowledge the
wrath of God, in the blindness of these men, that so many millions of men
should think they were bound to persecute the King to all extremity, and to
take away his goods, honor, liberty, safety, and at last his life; because
they had sworn to defend the Person and Authority of the King, and make the
world behold their fidelity, and that they would diminish nothing of his just
Power and Authority: Is it possible that their by-got zeal could so dislocate
their brains, and a-brutish their spirits, as to make them commit so many
crimes and enormities, upon so unreasonable a consequence. Oh Lord create in us
a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within us.

In the fourth Article of this Oath, they promise to endeavor with all their
power, to bring to condign punishment all those who were the cause of
separating the King from his people; and according to this, it was, they made
the people believe a long time, that the occasion of their taking up Arms was
to bring the King to his Parliament; but the hypocrisy of protestation, is now
clearly manifested, for when the King offered to return to his Parliament, they
utterly refused to receive him; telling him plainly if he came, he should come
at his peril. Forbidding all persons whatsoever, under pain of death, to
receive or entertain him in their houses. Let all good subjects who have taken
this Oath, open now at last their eyes, and acknowledge that the intentions of
their Guides, was quite contrary to their professions.

The Sixth Article required every person to swear; That this cause touched the
Glory of God, the happiness of the three Kingdoms, and the Dignity of the
King. Indeed this cause touched the Glory of God with such fowl hands, as have
defiled it as much as possible men could, and it touched the happiness of the
three Kingdoms with such malignant claws, as have torn them to pieces. But if
they will that we take them in their sense, namely, that their cause defends
and advances the Glory of God, the happiness of the Kingdoms, and the Dignity
of the King, we behold and feel the contrary: But grant that this should be
true, it is not a thing for which we must swear. Oaths are of two sorts; the one
sort are to affirm the truth of a thing present or past, the other for to
promise and oblige our will for the future; these two sorts of Oaths cannot be
taken together.

The Oath of the Covenant is of the latter; and therefore it is very ill done
of them to confound it with the first, which is altogether of another nature
and usage, and in a promise for the future; to thrust in an affirmation of a
thing present, yea, of a thing false, or at least doubtful, and whereof they of
their party are not accorded.

But suppose that this Oath were of the first sort, the things which we should
affirm upon Oath, are such as require the testimony of the person who swears:
Such are all questions of fact. But as for questions of right, they ought not,
neither can they be decided by Oath; and it is to want common sense, to make
his neighbor judge, to know which is the true Religion, and to judge whether
the Cause of the Parliament is better then the Kings. There the Oath loses his
use, for its made to persuade and give Authority to the thing, by the witness
of the person. If the Cause of the Covenant be the Cause of God, there is no
need to swear it, but to justify it by reason and practice. And although we
should even believe that it searches and advances the Glory of God, the
happiness of the Kingdom, and dignity of the King, it were unjust and
ridiculous, to press us to swear it; for moral truths, and even also
Theological, ought to be believed, not sworn. Civil things only, and those
amongst them which are matters of fact, ought only to be affirmed by oath; we
have a very firm belief of the truth of many points of Religion, and of the
honesty of diverse persons, and yet nevertheless, for all the world, we would
not swear to them; all who have any ingenuity, or good sense acknowledge, that
to force us to affirm the goodness of the Covenant by Oath, is an extreme
tyranny, and full of ignorance and absurdities. And also seeing we are very ill
satisfied of the goodness thereof, its another tyranny to make us swear to
defend it; and a most barbarous cruelty, to confiscate our possessions, and
sequester our Ministers of their benefices, because they refuse to take so
unreasonable an Oath, and yet all this was practiced during the Presbyterian
Reign.

The Articles of the Covenant were assisted with a Religious Prologue and
Epilogue, full of protestations of zeal and repentance, and therefore it was
almost impossible, but the most part of them that took it should be perjured,
considering the generality of the people are evil. And this should have
prevented the Gentlemen to impose the Covenant indifferently upon all, under
such great penalties. For as they will not suffer the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper to be administered to the people, for fear to increase their
condemnation: They should have by the same reason, according to their
principles, have withheld to administer these protestations of zeal and
repentance, to their consciences, whose disposition they were ignorant of.

Now a great evidence of their depraved and evil Faith, consists in their
protestations of sanctity and superlative expressions of zeal; in which the
Independent party who rejected the Covenant, without comparison, fly higher
then their Predecessors; All their Ordinances, and Declarations, yea even their
Letters of News, were sallies of zeal. All their murders and robberies were to
establish the purity of the Gospel, to conquer a Kingdom for Jesus Christ, and
that godliness might reign and flourish.

If they speak of the abominable parricide committed against their Sovereign,
they say that God made bare the Arm of his Holiness, that the Lord is on their
right hand, that he has smote Kings in the day of his wrath, and that they may
wash their feet in the blood of the ungodly. Thus they made their horrible
crimes march disguised in terms of Scripture, and the devil borrowed the
language of the Spirit of God.

Whosoever shall well consider the use they made of the Scripture, and whereto
they employed their great show of holiness, shall find an Answer to the
Question in the 50 Psalm. 16. But to the wicked God says, what have thou to do
to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth.
Behold here the work of the Covenanters; they declare the Statutes of God, and
take his Covenant into their mouths, to put on rebellion, the mask of Religion,
and to invest themselves without trouble, of the Authority and Revenues of the
Crown, the goods of the Church, and without suspicion to grope the purses of
the people; for the outward show of devotion, does much amuse the assistants,
and gain their belief; for who can fear any evil from those who so piously
invite them to repentance, and the advancement of the Glory of God? who would
not confide and trust in them that declare the Statutes of God, and take his
Covenant in their mouth? Satan in all forms is dangerous, but he is never so
pernicious as when he clothes himself as an Angel of Light, and it is ill going
Procession when the Devil carries the Cross.

Moreover by their fruits ye shall know them. How often abused they the
credulity of the people, when they conjured them to help to fetch the King from
his evil Counselors, and to bring him gloriously to his great and faithful
Council, that is to say, to themselves; but their faithfulness appeared then
when he departed from them whom they called his evil Counselors, to yield
himself up to them; for then their terrible mennaces against him, and all those
who should dare to receive him, forced this poor Prince to travel disguised in
great danger of his life through their Armies which besieged Oxford, and to go
and cast himself into the arms of the Scots, as a chased Boar casts himself
into the toils.

He found by sad experience in this his miserable refuge, that the Covenanters
were of the same Genius in other Nations, and of the same evil Faith. It
imports not much whether it be true or false, which was said of the Scots, that
they had secretly invited him, and promised to expose both their goods and
lives for his defense and safety; but how ever it was, they were bound by their
natural duty to do so: But instead of rendering him the duties of faithful
subjects, as crafty Merchants they made their profit of him; for after they had
kept him captive some months, at length they drew two great benefits by him;
the one upon their promise to employ their Armies for his service, they made
use of his Authority, to make that Miracle of Valor and Fidelity, the Marquess
of Mentr^sse, the Kings Lieutenant in their Country, and the terror of the
Rebels, to disband, and lay down his Arms; the other, in making sale of his
Majesty, to the Gentlemen at Westminster, for two hundred thousand pounds
sterling in ready money, obliging them to pay the like sum more two years
after. Upon which this most wise Prince, being demanded whether he had rather
continue with his Scottish Subjects, or go to his Subjects in England, answered
with an excellent grace and serenity, Without question, I must be with those
who have bought me, and not with those who have sold me. And in his meditation
upon this subject, Since I am thus sold by them, I am only afflicted for the
evil they have done, and to behold my self valued at a higher price then my
Savior. These words proceeding from a quick and well governed Spirit, a King
of his passions, and so conforming himself to the passion and obedience of the
Son of God, cannot be heard, nor read by good Christians with the same
moderation they were pronounced; but this magnanimous patience, should produce
in every pious soul, a most just execration of this the most base and barbarous
treachery, that has been committed since that of Judas, and which in iniquity
yields only to the abominable paracide, to whom he was delivered by this
infamous sale.

It matters not much what is said hereupon, that the Scots in delivering up the
person of the K. to the Gent. at Westmin. drew from them a promise to treat him
with safety, liberty and honor; for they ought not impose upon other then
themselves, this duty which was natural to them. Neither could they expect that
the English should render him that safety, liberty and honor, which themselves
refused him, or that the buyers should not as well search to make their profit
by him, as the sellers, and to reimburse themselves with usury by his ruin.

But for their care they took of the K. when they delivered him, let us do them
the favor to pass by their perfidiousness, and behold how the Gent. at Westminster.
performed their promise to treat the K. with safety, liberty and honor. Behold
how they led him captive to Holmby house, where they set a guard of soldiers,
his enemies upon him, denied him his Revenues, Rights, liberty, children,
servants, and (that which with greatest earnestness he desired) his Chaplins,
and the free exercise of his conscience, extremely misusing him with insolent
threatenings and injurious demands,

And for all this the Scots never seemed to be moved or troubled, whilst the K.
was in the Presbyterian parties custody. But when the Independents had seized
upon his person, although his captivity was a little sweetened over it was
before, the Scotch began to demand aloud the accomplishment of their promises
for his liberty, whereupon the Gent. at West. made a Declaration, to break and
null all their former promises of loyalty, and respect made to his Majesty by
this Parl. Telling the Scots, that these promises were formed, published, and
imploid according as the state of affairs then stood, Husbands in his book of
Declarations, p. 557. and 663.
but they might now be altered, and yet nevertheless these promises to preserve
the person and authority of the K. had been made with the solemnest and
sublimest protestations, we protest (say they) in the presence of Almighty God,
which is the strongest bond of a Christian, and the public faith, the most
solemn that any State can give, that neither adversity nor success shall ever
cause us to change our resolutions. Now at this day it sadly appears how much
they respect the presence of Almighty God, and how much they find themselves
obliged by the strongest obligation of a Christian, and the Public Faith, the
most solemn that the body of an estate can give. It is to be doubted, whether
they believe there is a God, or that he is Almighty, or so just as to call them
before him in Judgment for the profanation of his most Holy Name.

Before these Gentlemen did openly manifest that they would not grant the King
neither liberty, honor, nor safety, they set awork their hypocrisy and
treachery. The Independent Army having taken away the person of the King from
the Presbyterians, began to use him more Honorably, but not out of love to him,
but in hatred to his former Goalers, and to flatter and lull asleep the Royal
Party, and for this effect this Army made some Declarations in favor of his
Majesty. See here some of their expressions.

Forasmuch as a scandalous information has been presented to the two Houses,
importing that his Majesty is kept prisoner amongst us, and uncivilly and
barbarously dealt with, we judge our selves bound to declare that this
suggestion, and all other of the same nature, are most false and absolutely
contrary, not only to our requests, but also to our principles. And a little
after, we profess openly that we see not how there can be any firm or durable
peace in the Kingdom, without a due consideration and provision for the
rights, repose and immunities of his Majesty and his Royal Family. And in
another place they promise, that until such time as there be made a settlement,
his Majesty shall find amongst them all civil and personal respect, with all
reasonable Freedom.

But let us next see how they performed this promise, after they found this
great Prince inflexible to all their unjust and dishonorable propositions, and
especially to those which concerned the ruin of the Church, they restrained
his liberty, and set over him more insolent guards in his house at Hampton
Court; at which nevertheless Oliver Cromwell, who was then in effect chief of
the league, seemed to be much troubled, and very careful of the life of his
Majesty, and therefore persuaded him to escape by night, and to save himself
out of such wicked hands into the Isle of Wight; for being resolved to charge
the King with a criminal process, which was the way as he thought most proper
for the designs of his ambition, then privately to make him away; but he durst
not proceed thus far, whilst the King was so near the gates of London, and in
the heart of his Kingdom, the hearts whereof he possessed. I will not
undertake to sound the mysteries of iniquity of this Agent of Satan, but show
you a piece of his perfidiousness, and profound hypocrisy.

The night before the King stole from Hampton Court, Cromwell came to visit
him, causing all persons to withdraw out of the Chamber, except Major
Huntington, in whom he only confided, and taking the King aside, had a long
discourse with him, which Huntington could not hear, but could well behold his
passionate gesture, which witnessed a singular freedom and affection. Cromwell
at his departure cast himself upon his knees, and took the King by the hand,
kissing it many times, wetting it with his tears, and at length lifting up his
voice, said to him: Sir, so God bless me and my children, as I am resolved to
endeavor to place you and your children in your rights and dignities; after
this, approaching to Huntington, Major (says he) tarry with the King, and
(...) there happen any thing now this night, take a good horse, and come with
all speed and acquaint me. This night then the King passed secretly the Thames,
and taking post, cast himself into the trap they had laid for him in that
retired place: So soon as Huntington knew of the departure of the King, and
whether he was gone, he went in all have to give advice to Cromwell, that the
King had escaped into the Isle of Wight, who beholding him astonished and
amazed at this sudden change, laughed at him, telling him, That the King was
there where he desired, and that there wanted nothing now to the satisfying of
his desires, but that all his children were there with him. This history is
attested by Huntington himself, a person of credit and repute, whose eyes this
action and the like has opened, and turned his heart toward the King his
Sovereign.

Now the King being confined into this little Island, where all the avenues
might easily be kept by the Creatures of Cromwell, and the other Gentlemen of
the Covenant; the Mask was presently taken off at Westminster, and in the Army,
and all their oaths and protestations to maintain the person and authority of
the King, were changed into loud cries, in calling for Justice against him, to
which the Gentlemen at Westminster easily condescended, and for this effect
declared him incapable to govern; charged him with all the crimes malice could
devise, forbidding all persons to make any more addresses to him: But in this
fair way, they had some disturbance, by those Parties that in the year 1648.
rose for the King, but God justly provoked against this sinful Nation, suffered
injustice to triumph through the disloyaly of persons, who having until that
time born Arms against the King, took part with him expressly to betray and
ruin him.

And thus from the beginning to the end of this Tragedy, falsehood has played
his part, and at length this just Prince lost his life by the hand of those his
Subjects, who had called Heaven and Earth to witness their Loyalty and
Affection; and this is very admirable and memorable to all ages, how the
Conscience and constancy of the King took a way altogether contrary to that of
the Covenanters, for whilst the Covenanters swore themselves to destroy him, he
would do neither the one, nor the other to save his life, or Crown; for its
manifest that there was a time, wherein if the King would have promised that
which he was resolved not to have kept, he had in a short time been put into
such a condition (according to all humane appearances) as would have put him
out of the power of all the discontented to constrain him to have kept his
promise.

I cannot pass the last Act of this hideous Treason, without letting the world
behold another piece of the damnable Hypocrisy of Oliver Cromwell. The day
assigned for the Execution of the King being come, the Council of War sat,
which was then the Great Council of the Kingdom: A Letter without Name was
addressed to this Council to represe^t to them by Reasons of Conscience and
Prudence, the formidable consequences of so strange and hateful an Execution.
Cromwell seemed to be much touched at it, (which caused some suspicions, as
though he himself underhand had procured it) and proposed it to the
consideration of the Council, part of this company began to yield to the force
of Justice, and their duty, and to lean toward compassion: Cromwell beholding
this made a turn to the door, and sent one of his confidence to those to whom
the Execution was committed, to command them to dispatch the business: Then
returning to the Council Table, made a long Discourse showing the inconvenience
of this execution, and advised them so to secure the person of the King for the
time to come, that he might neither do nor receive hurt. This Discouse was
seconded by others, and then again reassumed by himself with a great many
words to lengthen the Consultation, until that one briskly entering into the
Chamber told them, Gentlemen, You may cease to consult, the work is done, the
King is executed: Upon this Cromwell suddenly fell upon his knees with signs of
great devotion, crying out, That this was the work of God, and a true stroke of
heaven, the Council being disposed to save his life, but the Divine justice
would not suffer so much innocent blood shed by this Tyrant to pass unpunished,
and hereupon made an eloquent Prayer to give glory to God, and acknowledge his
providence.

And from this History I leave the Reader to draw a Character of this Person,
whose perpetual method was to make his Impostures to pass for miraculous and
divine managements. When he would make his Inventions pass into public
resolutions, he would suborn a Prophet or Prophetess, who should come and find
him in full Council, or in the head of his Army, for to enjoin him on the
behalf of God, that which before he had resolved; he caused all the Councels he
proposed to pass for motions of the blessed Spirit, therefore if his Councels
and Actions did ill accord with his preceding professions, his inspirations
from above excused all, and he laid all the fault upon God; when any minded him
of his Protestations made to preserve the person of the King, and restore him
to his Dignities: He would Answer, That it was indeed his Intention, but that
when he sought God to open him a way for the performance, God had silenced him,
and showed that it would not be acceptable to him. His party seriously give
him this commendation, That he was so affected with the glory of God, that if
he had promised any thing with the most solemn and holy adjurations, and that
afterward God should put it into his spirit, That the contrary to what he had
promised was most expedient for his glory, he presently forgot all his Promises.

Therefore when he had the K. in his power at Hampt. Court, and often conferred
with him; his Majesty expressed his perplexity to persons of Honor, telling
them, I cannot (says he) treat with these people upon any foundation, who
refer me to their inspirations, for that which they promise me to day, they
contradict too morrow, if the Spirit dictate to them; but you must note that
the Spirit never dictates any thing to them but for their profit.

The wrath of God is great against us in suffering us to be ruined and
destroyed by fraud and hypocrisy, but verily his indignation is yet greater
against those who are seduced; for it is a lesser evil to be persecuted by the
Devil, then to mistake him for the Spirit of God.

But let us consider other Acts of the evil faith of the Covenanters. How have
the Members of Parliament answered the intentions of those that sent them? Was
it the desire of those Countries and places for which they served, that the
Divine Service so much loved by the people should be taken away, and their
Ministers driven from their Benefices, and Anabaptists and such like, without
knowledge and call, established in their places? Did they give them Commission
to levy and make War against their King, to cut off his head? This was written
during the ^itting of the long Parliament in Anno 1650.
And were they not sent and departed to council and advise the King, and to
succor their Counties? and have not they done the contrary? When their fellow
Citizens chose them, did they choose them to be their Sovereigns? Was it their
intentions that they should ^it in Parliament to perpetuity, and place in their
children to perpetuate their Reign in their Families? whereby they have gained
more in a few years then the house of Austria, which hardly in two hundred
years of an Elective Empire, have made one Successive; for these people have in
a few years turned into succession an Empire, in which they have no Election.
And it would be very hard to tell, who gave them the power to dispose of the
goods and lives of the people, and to govern the Kingdom by an Army, of which
England has never hope to be delivered, but by an absolute victory obtained by
the King. Of these high actions of Presumption and Tyranny, warranted by no
Authority, and upheld only by the strength of Arms, they must render account
to God, and since they maintain that the Sovereignty resides in the people,
they must also one day give an account to the people of their administration.

They made an Ordinance, That no Member of Parliament should exercise any
Office in the State, but how well did they keep it? Did they not make amongst
themselves a Monopoly of all the gainful Offices? They gave out they would give
an account of the Treasure expended of the State, but in the mean while they
followed the Council of Pericles, which was to study how never to give any.

They invited the people to present their plaints against their own Members,
but those who dared to do it were ruined in the prosecution, and served as a
sad example to all others to beware and keep themselves from so dangerous an
enterprise for the future.

They have also forced the Consciences of men to break their Faith, witness the
breach of Articles subscribed in the Counties of York and Chester, whereby the
Gentlemen engaged on both parties, were mutually obliged to lay down their Arms
and live in peace, but the Gentlemen at Westminster, frighted with this Hideous
name of Peace, declared this accord Null, as destructive to their affairs; for
both the Devil and the Covenanters maintain themselves by dissension.

They forced the Londoners, taken and released by the King at the Battle of
Brainsford, to take up Arms against him the second time, against their Faith
sworn to his Majesty, who most graciously gave them both their Lives and
Liberty, releasing them without any ransom.

But as for them they wickedly massacred those who yielded themselves upon
their promise of life, and liberty, as Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, and
the gallant and noble Lord Capel, Sir Charles Lucas, Sir George Lisle, and many
others.

They being thus habituated in disloyalty and unfaithfulness, their great
quarrel against the late King of blessed and glorious memory was, That he would
not break his Faith, nor falsify his Oath he took at his Coronation, to
maintain the Rights and Privileges of the Church, and to defend the Laws of
the Land.

And as they were perfidious to us, so were they also to one another, they
falsified their faith to their Army, which had too well fought for them, under
the Command of the Earl of Essex, and disbanded them without their pay.

But another Army paid them for this perfidiousness by another. The Independent
Troops were those which professed to them fidelity with the greatest zeal: And
these were they which unroosted them at Westminster, and pull the Gentlemen out
of their Thrones, leaving there, only such as pleased them.

And in passing, let us mark another seat of activity, of Cromwell, he persuaded
the House of Commons to casheer this Army, promising them that he would lay
down his Arms at their feet, but he gave them this counsel only for to provoke
and irritate the Army against them, and to ruin them, as indeed it did.

Then when the Army began to present criminal informations against the King,
they sent an Embassy of six Colonels to the House of Lords to keep them
quiet, promising to maintain their privilege of Peerage, but as soon as the
King was beheaded, they casheered the House of Lords, and those Lords having
basely abandoned their Head to the slaughter, presently lost the Life of
Honor, which flowed from thence upon them, and were most justly laid aside as
dead and unprofitable members.

The Scots also for having been too faithful to their Brethren in Rebellion,
were paid with the like treachery, for all that power and interest which they
ought to have had in the affairs of both Kingdoms, according to the Articles of
their League, was denied them with scorn and insultation.

Amongst our miseries, this is a recreative spectacle to us, to behold the
Thieves who pillaged us, to pillage and rob one another, and to deal
treacherously amongst themselves after they betrayed us.

To their disloyalty let us join their falsehood, wherein consisted the
Foundation and Building of all their Fabric. This appeared singularly in the
beginnings of the Covenant. Then the Gentlemen discovered daily some Treason or
other, with as much facility as the Labourer finds his work.

News of England, written from Spain, France, Italy, Denmark, Politic
Discourses of a Dutch Mariner, to an English Hostler, of Armies kept under
ground by the King, to cut the Throats of all the Protestants in a night; and
the greatest danger of all, which caused the chiefest fear to the subtle
spirits of London, was a design laid for a mine of Powder under the Thames, to
cause the River to drown the City; but this dangerous enterprise was discovered
a little before the Execution, whereupon the devout people very conscientiously
gave thanks to God, and they took special order for the future that the Thames
should not be blown up. In two or three months these Treasons amounted to the
number of nine and thirty, according to the account of a venerable Member of
the House of Commons, in one of his Speeches. This indeed was the time they had
most need of them to form a Party.

They made use of the same path according to their occasions; after a defeat,
they used to keep a day of Thanksgiving for a victory; if the King offered
peace to his Subjects, they gave ou^ amongst the people that he refused it, and
would have none; and the Ministers told God of it in their public Prayers,
with all the news of the times, that he might have no cause to pretend
ignorance. To draw money from the people, a plot would be discovered, for which
public Thanks was to be given do God, and afterward the Londoners must pay a
hundred thousand pound Sterling in acknowledgment of so great a Benefit. By
these plots which were only against their Purses, the people were often
pillaged, yet they had not the wisdom to beware of them, the Devil having sent
amongst them such strong delusions, that they should believe a Lie. Certainly
this Device or Motto should have been written upon the Standards of the
Covenanters, P^ssuimus in (...) Latibulum nostrum, and mendacio protecti sumus.
We have made Lies our Refuge, and under falsehood have we hid our selves, Isa.
28.15. But this covering will not long continue, For the hail shall sweep away
the refuge of Lies, says the Prophet, v. 17. And that which is builded
thereon, shall fall as an House built upon the Sand.

And thus much for them who boast of their Public Faith, and say they dare not
trust their King.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Instruments both Parties made use of, and of the Irish
Affairs.
LET us now come to the accusation which made the lowdest noise: Our enemies
reproached the King, that he made use of wicked Instruments. For beholding to
their great regret, that the person of the King was without blame, they cast
all the sins of his Court and Armies upon him. But we will see what Instruments
the two Parties served themselves with, and whether the consideration of the
Instruments can alter the nature of the cause.

But first of all let us make our advantage of that which our enemies are
forced to yield us, for envy which tare a pieces those which served the King,
found nothing to fasten on, in his person, yea though continually endeavored,
even after his death, when the Covenanters entertained, and yet do, Writers in
pay, to write sandalous and defamatory Libels against his sacred Majesty.

There was never Rebel which called not his Prince unjust, otherwise they would
condemn their own party of injustice: But the open conversation of the King was
a subject very improper, either for the detracter or flatterer; he lived not
obscure and hidden as the Kings of China, but made appear to the eyes of all
the world what he was, as the Sun makes himself seen to the Universe by his own
proper light.

This Prince whom the Covenanters persecuted under color of Piety and
Reformation, was four times a day upon his knees at his devotion, was guided by
the fear of God, and comforted by his Love, made his Word the Rule of his
Belief and Actions, humbled himself in his adversities under his mighty hand,
and reposed himself with a firm Faith upon the same hand which smote him. His
discourses were honest, religious, pertinent and judicious, and his Writings
were the same; wherein shined forth a Vigor and Majesty truly Royal. And the
sanctity of his retired Meditations, which are now public, will for ever fill
all good souls with consolation and instruction, and his enemies with
confusion, He was a Prince sober, continent, temperate, a spirit composed by
singular Geometry, so equal in all his inclinations, that it is hard to say, to
which passion he was most inclined.

Greatness arms vices with power, and tempts the desires by the facility; and
the Devil has his Agents in the Courts of Princes, who observe and watch their
humors, and advertise them of all the evil they may do; for to resist such
trials, one had need of a Soul wherein Nature and Grace had contributed to
strengthen against such temptation; this our Prince showed by his behavior,
that he believed there could be no pleasure where there was sin, Abhorring that
which was evil, cleaving to that which was good, Romans 12.9. The councillors of
vice had here assayed in vain, all which might move youth or power: If in any
thing he manifested passion, it was in favoring Virtue, Knowledge and Arts,
which he loved by judgment and experience.

The injustice they are able to reproach him with, is that which he committed
against himself, having taken from his own Rights to preserve and augment those
of his Subjects. It were to be wished for their good, that he had less loved
them, and himself a little more; for if he had given them less, they would have
had more than they have at this day.

Of his Clemency, none can speak more than his enemies, for his greatest
adversaries were those who were the principal subjects of it. He preserved the
lives of those who purchased his destruction: He restored the Inheritances to
the children of them, which ravished and took from him his own, and who died
with their swords in their hands against him, he offered a free pardon to them
who would not pardon him. But if this way has not gained their affections,
doubtless it has Gods.

Certainly since they have rejected and destroyed their good King, they deserve
God should give them such Masters, like the King of the Frogs in the Fable,
Storks and Herons which should devour them and consume them one after another;
but if he does not, I fear there will be such good order amongst them, that
they will mutually devour one another, there being no tyranny so cruel as that
of a multitude, nor worse servitude than to want a Master.

Behold here then a great point gained, That the King was a just and good
Prince! Those who so much complain of his evil Counselors or Instruments,
ought to love him so much the more, and to acknowledge that he could find no
Instruments like himself; there is no Malady in the body of State which is not
curable, whilst the head is found: In all Kingdoms, the injustice committed in
the Courts of Judicature, is done in the Name of the King; and there is no
Government so just and prudent, no, even that which is governed by a
prophetical conduct, as that of David's, which have not faults enough, to give
occasion to an Absalom to say, Oh that I were made Judge in the Land, that
every man which has any suit or cause, might come unto me, and I would do him
justice, 2 Samuel 15.4.

In public grievances, good Subjects are wont to cast the blame upon the
Ministers of State, and rest satisfied in seeing some of them punished,
accounting it their principal interest to preserve the honor of their
Sovereign; and good Princes when they are informed that the Ministers of State
have abused their Authority to the damage of their Subjects, which is theirs,
are wont to examine them, and judge them according to the Laws. And in this,
the King did as much as possible they could require of him, having submitted
the persons of those whom the Covenanters complained against, to be judged, and
tried by lawful and ordinary ways: But whilst they tread under foot the Royal
Authority, the Power of Parliament, and the Majesty of the Laws, and that they
were in open war against him, what reason had he to submit his Servants and
Ministers to the judgment of his enemies? Being certain that whilst the War
continued, they would aim most at them who served him best.

Then when the Parliament was whole and entire, there passed a Vote worthy the
gravity of that great Court, That the King could do no wrong, and that his
Officers, and not he were guilty of the evil which was done in the public
Government: But since those who loved the King departed, and withdrew
themselves to him, those which remained at Westminster, followed a way quite
contrary, for they cast upon the King all the faults of his Servants, and made
use of them against him, whom they ought and should have punished for having
ill served him. Then when they took in hand to examine the Ministers of State,
in stead of punishing them which were guilty, they received them into favor*
yea, after their ^aults proved against them, and turned all the discontent of
the people upon the King: What a great noise was there in the House of Commons
against the forgers of Monopolies? One would have thought that hardly any
should have escaped with their lives, but there happened altogether the
contrary: For because the Monopolists and other accused persons, made a
considerable number in Parliament, they made use of their faults, to make a
strong faction against the King, terrifying and making them understand, there
was no way left to preserve them from utter ruin, but to join with the new
party which was forming, and hereupon they were promised impunity for what
evils they had done, on condition they should do greater.

Some of these were sent to the King to Newmarket, in the behalf of their
companions, to whom his Majesty said these words, capable to convert them, or
to make their Indi^emen^ at the day of Judgment.

Gentlemen, lay your hands upon your Consciences, Who are they which invented
those Taxes by which you have so provoked my people against me? For whose
advantage and profit were those Imposts ^^^ied? Were my Revenues increased by
them? It was you that induced and moved me (...) them, for your own particular
profit, and now you return me a worthy recompense.

Other Parliament men, guilty of many crimes, were kept in the Parliament in
hope of impu^ity, the holy Covenant (...) a Garment which covered a multitude
of sins, even to the violating of a great Lady, and abusing her by own of their
Members, almost in the sight of the Parliament: Behold these, the Reformers of
Church and State! Others which were not of the Parliament, but under censure,
for having been Councillors, or Instruments in the Imposts and Taxes of the
people, were released by them, and employed for the same business, as persons
who well understood the Trade, who pillaged then with a good Conscience, for
the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. Those whose infamous life was
the shame of the Royal Court, were the honor of the Court at Westminster, and
the Pillars of the Covenant. Likewise the Judges accused of corruption, and the
Ministers of a scandalous life, in taking the Covenant, obtained a plenary
indulgence of all their sins, for after that, there was no more to say to them,
for those who washed themselves in this water, returned as white as if they had
been washed with Ink, or with the second Baptism the Anabaptists use at this
day.

But now let us look upon the Armies: Our enemies cry aloud, that the King made
use of those of the Church of Rome, to serve him in his Wars. Upon which, an
excellent Writer makes this gentle Question to them, How many were in their
Armies, or how many they would have had? For if the common report do not much
wrong them, they employed diverse persons of that Religion, there were persons
of Honor and Quality, who assured us, that they Prisoners of the same
Religion, served the Covenanters. We refer our selves to their own Consciences,
if they gave not a Commission to my Lord Aston to levy Forces.

The Relation in notable, the King being at York, this gallant man, accounted
the most experienced, and best Commander of War of his time, came to present
his Service to his Majesty, the King gave him thanks, and withal told him, he
was resolved to employ none of his Religion in his Army. Well (says he) I will
go then to those who will employ me, and indeed went presently to Westminster,
where he was received with open Arms, and a Commission given him written and
signed, which he carried to the King; Ye cannot wonder then, that the King made
use of him, and others of his Religion, whom before he was resolved not to
employ, although he had, to take away all shadow of occasion from his enemies,
who sought something whereat to quarrel with him, made a Proclamation that none
professing the Religion of the Church of Rome should come near his Court.

After this, the Covenanters used all their power to make them draw to the
Kings Party, well considering, their party being so small, would bring more
hatred than help to the King; and for this effect, they treated them with great
inhumanity, forcing them to forsake their Houses, and Lands, and run and hide
themselves under the Kings Protection, and this the King could not refuse them,
for as they owed him their Subjection, the King owed them his Protection, so
long as they governed themselves according to the Laws, and accomplished the
Conditions whereby they were permitted by Act of Parliament to live in the
Kingdom.

By this reason of Reciprocal duty, the King protecting them as his Subjects,
they were bound to defend him as their King, and ye shall not find in all the
Statutes which concern them, that they are exempted to serve the King in his
Armies, neither is it reasonable that they only should be free from the perils
of war, whilst their fellow Subjects venture their lives, and are shedding
their blood for the defense of their Country.

The Covenanters made it appear sufficiently to the world, that they judged
that Religion ought not to exclude any from bearing Arms in the public danger,
for in their Armies they made use of all Religions, yea that of the Church of
Rome, as we shall show hereafter. If it were lawful for them to make use of
those who denied the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, and of others that denied his
Divinity, and those who were rebaptized and denied Baptism to Infants, and the
Blessed Sacrament of the whole Church, it were not less lawful for the King to
make use of Soldiers of the Roman Religion; and if those whom they now call
Reformed, embrace the Doctrine of the Jesuits, touching the deposing and
murdering of Kings, and that persons of the Roman Religion reject this, and
join themselves with the Reformed Church in this point, the King had reason to
serve himself of the Last as well as of the First.

Moreover the King had but two Religions in his Armies, which were too many:
And although the Roman is not tolerated by the Laws, yet the Statutes give
protection to the persons which make profession of it, but the Covenanters
Motly Army consisted of many Religions, there can be no certain number of them,
for they multiplied and subdivided daily; and these Religions had no
tolleration by the Laws, nor the persons which made profession of them.

But put the case that the Covenanters were a party Reformed, uniform and
illuminated, since they have destroyed their King, what Law Divine or Humane,
does hinder him for using all means that God gives him to defend himself? And
if amongst his Loyal Subjects, there be some who are blinded in matter of
Religion, why should he not make use of those who are blind to repress those
who are illuminated; and maintain his Life and Crown?

It Is then a ridiculous Question, which they demand of the King, whether he
will defend the reformed Religion with Soldiers of the Roman Religion? for he
makes not use of them to defend his Religion, but his Person and Scepter, which
those whom they call Reformed, would wickedly pluck out of his hands. It Is
foolishly and unjustly done of them to complain that the King made them to kill
the Protestants, a name which they make a great noise with, when they have lost
the thing; they were not Protestants but Rebels, whom the King killed in his
just defense. The King was not to enquire of what Religion they were that made
War upon him; the true Religion gives not license to Malefactors to do evil,
and to bind the hands of the Judge, that he should not punish them; chiefly,
when the Malefactor fights against the Judge, and he to whom God has committed
the sword to execute vengeance in wrath, is constrained to make use of it to
defend his life and authority; the Malefactor who is instructed in a holy
Religion is doubly guilty, he is the evil servant in the Gospel, who knows his
Masters will, but does it not, and therefore he shall be beaten with many
stripes.

This above written serves as an Answer to the e^clamations of our enemies,
That the King caused an Army of Irish Papists to come over to kill the
Protestants in England, for it matters not what Religion the English be of, if
they be Rebels, and who can blame him for employing Rebels converted, against
Rebels obstinate, but only those that perish by them: But that which gives
occasion of laughter in this Objection is, that there were none, and the Irish
have not yet sent over their Army into England, according to their promise to
help the King. We grant that the English are far more considerable to the King
then the Irish; suppose the difference be as great as betwixt a Son and a
servant, but if the Son prove unnatural and draws his sword against his Father,
who can blame the Father if he arms his servant, were he a Barbary slave, to
defend his life? It Is not to purpose then for them so often to object to us,
that the Irish were the Executioners to cut the throats of a multitude of
Protestants in Ireland, and that it is a horrible thing to bring them over into
England to do as much here; for at the worst they were but Executioners of
Rebels; Certainly civil War is a horrible thing, where one destruction draws on
another, Abyssus abyssum advocat; but since the enraged and implacable
obstinacy of the Covenanters, brought the King to this extremity, that he could
not quench the fire that they had kindled in his Kingdom, but by ruin; like
those who would quench a Town all in flames with Cannon-shot, what could we do
other then call in the Irish to his succors? having rebellions then on all
sides? Was it not wisely done of him to make an agreement with the most
tractable and pliant, and to serve himself with their Forces to make head
against the others? If the English would not have had the King made peace with
the Irish, why did they then refuse the peace and pardon which the King so
often, and so graciously rendered them? And did he enter into Treaty with his
Irish Subjects, before he had a long time in vain solicited his English to
their duty? Should he rather willingly have lost two Kingdoms to help his
enemies to render themselves Masters of the third?

But say they, the Irish shed abundance of Protestants blood in Ireland, which
should have been revenged in stead of granting them peace. Its true, they
committed many fearful and strange cruelties, but this blood has been
sufficiently revenged; For, for one which they put to death, five of theirs
have been killed since the beginning of the War: And moreover this reason
sounds ill in the mouths of Christians, who ought to leave vengeance to God.
We could not expect that the Covenanters would ever commend this peace, which
might have been so disadvantagious to them, and might have supplied the King
with many Soldiers, if the Irish had kept their word.

The principal reason of their complaint was, because the Londoners lost much
hereby, for they had advanced great sums of moneys to the two Houses, for which
they were to have had the Irish Rebels Lands, after they were extirpated; which
was to buy the Bears skin before he was killed; and this partly was the cause
of breaking up of the Treaty at Uxbridge, for the Citizens of London would by
no means hear of Peace, unless the King would break his faith with the Irish,
and root them out; for the quarrel that the English Covenanters had with them
was not for their Religion, or Rebellion, but because they would not suffer
themselves to be killed in a peaceable and quiet manner, that thereby the
Merchant Adventurers of London might have their Bargain. And thus the
Covenanters as much as in them lay, justified the unjust arms of the Irish,
since they would by no means have peace with them: And after all, the King has
the sole power of Peace and War, and if he will receive into grace, and pardon
his Subjects who have offended him, he is to give account to none. Yet
nevertheless that it may appear to all the Reformed Churches how much our good
King departed, loved his Religion, he would not grant peace to his Irish
Subjects on the conditions they demanded, advantageous to their Religion; which
if he had accorded, he might have had Legions in stead of Regiments, and not
wanted neither the help of his Subjects, nor their neighbors; but rather then
he would buy their assistance at that price, he chose to sink and fall under
the oppression of the Covenanters; after this piety or humanity ought to have
converted the enemies of the King, if he had had to do with persons who had
either the one or the other. But if the Gentlemen at London lost their moneys
which they advanced upon the Irish affairs, they have cause to complain of the
Gentlemen at Westminster, who made use of this money, not to reconquer Ireland,
but to make war upon the King, who had a great desire to terminate that
business, and would have gone in Person, but not to serve the avaritious and
barbarous intentions of these Merchants of blood, but to recover his Rights,
and to restore a number of his exiled Subjects to their possessions; Those
ruined and remaining Families of the general Massacre, cried aloud in the ears
of the King and Parliament. For to help them there was a general Collection
through the Kingdom, and the Ministers by Order of Parliament were to excite
the charity of the people to a liberal contribution, which was done, and great
sums of money were raised for the Irish War. But to what was the charity of
many pious souls employed? to make War against the King; The Armies which the
cries of the poor exiled Irish had raised, and were ready at their Port to be
shipped, were called back, and conducted against his sacred Majesty; and
although many in those Troops had their Interests in Ireland, they were
constrained to forsake them, for unknown Interests, and an open Hostillity
against their Sovereign. It Is no wonder then, if part of those Troops at the
battle of Keinton, turned to the King; and took a bloody revenge of so great
injustice. For what a most horrible tyranny was this, to make them fight
against their King in England, whilst the throats of their wives and children
were cutting in Ireland?

We earnestly beseech the Covenanters, that whenever they curse the Irish
Rebellion, they would remember these two things; the one, that the Scots showed
them the way, having before made a Covenant for Religion, and levied Arms to
maintain it, and obtained by this way, all that they desired. The Irish seeing
this was the way to obtain the liberty of their Religion, presently followed
the example of their Neighbors, and as a judicious Writer says pleasantly,
That if the Scots had not piped, the Irish had never danced.

Let them remember also, that the Irish as wicked as they were, had without
comparison more reason for their rising, then either the English or Scotch, for
it is most certain that the Irish were held in with a bridle, which had a ruder
bit then the other Subjects of the King. Many of the Irish for their former
Rebellions were dispossessed of their Lands; and although the sentence was
just, the loss nevertheless was sensible; moreover they had not the free
exercise nor liberty of their Religion, the English nor Scotch cannot allege
any thing like these. Hardly shall you find in any History a reign of fifteen
years more flourishing, peaceable, and mild, then the fifteen first years of
the Reign of the late King, notwithstanding all the grievances the Covenanters
reckon up to his disadvantage: There never shined more happy days upon England
and Scotland; In effect, they were Nations sick of too much ease. When Subjects
undertake to criticize upon mysteries of State, and come to quarrel amongst
themselves for subtilties of Religion, or points of Discipline, its a symptom
of an easy yoke, and of excess of ease and prosperity.

Moreover the Irish fought against men of another Religion, and of another
Nation, they fought not against the Person of their King, cut not the throats
of their Brethren, nor ruined those of their profession; imposed not necessity
of Conscience upon others; but only demanded public Liberty of Conscience for
themselves, although many amongst them contented themselves with less; for by
the Articles of peace in September. 1646. the King gave them no Toleration for
the public exercise of their Religion; Certainly therefore as those of Niniveh
shall rise up in judgment against the Scribes and Pharisees, so shall the Irish
against the English and Scotch Covenanters.

Further, our enemies are very unjust to complain, that the King assailed to
bring over Irish Armies into England, since they in effect a year and half
before had brought Armies of Scotch into England to serve them. If they take
the boldness to entertain the Armies of strangers within the Kingdom of their
Sovereign, shall it not be lawful for the King to defend his person and Kingdom
with his own Subjects, which in this quality are not strangers in respect of
him, but the Scotch are strangers in regard of the English. Histories furnish
naught parallel to this crime, to have brought the Scots into England, and to
move them to come, gave them part of the Kingdom of Ireland; but its easy for
them to give that which was none of theirs; with the same right the Devil
offered to Jesus Christ all the Kingdoms of the world, for they can produce
their Authority no other where.

This Nation abounding in men, living in a barren Country, will be easily
induced to plant Colonies in a more fertile soil, and who will believe that
having their weapons in their hands, and being in England, backed with their
forces from Scotland, they will govern themselves at the devotion of those that
sent for them, and go no further then they are commanded; there is danger least
it happen as to the fountain of Lucian, which a student in Magic, with certain
words he had learned of his Master sent to fetch water, to which the fountain
obeyed, but the poor apprentise knew not the words to make it stay, which in
the mean while went and fetched water without ceasing, till it filled the house
up to the windows. Certainly our Mutineers had the wit to make the Scotch come
to their help, and there needed no great charm to persuade a people which had
nothing, and had nothing to do, to come and fish in troubled waters, in their
neighbors pond: But I have great fear, that those which caused them to enter
upon their March, were ignorant of the charm, to stay them that they should go
no further, and that the Scotch will not have done, when the English have done
with them.

It was not then an action of judgment to cause the Scots to enter England,
without having power to make them return, and to hinder their coming again,
much less an action of piety, for God needs not the wickedness of men to
advance his Kingdom, it was an action purely of spite and stomach, a stroke of
despair, proceeding from persons resolved to destroy their Country with them,
rather than to suffer the insultation of a Conqueror, or the reproach of their
treachery: But in doing this, they have rather augmented their reproach, and
drawn upon themselves perpetual infamy: For as long as there is a God in
Heaven, and Conscience in the world, the memory of those, who had but a finger
in so base an action, will be hateful to all good men, their names will offend
their ears, and their posterity will be forced (if any remain) to change their
Names, for fear of being stoned by the public.

But lets return to Ireland, and pour into the bosom of our enemies the
Objection they have so often pressed against his Majesty, that he invited Irish
Papists over to his party; and show to the world, that it was the Covenanters,
and not the King, who really employed them.

For to unwind this entangled and intricate business, we must take the thread of
the affair higher; ye must then know, that there are two sorts of Irish
Papists; the one, ancient Inhabitants of the Country, who since the Conquest of
Ireland bear an hereditary and irreconcilable hatred to the English; the other,
the posterity of those English Colonies which were planted in Ireland about
four hundred years since, to preserve the Conquest for the English, and are
accounted as English, by the ancient Inhabitants, for they yet preserve the
Language, manners and inclination of the Country from whence they issued; the
English and Scotch Protestants in Ireland are new Colonies, which during these
forty years of peace, have increased in number almost equal to the others.

When the Rebellion brake out in Ireland, soon after that in Scotland, being
encouraged by their example, the old Irish and the old English Colonies joined
together in one common design to establish the Roman Religion, whereupon the
Gentlemen at Westminster instead of suppressing them speedily by Arms, (which
his Majesty desired, and offered to go in person) made an Ordinance wholly to
extirpate them, to which the King would never consent, alleging that it would
be a means to cause the Colony of Protestants in Ireland, who were without
defense, to be extirpated; as it came to pass, for the Irish being provoked by
that bloody Ordinance, did what they at Westminster had taught them, and
extirpated the most part of the Protestant Colonies, killing man, woman and
child, with most horrible barbarousness. I leave to the just Judgment of God to
decide against whom this Sea of innocent blood cries.

In this Butchery, the old Irish were the most active and cruel, the others
went along with them only for company; and besides, their interests were
different, for the intention of the old English Colonies went little further
than the design of freeing themselves in matter of Religion, but the native
Irish would as well be freed of the Nation, as have the freedom of their
Religion, and would shake off the yoke of the English Monarchy, take possession
in the name of the Pope, of the Abbeys which were all in the hands of Lay men,
recover all that they had lost by Confiscation, for their former Rebellions,
and for this effect, null all Titles which held of the Crown.

This Intention was contrary to the old English, who held all their Estates of
the Crown, and possessed diverse Abbeys by Pattent Royal, and besides this, had
an hereditary affection toward their King and ancient Country; and therefore
they had reason to fear, that after the extirpation of the English Protestants,
their throats should be cut, and upon this consideration they listened to the
overtures of an accord the King made to them, in the year 1643. And although
they brake not off suddenly with the old Irish, yet they loosed themselves by
little and little, and in the end, declared themselves for the King; but it was
not until a long while after they did him any Service, having been amused and
abused a long time by the subtilties of Rome, who upheld and instructed the old
Irish, for to pass into England and serve the King, if ever they had promised
it, the same subtilties and their dissentions would never permit them to do.

No man of understanding or sense can blame the King to receive from them the
service they owed him, neither did he ever make any profession to the contrary,
as they at Westminster, who passed a Vote of extirpation against them, and
stirred up the people against the King by this pretext, that he made use of
persons of the Roman Religion; now after this, if they themselves shall make
use of them, they are inexcusable before God and man.

But now let us see how their actions agree with their words and looks. The
Royal party being greatly increased in Ireland, especially by the conversion of
the Protestant Forces which before served the Parliament: The Gentlemen of the
Covenant finding themselves very low in that Kingdom, found no better expedient
to repair their languishing affairs there, than to join their interest with the
Popes, and the old Irishes, for it is most notoriously known, that before the
death of the King these Irish Papists took pay of the Parliament, and served
them in the war, and have since rendered many good Services to the holy
Covenant, above all, before Derry, which the Covenanters held, but was besieged
by the Scotch Royalists, and had been taken without the coming of the Irish,
conducted by Owen Row O Neal, who forced the Scotch to raise the siege with a
signal loss, when the besieged were in great distress, and ready to yield up
the Town. And this conjunction endured near a year, for it was not till after
October 1649. that these Irish returned to the obedience of their King.

And indeed we have not here any thing to wonder at and be astonished, if two
sorts of Rebels who agreed together to cast off their King, join themselves
together in one party, and if their temporal interest which binds them be
preferred before the spiritual, which both in the one and the other League
served but as a pretext to their covetousness and ambition, the Gentlemen at
Westminster judged right, that the advancement of the Pope in Ireland, was less
disadvantagious to them, than the whole reduction of that Kingdom under the
obedience of his Majesty.

This scandalous conjunction having much exasperated the spirits of the by-got
people, whom they had taught to hate the King, because he had made peace with
the Papists, and murderers of Ireland, the Gentlemen at Westminster, after they
had a long time denied it, and seeing they could not any longer dissemble this
infamous action, publicly called before them in examination Colonel Monk, who
was employed in this agreement, and demanded of him, who caused him to make it?
he being instructed beforehand, answered, that he had done it of himself, of
his proper motion; then being enquired why he durst make such an accord without
a Commission, he answered, that he judged his agreement then profitable for the
interests of his party; and hereupon he was dismissed and sent away without any
punishment, and these Gentlemen condemned this accord and alliance by a public
Act.

But where is the man that is so simple as to be deceived by so sottish a
force? But to undecive the abused, and to show that these Gentlemen gave no
orders for to break this agreement; they had news a while after, that great
succors were put into this Garrison of Derry, (then the Covenanters) by the
Troops of his Holiness; and then all the Juggling was discovered; and there
rested then no other answer for them to give, but that of the Italian, who
being exceedingly pained with the Gout, and having prayed to God and all the
Saints, and yet found no ease, began to call and pray to the Devil for help,
and gave this Reason to them that rebuked him for it, Ogni adjuto e bono, all
help is good from whomsoever it come.

Now every man who shall compare their Protestations with their Actions, may
demand these Questions with astonishment and horror. Are these the men who have
so cried out against the murderers, which massacred so many thousand
Protestants? Are these they who before and after the Massacre, did so press the
King to sign their utter extirpation? Are these those who rendered the King
odious, only for offering them peace and pardon? Are these the men that stirred
up the people against their King, because he had some few Soldiers of the
Roman Religion scattered here and there in his Armies (for he never had an
entire company of that Religion) and yet behold they themselves, entertain a
great Body of an Army of the most refined Papists, and the most violent enemies
of the Reformed Religion, to whom (when the King treated with them) he refused
to give them any toleration. Behold the Army of the Popes become the
Parliaments, behold the Murderers whom they would have rooted out, become their
Soldiers; Behold the revenge of the blood of their Brethren, which they made
such a noise of! The Massacre of the Protestants is pardoned the Murderers,
provided they massacre those that remain of them. Is it to pay the Armies of
his Holiness, that such great Sums of Money are raised of the Protestants?
and that they suck the poor Families even to the very Marrow? Is this the
effect of so many solemn Professions, of so many Fasts and public Humiliations
for the establishment of the Gospel in Ireland? Where is their shame? Where is
their Ingenuity? Where is their Conscience? Be confounded Infamous Hypocrites,
and since ye cannot hereafter avoid the execration of men, endeavor to prevent
by your repentance the Judgment of God upon your Impostures.

CHAP. XXIV How the different Factions of the Covenant agreed to ruin the
King, and contributed to put him to death.
WE will not undertake to deprive the Independants of the glory to have been
the last Actors in that exectable paracide, committed upon the Sacred Majesty
of their King; an action which being the shame of the Nation, and reproach of
Religion, was nevertheless set forth to the eyes of the world, with the
ostentation of Justice and Piety; and for this horrible execution, there was a
solemn Thanksgiving enjoined to be rendered to God by a public Ordinance. It Is
true, this Ordinance was ill obeyed, and many Ministers cried out against it,
which did so provoke their new Masters, that they appointed a Committee, to
eject the Ministers out of their Benefices, and to place in Lay persons.

Now because the Presbyterians thunder aloud against this action, we will see
whether they have not contributed to it, and if their behavior to their good
King gave him occasion to hope for better dealing at their hands.

And for this purpose we may do well to consider the Propositions which they
presented to the King at Beverly, and since at Uxbridge, and at New Castle,
then when the Presbyterians held the better end of the staff; they required of
him in substance, that he should not dispose, neither of the Militia, nor of
the civil Government, nor of his Towns and Revenues, nor of his Children, nor
of his Court, nor of Honors, nor of the Offices of the Crown, and that he
should hold no power in the Treaties of peace, of War, and of Commerce with his
Neighbors: That his Council should no more depend upon him, that he should
have no Negative voice in Parliament, and should be bound to grant whatsoever
the Parliament would demand of him; that he should show no Acts of Grace, nor
execute Justice, and not have the power to do either good or evil; that he
should consent that his party should be for ever ruined, and deliver up all
those who had served him to their rage and Butchery: That he should utterly
overthrow both the Civil and Ecclesiastical Government, cut all the Nerves of
Government, and dispossess himself and his posterity without resource: In
brief, that he should betray all the trusts God had committed to him, and
render himself the most miserable and guilty creature in the whole Universe:
All the choice left this poor Prince, was, whether he would be destroyed by his
enemies, or by his own proper Act, for if he condescended not to these demands,
being then in their hands that made them, the least he could expect, was to be
deposed; and if he granted them, he deposed himself: Every man that has either
prudence, or Conscience, will choose rather to be executed by another hand, than
be his own proper Executioner: Read the Articles, which are too long to be
inserted here, and if there were any thing that was his, or which God had given
him to keep, that these Gentlemen demanded not of him, except his life, and if
he could assure himself of his life, after he had given his enemies the Sword
of Justice, and had by consequence acknowledged them his Superiors, before
whom he was Justiciable: The Sequel of Affairs have showed the truth of this
consequence, for it was upon the Presbyterian Principles, that the Independants
built their Conclusions.

Let them weigh well this reasoning, Saint Paul teaches us, Romans 13. that the
Supreme Magistrate bears the Sword by God, he is his Minister; upon this
ground the Supreme Magistrate exercises Authority in the earth, by way of
force: Observe that the Apostle says not, he bears Swords, he assigns him
but one, and this sword, both executes Justice, and the Militia by one and the
same power. Now the Presbyterians have a long time taught, that the Sword of
the Militia appertained of right and originally to the people, of whom the
Parliament is the Representative, and if this Doctrine be not true, their Arms
were unjust; but if it be true, the sword of Justice also belongs to them; for
if upon these grounds it was lawful for them to wrest out of the hand of the
King, the Sword of the Militia, to make use of it against him, it was no less
lawful for them to employ the Sword of Justice against him; all their
Philosophy cannot divide these two Powers, which have the same foundation both
in Scripture and reason, and which have been equally violated in beheading him,
and making war against him.

Therefore the Presbyterians who now cry so loud, that the Person of the King
was inviolable, and not subject to the sword of Justice, condemns by this all
their past actions; for if it were an execrable paracide, to cut off his Head
upon a Scaffold, it could not be the action of a good Subject to take off his
Head by a Cannon Bullet in the field, as they many times assayed. And in
employing the Militia against the King, they gave the Independants the Sword of
Justice, who unhappily massacred him: After they took from him, his Sword, his
Crown, his Revenues, his Servants, his Children, the Liberty of his Person, and
which is much more, of his Conscience, they left the Independants but a step to
go further, which was to take away his life. And all wherein these last surpass
them, was that they gave the last blow to the King; the Presbyterians laid his
head on the Block, and the Independants cut it off.

The name Independent was hardly known then, when his Majesty complained in one
of his Declarations, that diverse persons to the number of seventeen, had been
accused to have said, they would kill the King, and how the Accusers could
obtain no Justice against them; if the Members of Parliament who now abhor this
murder, had then had any care of the safety of his sacred person, they would
never have stayed the course of Justice against these crimes. They had not
entertained in pay Mercurius Britannicus, and such Rascals, by horrible Libels
to defame his Majesty, and inflame the rage of a foolish and seditious people
against him. If the quarrel had been only against his evil Counselors, (which
is the old and super-annuated pretext of all Rebels) they would never have
cashiered the Army of the Earl of Essex, for to employ a -- and a medly of
pestilent Anabaptists, whom they knew to be mortal and sworn enemies to the
King and Monarchy.

Certainly we have so much Charity as to believe, they had not an intention to
put him to death, when they began the war against him, no not even when they
imprisoned him; as Judas according to all appearance, had no intention to cause
his Master to be crucified, when he sold him to the Council of the Jews, and
never thought that the Priests would proceed so far; for when he heard they had
condemned him to die, this unexpected blow so surprised him, and moved him in
such a manner, that he presently brought back again the reward of iniquity, and
rendered witness to the Truth, and to his Conscience before the Council, I have
sinned in betraying innocent blood: It Is more than the Presbyterians have
declared, beholding their K. condemned and beheaded by their practices,
although it was beyond their intention, neither have they been so smitten with
remorse of conscience, to bring back again that which they have got by
sacrilege and rebellion, and yet notwithstanding, Jesus says of Judas, much
more penitent then some of them, That it had been better for him he had never
been born.

In speaking thus, we have no design to lead them to despair, but to
repentance, to which the mercy of God is ever open, since we speak of the
party, and not of particulars; many whereof detest their Councels and past
actions, and we do not doubt but that of such, the King shall yet receive most
signal services: Its that whereof his wise and glorious Father assured him in
his last instructions: Be assured (says he) as I am, that the most part of
those who have injured me, have done it, not through malice, but through
misinformation, and a sinister apprehension of the affairs. None will be more
loyal and faithful both to me and you, then those subjects, who being sensible
of their errors, and of the wrongs we have received, shall feel in their souls
most vehement stirrings to repentance, and ardent desires to do us some
reparation for their past offenses.

Without question there are many that yet serve the Covenanters, especially
those in civil employments, and even some in the Parliament, who groan under
the yoke of impiety, and sigh after Religion, peace, their King, and their
duty: But alas it is but to think of liberty when they are in chains; although
so afflicted as we are, we have great compassion on them, and esteem their
condition worse then ours. Its a great misery to be obliged to evil, because
they have done evil, and to do the work of the devil, and to know it, and
cannot retire. Behold the fruits of affranchising themselves in the beginning
to do evil, to the end that good might come of it; flattering themselves with a
good intention (which pretext cannot be wanting to any injustice) and with a
vain hope to return to their duty when they should see it expedient, and to
amend when they would, what they had marred; they offended God with gladness of
heart, but now they find themselves fettred in a cruel necessity, continually
to offend him, or to cast themselves into our condition; they were better to
come and keep us company, and generously to be ruined for the love of God, then
to be perpetual Actors in the ruin of their King, their Country, their Church,
and their Conscience; and by their hardness and impenitent heart, treasure up
wrath against the day of wrath, and the declaration of the righteous judgment
of God, who will render to every one according to his works.

CHAP. XXV. Of the cruelty of the Covenanters toward the good Subjects of the
King.
FRom the oppression of the King, let us cast our eyes upon that of his
subjects; to begin this discourse, is to enter into a gulf without bottom, of
misery and impiety; for the Covenant is the den of Cyclops paved with blood,
hung with spoils; it is the Cave of Radamanth, where is heard the noise of
whips, the clattering of chains, the menaces of furies, and the pitiful shrieks
of those whom the Vultures tear a pieces, and who are fle^d alive; there you
shall behold thousands massacred, stretched upon the ground, the Flower of the
Church and State cut off, the grandeur of the Kingdom reduced into a heap of
ruins, upon which set some petit Gentlemen, enriched by the general wrack, and
fatted by the blood and bowels of their miserable country, there you shall
behold the Grandees of the Kingdom a foot, begging the favor of their
inferiors a horseback, and beholding their offices and revenues distributed
among common persons, and their enemies.

Against them and all the Nobility is the great quarrel, the Covenanters hate
them, because they are persons of honor, and acknowledged the King for the
Fountain of Honor, and as such for the most part, they have followed and served
him; thus almost all the rich and wealthy families of the Kingdom were wholly
ruined, not by the insolent soldiers pillaging in hot blood, but by the
extorsion of a new Committee, and robbery, which was done upon the carpet, and
in cool blood.

Of these grand revenues, they accommodated themselves in the first place, and
then those who have served them, assigning for a recompense to their
instruments, persons of no worth, and newly raised from the dust, the ancient
rights and revenues of Lords and Gentlemen, they wanting nothing to be such but
blood and generosity. The Covenanters party often celebrate the feasts of
Saturn, where the servants sit at the upper end of the table, and are served by
the Masters, and this fanatic insolence proceeded so far, that these spoilers
esteemed themselves as lawfully invested in the inheritances of their
superiors, and countrymen, as the Israelites were of the lands of the
Amorites: There is but this difference, the Israelites took possession by the
command of God, these against his command.

Now by the special favor of the Gentlemen at Westminster, it was ordered that
the fifth part of the revenues should be for provision for the wives and
children of Delinquents, (such they call them, who so little respected the
Majesty of the House of Commons, that they were faithful to their Sovereign.)
Thus their wives sometimes were admitted to be Farmers of their husbands
estates, and reserving themselves the fifth part, paid the rest to the State.
But at last, even the Delinquents were admitted to compound for their estates;
those who were best dealt with, paid two years value of their rents, others
this double* if such be their compassions, what is their severity? Is not this
for them to comment upon the saying of Solomon, which says, The mercies of the
wicked are cruel.

But moreover these favors were not granted to all, there being many who were
never admitted to farm their estates, no neither to redeem them by composition,
and whose wives and children have scarce bread, nevertheless, the confiscation
of their estates, their perpetual banishment, the sentence of death pronounced
against them, are honorable marks of their great and loyal services to their
Sovereign.

Of all those who suffered in this quarrel, the Ministers of the Gospel were
the most barbarously dealt with, and for the least cause, very few amongst
them, who engaged themselves in the war. The Bishops whom the Laws gave the
precedence in the House of Lords, have wholly lost their places, through the
violence of the House of Commons, assisted with the seditious multitude; their
Houses and Ecclesiastical revenues have been sold, and are torn from the Church
for ever, their persons a long time imprisoned, and the most eminent of them
had his head cut off upon a Scaffold.

This cruelty executed upon the heads, descended upon the members, all the
revenues of the Dean and Chapiters through the Kingdom are become the prey of
sacrilege, and of lazy bellies, which cram and fill themselves with the
patrimony of the Church; the lawful possessors, without any distinction good or
bad, were dispossessed: whereby the gentlemen of the Covenant clearly show,
that it was not the amendment of the Clergy, but their own enriching with the
spoils of the Church, was the mark and scope of this Reformation.

In the ninety seven Parishes within the walls of London, there were found upon
account, that there were fourscore and five Ministers driven by violence from
their Churches and houses; and to number the Suburbs and Parishes adjoining to
London, the number of the Ministers, were a hundred and fifteen, without
comprising those of S. Paul's and Westminster, Note that this book in the French
was printed in the year 1650.
where the Deans and Prebends ran the same fortune; of this number, twenty were
imprisoned, and of those who are dead by distress, and anguish in diverse
prisons, in the holds of ships and banishment, they reckoned five years since
twenty two; but this number is almost doubled since, and the others dispersed
and fled into strange countries, or otherwise oppressed and ruined, are left to
meditate upon this of the Psalmist, The Lord is the portion of mine
inheritance, he shall maintain me, for any other of the Church its denied them.
In the other parts of the Kingdom, many faithful Ministers to the King had the
like usage, especially those who possessed the fairest and best benefices, for
this was an unpardonable crime, and some of them were massacred by the furious
Anabaptists, as a Sacrifice well pleasing to God.

Now whereas some other Delinquents have liberty to dwell in their houses, to
farm their rents, and to compound for the principal; to the Clergy nothing like
this is accorded, but they are turned out in their shirts, condemned to a total
ruin without resource. There is indeed an Ordinance of Parliament, that the
wives and children of ejected Ministers, should have the fifth part of the
revenues of their benefices, but it is very ill observed, for the new
incumbents into these benefices, carry themselves with such pride, and
inhumanity to these poor women, refusing to obey the Ordinance, constraining
them to plead before Judges, their adversaries; who instead of speedily
relieving them, delay them with length of time, and make them consume in Suits
that which they borrowed to plead their Cause.

So that these poor desolate persons, through the greatness of the expense, and
tediousness of delays are constrained to desist their prosecution; and many
being ejected out of small benefices, dare not present their petitions for the
fifths, because the expenses will amount higher then the principal: Certainly
if there were any charity or sincerity in the Authors of this Ordinance, they
would cause it to be strictly observed, they would not permit that the poor
wives and children whom they have ruined, should be shufflled off with
litigious and crafty tricks, and oppressed with charges, when they come to
demand that small alms which is granted them out of their husbands estates,
they should not deny them that in retail which they have accorded them in gross.

Moreover you must know that this pretended gratuity is but for the wives and
children, but as for the Ministers, who have neither the one nor the other,
they are accounted unworthy to live, and not any part of their Estates is given
to them; and thus they have rendered the Ministers of the Gospel conformable to
their Master, who had not where to lay his head, and Jesus Christ is yet
persecuted in his servants.

But the persecution staid not at those whom they Ejected. Behold a new
invention, to ^oot out at one stroke, all those who remained loyal, or Orthodox
in the Church and State. It was ordered that all who had any office either in
Church or State, should subscribe to be faithful to the present constitution of
Government, by the House of Commons, without King or Lords, but the principal
aim was to pick a quarrel with the Ministers of the Gospel upon their refusing,
and to abolish the Ministry, for which they had already prepared the people,
having appointed a Committee, to displace disobedient Ministers, and to put
those in their places, who condemned their vocation: these are the terms of the
instruction given the Committee, this horrible menace should give to all
faithful Pastors, cause rather of hope then fear, for he that said to his
Disciples, He that refuses you, refuses me, finds himself refused, and
rejected in the persons of his servants, and yet more in their Ministry;
without doubt he is provoked to jealousy, and will take upon him the cause of
the Ministry of his Word.

Whosoever shall seriously consider all that hideous spectacle of devastation
of the Church, the abolition of Government, the ruin of the Pastors, the
corruption of Religion, the profanation of the service of God, and shall
compare this persecution with that the Greek Churches suffer at this day, shall
find that all the ravages of the Turks since the taking of Constantinople, have
not so disfigured the Church in two hundred years, as these Reformers did in
six or seven years in their own country, and amongst their brethren in the
faith.

But pass we from the Ecclesiastical to the Civil, the new Courts erected to
hear complaints, and to receive the compositions of Delinquents, were as so
many Butchers Shambles, and Flaying-houses, where they tore off the skin, and
pulled out the bowels, and where they dismembered, and cut in pieces many
ancient and good houses; our miserable party had to do with worser Judges, then
he spoken of in the eighteenth of S. Luke, which feared not God, neither
regarded man; and yet he suffered himself to be overcome by the importunity of
the afflicted Widow, and said, I will avenge her, or I will do her Justice; We
propose him for an example to these cruel souls, and say after our Savior,
Hear what the unjust Judge says; And shall not God avenge his own Elect, which
cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them, I tell you that he
will avenge them speedily.

There could be expected no juster sequel of iniquity from their beginnings,
then when it was commanded for every person through the Kingdom to bring in
their Plate and Jewels, which the seditious Zealots contributed as freely as
the idolatrous Israelites to make a Golden Calf, but those who did not bring
their Plate, they plundered their houses, and took it away by force; at the same
time they commanded the people to take up arms under the penalty of being
hanged, and this sentence was executed in the Counties of Essex, Suffolk, and
Cambridge; the principal actor of this tyranny, was the Earl of Manchester, who
caused some to be hanged, who not being well learned in the Catechism of
sedition, refused openly to take up arms against the King, others for the same
reason were tied neck and heels, unreasonably misused, and cast into prisons
until they had learned Rebellion, and the rest of the people affrighted hereby,
went peaceably to commit treason against his Majesty.

Therefore the greatest cruelty of the Covenanters, was not in rendering their
country miserable, but in having rendered it wicked, and forced so many simple
people to be instruments of their ambition, and partakers of their crimes. How
will they answer for the blood and the consciences of their Soldiers killed in
the act of paracide, then when they discharged their Muskets against the
Squadron where the person of the King was? How will they answer for them who
were actually employed in the massacre of the King, and who have since felt a
hell in their consciences? we must confess that they have been more cruel
toward their own party, then toward ours, since they have only made us to
suffer evil, but they have forced their adherents, both to suffer and do evil,
which are the two principal things wherein all the work of the devil consists.

After this execrable murder of their excellent Sovereign, how many murders
did they heap upon this? Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, the truly Noble
and loyal Lord Capel; many others killed in their armies in diverse places, many
in every County condemned to death by partial Judges, who received all
accusations against those who had served their King, and many thousands good
subjects murdered in Ireland by these Sanguinary Zealots.

It would be infinite to reckon up all their crimes against God, their
Religion, their Church, their King, and their Country, and all that can be
spoken, is nothing in comparison to that prodigious mass of iniquity, which
stricks heaven with its height, and makes even the earth to sink with the
weight which draws from the bottom of our wounded souls, these ardent sighs.

Oh our good God, art thou so wrathfully displeased against these Nations, as
to give them over to a rebrobate sense, and abandoned to do the will of the
devil, and establish his Kingdom? Oh Religion, Conscience, King, Church,
State, Order, Peace, Justice, Laws, all are violated, defaced, disfigured and
melted into a horrible Chaos of obscurity and confusion! Alas how can it be
that this people enlightened with the knowledge of God, abounding with the
riches of heaven and earth, should fall into such a diabolical frenzy, as to
trample under their feet their Religion, cut off the head of their King, pluck
out the throat of their Mother, the Church, and deal with their
Fellow-countrymen, and Brethren in Jesus Christ, more cruelly then the
Mahumetans deal with the Christians, who drives them not from their houses and
patrimonies in Turkey, nor reduce them to the fifth part of their Revenues, How
is the faithful City become an Harlot! it was full of Judgment, righteousness
lodged in it, but now murderers, Isa. 1.21. Certainly although the evil they
do unto us, should not force us to go out of our Country and leave it, yet the
evil that we behold in it, is capable to make us forsake it, and to embrace the
Prophet Jeremies choice, Jer. 9.2, 3. O^ that I had in the wilderness a lodging
place for wayfaring men, that I might leave my people, and go from them, for
they be adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men, and they bend their tongues
like their bow for lies, but are not valiant for the truth, for they proceed
from evil to evil, and they know not me, says the Lord.

Ha people frantic? whose eyes the God of this world have darkened, and
exasperated your passions with a seditious rage, cruelly and bloodily to
persecute your Church and Sovereign? Miserable people who do the work of their
enemies, and execute upon themselves the malediction pronounced to Jerusalem
in Rebellion, Sion shall tear her self with her own hands, ridding and casting
their crown and glory upon the ground, cutting their own sinews, and breaking
their bones, and by their weakness and disunion, invite the enemy to come and
make an end of them. Blind Zealots, who stirred you up so disorderly to pull
down Antichrist? you will find in doing thus, you have contributed to raise him
up, and having drawn an horrible scandal upon our most Holy Religion, by your
impious actions, and infamous Doctrines, have healed the mortal wound of the
beast, and hardened the consciences of men against the Sword of the Gospel,
which rarely penetrates with efficacy, when its welded with wicked hands.

That which comforts us in beholding you to (...) to make faith cease from
being in the earth, is, that hereby (...) advance the desired coming of Jesus
Christ, who has marked that time for his return, when he will deliver his
Church, from the bondage of seduction, vanity, blindness, and misery, for to
invest her with liberty, holiness, and glory, which he has purchased for her
by his blood.

In waiting for this happy deliverance, if we must still behold Rebellion
proudly domineer, over the Supreme Powers ordained by God, and sacrilege make
havoc in the Church, and crimes turned into Laws and Doctrines of Religion, we
shall preserve our selves by the grace of God, from murmuring at his Justice,
and the conduct of his Providence, remembering that God punishes us justly by
instruments which are unjust, and that he will assuredly manifest his just
judgments upon them, when he shall see it most expedient for his glory, which
^e is used to advance by ways contrary, in appearance, and makes, as in the
Creation, light to shine out of darkness; we will endeavor to learn in our
calamity, this divine wisdom of Solomon, Eccles. 5.8. If thou s^est the
oppression of the poor, and violent perverting of Judgment, and Justice in a
Province, marvel not at the matter, for he that is higher then the highest,
regards, and there be higher th^n they.

Being persecuted by a people who in destroying us, pretend they do God
service, and who palliate their cruelty with zeal of his glory, we comfort our
selves in this holy promise, as made expressly for our condition. Isa. 66.5.
Hear the word of the Lord ye that tremble at his word, your brethren that hated
you, that cast you ^ut for my name sake, said, let the Lord be glorified, but
he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed.

O our God we beseech thee forgive our enemies, confound their pernicious
designs, and convert their erring consciences, repair the hedge broken down of
thy vine, whereby the Wildb^ar out of the woods break down the branches, and
root up the tender plants, wherefore shall they say amongst the heathen, where
is now their God.

Soli Deo Gloria.
El poder malamante adquirido, no suale ser duradera.
FINIS.

