A SERMON Preached before the KING, IN Christ-Church, DUBLIN, On Ash Wednesday
1689.

By Fr. Edmond Dulany, Franciscan Friar.

Published by his Majesty's special Command.

Dublin, Printed for Alderman James Malone Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, and are to be sold at his shop in Skinnerrow, 1689.

A Sermon Preached before the KING, etc.
Mat. 6. verse 19. Nolite Thesaurizare vobis thesaures in terra, etc.

Heap not up to your selves Treasures on the Earth, where the Rust and Moth do
Corrupt, and where Thieves do digg through and steal; But heap to your selves
Treasures in Heaven.


LEt Corruption Enter (most Sacred Majesty) to make a prey of this Frail body
when I am shut up in the fatal Tomb, and buried in the Bosom of Oblivion,
waiting to answer the last call of the Archangels Trumpet to appear before the
Tribunal of the dreadful Judgment; Let creeping Worms, Serpents, and on w^ildy
Beasts devour this Flesh, and leave only my bones the residue of their Hunger,
to be resolved into Ashes by the Revolutions of time, I will still cry with
Diogenes; Quid ferarum mihi nihil femienti oberit Laniatus. Let man be
converted into Dust, he shall have no Pain when he is destitute of all sense of
Feeling, it is not the Grave document of the Holy Churches Memento marking our
Foreheads this morning with Ashes, a symbol of Mortallity; And the Primitive
ingredient that Constituts the structure of this Tabernacle, and in which a
Resolution of the whole shall soon End; it is nothing of these can strike a
Terror into my heart, But the Conclusion of the Prophet Joel, who from the
mouth of God Chalking out the Way we must Walk to save our Souls, Emphatically
Commands us to turn our hearts drunk with the Love of Creatures, to God, and to
punish by Abstinence and Fast, the Rebellion of these Members that first
mutiny'd by consent, and then by overt Acts warred against our Sovereigns Laws,
Convertimini ad me in toto cord vestro, in Jejunio: And this is not enough,
but we must wash the Impurity of our Thoughts with the salt tears of our Eyes,
and wipe them of with the sighs and deep groans of our hearts, in fletu and
planctu, and the heart that was the Harbor of our Crimes must be Rent with
grief and sorrow, Scindite Corda vestra; he proceeds further to tell us that to
accomplish the just measures of true Repentance, we must not only proscribe the
use of unlawful, but also temper the use of Lawful things: Egrediatur sponsus
de Cubili suo; Let the Bridegroom go forth of his Chamber, and the Bride out of
her Bride-chamber; all this is too Little if the Priests, the Ministers of the
Lord between the Porch and the Altar, will not weep and cry parce Domine, parce
populo tuo: Spare O Lord, spare thy People, and give not thine Inheritance into
reproach, that the Nations have Dominion over them; and when all this is done,
after we Chastize our bodies in the severest Exercises of Mortification, after
we afflict our Souls with the deepest Resentments of grief for our offenses,
after we deny our selves the use of things inoffensive, and have our cause
Recommended to Heaven by the Intercession and public Prayers of the Priests
and Ministers of God: Let all Sinful Souls with Dread and Fear, Remark what
slender assurance we have from this Organ of the Holy Ghost, of the security of
our Salvation when he leaves us still in doubt whether the Lord will Convert
and forgive us, Quis scit si convertatur et Ignoscat Deus; O terrible words! if
they that leave no Corner of their hearts to entertain any other thoughts, then
such as unite them to God in Love and Charity, and detest their former faults,
can have no assureance of the security of their Salvation, what hopes can those
have, that Enclose all their desires within the Circle of Wordly Interest, and
fall into a certain blindness and hardness that Render them Insensible to all
the Movements of Grace? how sure is Hell for those that put up a three Headed
Idol of Honors, Wealth and Pleasures in oppos^tion to the holy Trinity
dedicating thereto, all their thoughts and actions (a practice commonly
Following men of Quallity and Courtiers) if those that abdicate dignities,
despise Riches, and lead a life in continual Purgatory of voluntary
Chastizments upon their own bodies, do labor under a deadly Fear of looseing
Heaven, Finally if the humble penitent, the poor in spirit, and the Righteous
man cannot determine whether he lies under the disgrace or favor of God, quia
nemo scit an amore vel odio sit dignus, There is no ground for the ambitious
Courtier, the sensual Libertine or the Injust Statesman to expect Salvation.
Gentlemen this ought to be the Subject of your Frequent Meditations this Holy
time of Lent to Reclaim you in your vanities, to work your Salvation in
Trembling fear, that may dispose you to true and severe works of Penance and
Repentance, and undervalue the deluding and treacherous Honors, Riches and
Pleasures of this False world, by which Milions of Souls do Eternally perish.
It is what the Son of God Commands you to do in the lesson of the Gospel read
this morning; Nolite thesaurizare vobis thesauros in ter^ and it is what I
design to persuade you to; In order to which I will divide this discourse into
two parts, The first whereof will Evidence, the vanity of all worldly
Treasures, for which men do expose themselves to Perdition, and the Afflictions
that attend them, the second will show their Inconstancy, and Conclude by
Inference from such premises, that they are not fit objects to adjust the
desires of a Rational Soul whose capacity is of so vast an Extent that nothing
but the Treasures of Heaven can fill it. This shall be the Subject of your
Sacred Majesty's favorable attention, which I beg, and the discourse I intend
to make, after we Implore the Grace and help of the Holy Ghost and salute the
ever Blessed Virgin, with the Archangel Hayl Mary etc:

Before I enter upon the proofs of my divsion, I must undeceive any that may
mistake my Intention to lessen the Credit of true Honors in this world as
Contrary to the Institutions of Divine Laws or inveigh against Riches as of
themselves repugnant to Salvation, or against moderate pleasures as
inconsistent with the Eternal happiness we aspire to in the other world: Such
Propositions were shoots of Heresy, Blasphemy and Cruelty, when the Author of
Nature in the first draught of the world out of nothing coppied Monarchy (which
Implies all Dignities and Honors) in the person of Adam, with an absolute
Dominion over all that was Created, and Furnished him with plentiful means to
support the Grandeur of so great a Title, in the Vassallage of all the
Creatures he Subjected to his Power, without any Restriction in the use of any
part thereof to gratify his desires, except the use of the forbidden Tree.

In the state of corrupt Nature, in which the passions of man kindled to an
excess of unruliness, through the loss of Original Justice; Providence ordained
the Power of Kings with the Character of Greatness, which imports a right in
them to Command, and imposes upon all Subjects an indispensable obligation of
Loyalty and Obedience; and in reference to wealth and pleasures, there is no
innovation, only a task of labor and pain, added in the acquisition, as
punishment for sin, and a regular moderation in the use, Squared by the Rules
of God's Commandments, and Precepts of the holy Church, to make it meritorious.

It is not therefore Honors primarily lodged by Providence and Nature in the
person of the King, and flowing from him by a certain Emanation to others
gradually qualified by the merit of their Loyalty, and signal services in their
many and different stations and degrees, that come in dispute as a subject of
reflections from the Gospel of Christ: But the corrupt measures taken by many
that aspire to them without any other merit than their ambition, and the
perverse use made of that Eminence by others; who ought to recede so far from
any vice, as they are exalted to approach in dignity, to the Prince that
confers it; in whose Front is stamped the Image of God's Power and Authority,
and by consequence an obligation to Virtues suitable to that Supreme Degree.

Riches also, which were given by the hand of God for the use of life, and
ought to serve us as instruments to acquire Heaven, are no further blameable,
than they are converted by us into Engines, to work Iniquity, as holy Gregory
says; and by our folly, or rather madness, are raised to such a height of
esteem in our fancies, that basely forgetting God, the only and true Center of
our happiness, we fix our love uponn them, as the ultimate end to accomplish
all our de^^^es.

God has placed man in an earthly Paradise of pleasure, to give him therein a
commencing taste of those future full contentments he was to enjoy in the
Heavenly Paradise, after his translation from the Pilgrimage; and though for
his disobedience, he and his posterity were attainted, and banished from
thence, yet in their banishment they were not left so unhappy, but they had in
the midst of afflictions, such a measure of contentments and pleasures in the
enjoyment of Creatures, as may in the religious use thereof, lead them to
conclude the endless pleasures that consist in the fruition of the Creator: But
such is the malice and stupidity under which men did in all ages, and do
labor, that shutting their eyes to Reason and Religion, without regard to
Rewards or Punishments, to Threatenings or Promises, to Heaven or Hell, they
make Dignities, Wealth and Pleasures, the Butt of all their aims, by open and
secret contrivances, to fill the vacuities of the Civil Body, not to
strengthen, but to weaken the parts thereof, often receding through Pride, and
wanton Ambition, from their Subjection to Authority, even to the contempt of
Majesty, in Sedition, and hellish Rebellions, (of which our Times do afford too
woeful an experience); and trampling inferiors by violence and extortion, to
support their extravagant dissolution in Debauchery and Lust, and to satisfy
their insatiable thirst of Covetousness: and thus they sacrifice Loyalty to
their Pride and Ambition in Rebellion, Honesty to their Avarice in Injustice,
Virtue to brutish Pleasures in Concupiscence, their Honor to disgrace, and
their Souls to the Devil.

To secure you from such dismal ruins, D. C. S. The Savior of the World gives
you a Preservative, in the present Gospel, Nolite thesaurizare vobis thesauros
in terra, etc. Heap not up to your selves Treasures on Earth, where the Rust
and Moth do Corrupt, and where Thieves do Digg through and Steal. Survey all
the parts of the treasures of the earth, upon which man throws the affections
of his heart excessively to the contempt of God, and loss of his Soul, and you
shall find them perpetually waited on by the rust of Vanity, the moth of
Afflictions, and the thieves of Inconstancy, to corrupt their nature, use and
permanence. It is the Doctrine of the Holy Ghost denounced by the wisest of
Kings, and proved by him in the experience of the greatest treasures the earth
could afford; Superinduxi animae mea cogitationem super omnia illa, Eccles.
Cap. 2. jux l. G.
and inveni in eis, tria haec vanitatem, afflictionem and consummationem; Let
covetous men fill their Coffers with the Gold of the new found world, the
Pearls fished in the Seas of Asia, the Jewels brought from the remote Regions
of the East, and call it treasure; Let Honor draw out long lists of Ancestors,
with exact Records of their Prowess and Feats, to fill parchment with Titles,
and call it Nobility of Blood; Let Nations with armed Bands run to the
destruction of one another, and the subdued serve for a foundation to erect
Monuments of Triumph to prop the Glory of the Conqueror, and call it Victory:
Let the self-interested Statesman devise new Maxims of Government to push
forward his own ends, under color of public good, though destructive to many,
and injurious to God and his Church, and call it Policy: Let Pride please it
self in proportion of Parts, and a supply to the defect borrowed from a Dress,
little becoming the Gravity of Christian Religion, or conformable to the
Doctrine of St. Paul, or the practice of the holy primitive Christians, and
call it Beauty All-a-mode: Let Ambition glory in the dependency and flattery of
many underlings, and call it Power, in Authority to Command, and administer
Laws to others, and call it Dignity, in the plenty of worldly substance, and
call it Riches: Let sensuality find new inventions to gratify the gust of
senses, and call it Pleasures: But the Holy Ghost, by the mouth of Solomon, in
all these finds nothing but Vanity; in omnibus inveni vanitatem.

I must step back from Solomon to hear what his Father David says, in the 42
Psalm, Ye sons of men, how long are you of heavy heart, why love you vanity,
and seek after lying. Quod mendacium quaritis, what lying seek you after, says
holy Austin. In short, Mundum, the World, which is express lying, and open
falsehood; this is the reward of all your fatigues. O senseless worldling! this
is the Hire of all your Labors, this is the Crown of all your Victories, the
Fruit of all your Toils, and the Reward of all your Troubles; Fallit vos quod
quaeritis, mendacium est quod quaeritis; You imagine the World a Magazin, able
to afford all content to your desires. When the Holy Ghost gives it the Name of
an horrible and dreadful Desert, filled with monstrous rnd blood-thirsting wild
Beasts: because in it, Passions and Concupiscences do rule, without the curb of
any Laws, beset with Thorns and Briars; because in every stop you hit upon some
Affliction that grieves; Corrupted with the Infection of Pestilent air, because
there are Pernicious Examples of wicked Livers: darkened with Frightful shades,
Because it is Governed in Ignorance of Heavenly things: Replenished with Cross
and By-ways to lead Astray; because it is full of Errors and perverse
Institutions: wihtout Restoratiues to Refresh our weakness; because it has no
true pleasures, to quench the thirst of our desires: sounding with the
abominable noise of unlucky Birds, because there is nothing so often heard as
Contumelies against Neighbors, and Blasphemys against the great name of God:
Remote from any Succor, because the mischances that happen are often
incurable: destitute of any true Felicity, because it is the sink of all Evils,
Desertum vere et aridum et sterile reputat soeculum omne hoc says venerable
Gilbertus upon those words of the Canticles. S^^ ^^ Ca^t. ^.
Quae est ista quae ascendit per desertum, and I must Cry with the same Author,
how is it possible that men, Endowed with Reason and Professing the Religion of
one true and Eternal God, should be drawn by the scent of a desert so
described, to love any thing therein contained to the Contempt of God and his
Laws in such a measure, that all Cures daily applied by Gods Preaching
Ministers either proposeing the joys of Heavenly Glory for a Reward of virtue,
or the Imminent danger of Slavery and Misery, which is visible and apparent, as
a Temporal Correction to Reclaim our Manners, or Eternal fire as the
Everlasting punishment of final perseverance in sin, are so Far from producing
in us the designed Effects, that all their Endeavors seem to be Incentives,
rather then Lenitives, to the disease of self love, and the love of the world,
it is grown so Epidemical in every State and Condition and Sex and Age.

Heathens were sensible of the vanity of the Worlds gifts, which Christians by
their too much value for them, and their Irreligious desires seem to deny; this
made Seneca declare, Lib. det^a^ quillitate anim.
that all wordly goods were Intrinsecally uniform in vanity, and Extrinsecally
different only in Form and Figure: Let us hear your sense of this Figure, great
Apostle of the Nations; It passes away says he, It flies, It perishes,
praeterit figura hujus mundi, J. Cor. 7.
like a figure drawn in dry dust, which for its levity has no Consistency and
is the mock-stock of winds raised by the least blast, apt to blind the Eyes,
Cap. 29.
and dirt, whatever it lights upon; with reason then I may speak to the lovers
of the world in the words of the Prophet Esaias: upon another occasion
Expergiscimini, Expergiscimini, Qui habitatis in pulvere, awake awake ye that
dwell in the dust, and open your Eyes to consider: that in dust you have laid
the Foundation of your might and power, Kings and Monarchs; To the dust you
commit the Glory of your Titles, Noblemen, upon the dust you Engrave the marks
of your Renown, Famous men; in the dust you leave the footsteps of your
Enterprises Valliant men; It is dust that Composes the substnace of your
Treasures, Rich men, by the dust you seek to satisfy the huger of your desires
voluptuous men, at the dust you Level all the Essays of your projects,
Ambitious men; From the dust you borrowed the first material of your being
Mor^al men, and into dust shall soon Return those bodies you now Pamper with so
much delicacy, sensual men, which is the Advertisement given you by the Holy
Church this morning, Pulvis es et in pulverem reverteris

Did you ever observe A. A. a flock of Innocent Children dallying, in the sand
and in serious folly, drawing plat-forms of Cities and Towns, here raising
heaps under the Title of strong Castles and Impregnable Forts, there marking
long Ridges giving them the name of Trenches and dikes for defense in one place
ranging small stones in a Row which they call Casarms to Lodge Soldiers, in
another drawing up a certain number to Assail the Fortifications and a thousand
other fancies of their Innocent folly, when their Fabric in fine is but Sand,
^n Cant^c^
This is properly the life of Worldly men says Greg. Niss: hoc est humana vita
puerorum ludus in arena etc. Their Honor is but Sand, their power is but Sand,
their wealth is but Sand, and all what the World can give is but Sand, Dust and
Vanity; In omnibus inveni vanitatem; what is more vain then a dream, and yet
all the Power and Riches and Pleasures of the Earth are no other thing if you
believe the Spirit of God speaking in the mouth of holy David, Dormierunt
somnum suum et nihil in venerunt omnes viri divitiarum in manibus suis you
dream to have found a Treasure, Psalm. 75.
you are Rich but in a dream only, when you awake instead of real Riches, you
find your self Laden with real Poverty, so it is says Holy Austin the Lovers
of this world are Lulled a sleep by its Charms, that they think not of
Eternity, and fancy themselves happy and Rich, Ang in Psalm. 75. amaverunt
prasentia et dormierunt in pisis, prasentibus et illis facta sunt ipsa
praesentia deliciosa quomodo qui videt persomnium inveni^se se Thesauro^
tam^i^^ d^v^^ (...) d^^ (...)
but when their Eyes are opened by the Watch of Death, true misery will Correct
the Illusion of a dreaming Fancy, and perpetual Poverty, will Curse the mistake
of vain Imagination, Somnium illum divitem fecit, Evigilatio Pauperem fecit.

Are not the Ambitious then, and the Covetous, and the Voluptuous of this Age
infatuated and damnably Mad if they believe, the Imortallity of the Soul, or a
Heaven, or a God to venture their Salvation for the purchase of things that
have no real Substance but apparent, That are in Effect, but Falsho d and
Lying, that are the fruit of this world a Hideous and Horrible desert, that are
but Dust and Sand, and consist only in an Ex ernal Figure, that Perishes and
passes away: Or in the Illusion of a Fantastic dream, and that are finally
declared by Heaven to be nothing but vanity, in omnibus in veni vanitatem. Are
not these A: A: so many Reasons that Convince us we ought not to six our hearts
upon them, nor seek after any Treasures upon Earth in Obedience to the Doctrine
of the Savior of the world in the Text, Nolite Thesaurizare vobis thesauros in
terra: But their vanity might be dispensed with, if the Afflictions and
Inconstancy that follow the Treasures of the world were not overruling
arguments of the Folly and Madness of those, that Employ their Labors, their
Sweat, their Blood, all their desires, their Thoughts, their Industry, their
Bodies and Souls in a pursuit to purchase them. They are not only Fallacious
and Feigned, but also Dolorous and Afflicting, they deceive by their vanity, and
torment with their misery. The Rose is the symbol of pleasurs, whence the
Carnal Infidels belching their Blasphemous thoughts against the Immortallity of
Souls, said Sap. 2: Let us Crown our selves with Roses before they wither; In
Paradise, says great Basilius the Rose was without Thorns to show that
contentments there were to have no mixture of Afflictions or Grief; hom: (...)
parad:
But since Sin obliged the Earth to bring forth Brambles and Thistles, it is
Sorrounded with a guard of Thorns, to Symbolize that Afflicting mischances, are
Inseparable attendants of Human prosperity, without Exemption, in any Degree,
Dignity State or Condition, It is Holy Ambrose his application, Spina septit
gratiam floris tanquam humana speculum preferens vitae, quae
vanitatemperfunctionis suae finitimis curarum spinis saepe Compungat. Though
you should shine O Man with the splendour of Honors or sit upon the Throne of
Power, Lib: 3. hexam Cap. 17.
or Command the wealth of Craesus; Spina semper proxima est; The throne is
still near you, look over all those things in which men place their happiness
in this world, and you shall find that no one thing is free from a peculiar
Melancoly occasion of Evil that follows it, Honors are perpetually waited on
by Envy which often Contrives their disgrace; Riches by Fears, and Anxieties,
Reputation is obnoxious to the venom of detraction, Pleasurs do breed
distempers; Friendship is often made use of to work Treachery, in Marriages
there Reign Jelousies, and Children to their Parents do prove ungratfull
Meca'nas in Feathers, felt the same grief that Tormented Regulus upon a Gibbet
says Seneca, to hinder his repose, Tam vigilat in pluma, quam Regulus in
Cruce. And Dionisius his Dishes proved unsavory to his Guests, for the Sword
that hung over their Heads, so unlimitted are the Miseries attending the
Pleasurs of the world, that even in the Throne they cannot be divorced: and
Seleveus Taught by the Experience, declared that whoever knew the weight of the
Scepter though of Gold, would not honor it to lift it from the Dunghill, and
if Kings and Princes in the midst of their Might and Power sunk under the
Crosses and Anguishes they endured to such a descent of disrespectful
Expressions of the Scepter and Crown, who can Expect to find in this world, any
true and accomplished Felicity, or any solid Comfort or Joy? I will not
Instance the particular Circumstances of every man's Troubles in the pursuit of
that part of the worlds vanity he Ayms at, I will only say the acquisition
thereof costs him greater pains, then the enjoyment gives Content; what labors
do not the Covetous undergo for their Riches, The sensual Epicures for their
Pleasures, the vain to support their Pride, and the Ambitious to Attain to
Dignities?

The Servants of God in their severest Acts of Penance, for the Conquest of
the Kingdom of Heaven, never Exercized greater Mortifications, then the Lovers
of the world submit themselves to for to attain to their Ends, if they do fast
to Mortify the flesh, The Covetous do fast live Close and Uncharitable, to
fatten their Purses; if they go in Pilgrimage for the love of Virtue, what
Pilgrimage by Sea and Land, do not these undertake for the love of Gold; if the
Servants of God do, watch in Prayer, the disolute and Intemperate do watch in
Debauchery, Sap. 5.
They humble themselves to all men for Christ, and how many do the Ambitious
Debase themselves to, Those do lie under the Inclemency of the weather and
these do Expose themselves, to a Thousand Storms, Fatigues and Troubles that
truth Forces this Confession out of their Mouths lassati, sumus in via
Iniquitatis; we are wearied in the way of Iniquity, Their Sufferings are equal
to the Tortures of Martyrs, says holy Austin; but their merits, are different,
and their ends are disform, Similes penae sed discreta Causa.

The world is a Palace like that in which Job's Children Feasted which within
the space of one houer, says holy Chrysostom, Hom: s. in Job.
was a dwelling place of the living, and a grave of the Dead, a Banqueting
house of Friends, and a Burying place of the defunct, a Choire of Music, and
the Stage of a most woeful Tragedy: una eademquae hora Domus et Sepulchrum,
convivium et Tumulus, festum et fletus, facia est; Even so says holy Ambrose,
the world invites its Lovers to feast in the plenty of its pleasures; but
Treacherously oppresses them with unexpected Ruin it invites them to Dine and
drags them to dye, it promises meat, and Furnishes Afflictions, pretends to
give wine, and fills the Cup with poison. Rogas ad Convivium, Cogis ad mortem;
It affords Treasures that can never be Enjoyed, but in a flood of real evils,
Invitas ad prandium efferre vjs ad sepulchrum; cibos promittis et tormenta
irrogas; vina praetendis, et venena suffundis. Lib. de Elia et jej^
it offers fruit that cannot be gathered without a Crop of Infinite Troubles, it
promises hapiness, and at the same time ushers in miseries, it flatters by its
Smiling and Murders by its Cresses. Cum oblectant, sa'viunt, Cum blandiuntur
occidunt. I will Conclude this first part by the words of holy Chrysostom, what
can be more unhappy then that man created for Glory shall Enslave his heart in
the disordered desire of Terrene things, and throwing away the Badges of his
Liberty, and Nobillity, shall fall from Celestial things to think or speak of
nothing, but of Dignities subject to the Rust of Vanitys, or Riches, that still
carry in them the Moth of Gnawing Afflictions, val. hom. 6.
or of Pleasurs that fix a sting in the Soul, when they Power Honey in the
Mouth.

What Villainy is it for love of these to Trample the poor, to oppress the
Innocent, to Enjure the Widow to strip the Orphan, to suck the Blood of the
Weaker, To Rob the Church of her Rights, To confound Order To forget God, To
Transgress his Commandments, To Renounce his Glory, To Contemn his promises to
despise his Menaces, to offend his love, to Exasperate his Justice, to provoke
his Anger, and to draw his Malediction. Christian Souls, if the Vanity and
Afflictions inseparable from the Treasurs of the world, which are pursued with
so much vehemence and disorder, cannot work upon other men's hearts to divert
them, at least let Prudence direct you, not to affect Immoderatly or unlawfully
desire those things which you are not sure to retain when you have them, It is
Virtuous and Meritorious to draw, your affections, from them before you are
Compelled by a certain sure necessity to quit them with grief and Confusion,
for they are Unstable, and Inconstant, which is the matter of my

Second Part.
Saint Austin in his 29th Sermon de v^rbis domini puts this question to all
those that Throw their Affections upon the World to the Contempt of Gods Laws,
and without Regard to the Salvation of their Souls Cur ponimus Cor in terra,
Cum videamus quia evertitur Terra; why do we abandon our hearts to the
Irregular desires and Concupisence of Terrene Treasurs which we know are
Instable and Transitory? why do we pretend to rest our selves upon that which
we see is in continual Turbulent Motion toward its own destruction, and the
Ruin of those that Rely upon it, or why do men Confide in, or Trust to that
which they find by daily Experience to deceive and betray?

Velut nubes pertransiit salus mea, says holy Job, The true pattern of patient
Princes describing his own misfortune and sudden Fall from the Glory of the
Throne to the misery of the dunghill, Job. Cap. 30 v. 15.
my prosperity, my Riches, and all my glory has passed away like a cloud, The
comparlson and Simile, cannot be more proper, having for an Author the holy
Ghost, which moved the Organs of this great Saint to Express it, a Cloud then
in it is Effects and Nature is the Right Symbol of Human prosperity, and the
perfect emblem of the Great Men of the Earth: For as the clouds mitigate the
rays of the scorching Sun, and refreshes sublunary things, apt to suffer by
the overmuch heat of that Planet; so Powerful Men are the defense of those
that are under their protection, from the heat of injury and oppression; a
fertile clowd showring, recreates the barren and dry ground, and revives
decaying flowers and fruits: A Prince by the influence of his Favors gives
vigor to, and revives his Subjects, drooping under the yoke of adversities: A
clowd kindled, often darts in the air, terrible torches, and wild flames. This
represents an angry Potentate of the Earth, when he terrifies with a fire cast
from his eyes, and with lightnings from his Countenance. A clowd armed with
unusual hail, storms, tramples, oppresses innocent trees, vines, plants; and is
not this the figure of an Usurping Tyrant, threatening without reserve,
desolation, slaughter, and slavery; and when a Cloud roars in Thunder, and
discharges dreadful flashes of Lightnings, against which humane providence can
make no defense; shall not we say, This resembles the wild resolutions of such
a Monster in his decrees against Loyal Subjects, for adhering to God's
Anointed, their lawful and natural Prince: But what is the nature and substance
of this Cloud, that works such prodigious effects? A little vapor raised from
the low region of the earth, Low Countries.
and originally extracted from the tribe of Pools and Sinks, elevated chiefly
by its own levity, to the second region of the Air; By Revolution and Rebellion.
and what prop sustains it there? nothing but a Pillar of slender Air, which is
no solid Prop; and how long can it last, or pretend to subsist? no longer than
it is calm weather about it; the first blast of a contrary wind that blows
toward it, will drive, dissipate, and destroy it. This is the true figure of
the Power and Greatness of the Ambitious of the Earth; says holy Gregory, a
Cloud that vanishes of a sudden, and has not a monent of assured permanence;
they are high and sublime, raised above others, to the second region of the
air: but the foundation that supports them, is weak and unstable; one blast of
popular commotion, or misfortune, breaks them; one fit of distemper levels them
to the ground, and brings all their Greatness to their primitive dust in the
grave; Salus ergo ut nubes transiit quia peccatorum gloria quae alta est, Lib.
20. M^r.
fixa non est.

Ab exemplo.
List your eyes, D. C. to view that ever cursed, impious and unnatural Absalom,
famous in infamy, swelled with hellish pride, and with sacrilegious arms,
embarking himself in the ocean of boundless Ambition, to Usurp his Fathers
Throne, ready to Imbrew his inhumane hands in the Blood of the best of Kings,
and eviscerate the kindest of Fathers. Observe a thrice perjured people seduced
by a Nobility drunk with the love of dissolution and riot, and poisoned with
the venom of Disloyalty and Rebellion, sucked from the corrupt principles of a
restless Religion, setting him up a Mimick King, under the Royal Canopy, to
receive homage from Vassals, tribute from Subjects, and Embassies from foreign
Princes: He models Governments, promulges Laws, establishes Pragmaticks,
punishes, rewards, exalts, deposes, impoverishes, enriches, condemns, pardons.
Unfortunate man, what do you do? how far will your Ambition dragg you? against
a King that derives his Power from Heaven, and not from Men, you turn your
sacrilegious arms? against a Father, you devise your stratagems? and to attain
to his Crown, you arrived to the height of iniquity, treading under foot the
Laws of God, and Man, and Nature; you are unfortunate, whether you win or lose;
if you prevail, you are impious; if you miss, you are infamous; if you
overcome, you shall ever be accursed, to have gained a Victory more
dishonorable and inglorious than the loss can be; if you lose, you shall ever
lie under the confusion just judgment will bring upon you for entering into so
unjust and unnatural a War; if you vanquish, you forfeit the best Jewel Nature
could set in your breast, which is the gratitude you ought a good Father; if
you be subdued, your loss will not be only of life, (that is too small a
satisfaction for your guilt;) nor of your credit or reputation, (for we see how
little you value it) but of your Soul, and eternal Salvation, to expiate in
everlasting flames, the enormity of your execrable Ambition. Behold,
Christians, O just Judgment of the Almighty! This Parricide, unnatural
Miscreant, in the midst of his vast and ill-grounded hopes, carried on more by
the violence of his wicked designs, than the force of the Beast he rid on, was
lest hanging upon a Tree, by the hair of his head, and pierced through the
heart with three Javelins, and covered with wounds over all his Body, he fell
to end the infamy of his actions in the catastrophe of a deserved dismal death.
Imprecations are not justifiable in a Pulpit, yet it were but Justice, O
Heavens, Let the Enemies of my Lord the King become as the Child (Absalom) and
all that rise against him unto evil, 2 Reg. 18.
that Equals in Impiety should be soon equalled in punishments; that a
re-accession to his Throne may be facilitated to the Just and Godly David. But
this with submission to thy holy will, be said, O Lord! whose hidden decrees
permitting Impiety to rule, we are to receive, and accept of without repining,
in perfect resignation; knowing that what thou ordainest, is most available to
us, and that thou art merciful and good, to make us happy even by our
adversities, which thou can turn to our advantage, when we truly submit our
selves in conformity to thy Divine pleasure. Now what we are to gather from the
fatal course of Impious Absalom to our purpose, is the impiety of irregular
Ambition, Lib. 2. Reg. cap: 18. Drogo.
and the inconstancy of the Greatness promised by this false world; Illo
suspenso inter Coelum and Terram, mulus cui insederat pertransit, says the
sacred Text; (Absalom) hanging between Heaven and Earth: The mule that he rid
upon passed through, pertransit, says an Excellent Author, because the world
passes away with its concupiscence in great speed: which inconstancy prompted
the Eloquence of Rome to break out in Exclamations worthy to be printed in the
hearts of true Believers: O fallacem hominum spem, fragilemque fortunam, and
inanes nostras contentiones quae in medio spatio saepe franguntur, and
corruunt, L^^. ^. de O^^^
and ante in ipso cursu ^bruuntur quam portum conspicere potuerunt; O vain
hopes of mortal men, that seek with so much heat and strife to establish your
happiness upon the beguiling false goods of the earth, which are most apt to
forsake and desert you when you seem to be most sure of them. Those Honors and
Treasures that puff you up with Pride, says Seneca, Nescis ubi te reli^tura
sint, Lib 3. (...) qu^s^
you know not where and in what miserable condition they may soon leave you,
and that Fortune which you with so much injustice and oppression strive to
settle upon posterity, will be easier purchased than preserved, says Tacitus,
Anna^
Such is the volubility and uncertainty of sublunary things. If we had time to
reflect upon the practice of Heathen Philosophers, in reference to the world,
following only the dictates of reason, without hopes of future felicity, we
should find their moral virtues, and contempt of the world to fix an
everlasting ignominy upon the Christian of our Age, who by their too much love
of Honor, Wealth and Pleasures, and are (...) scandal to Christ, and an infamy
to Religion: our Profession obliges us to Humility, Justice, and Temperance,
and in a word, to a conformity in our lives and conversation to Christ; and
this conformity is so absolutely necessary, that it is the notion and character
of a predestinate soul, according to the rule given by St. Paul in the 8th to
the Romans, Quos praescivit and praedestinavit conformes fieri imaginis filii
sui, whom he has foreknown, he has also predestined to be made conformable
to the Image of his Son.

An intrusion by Ambition into public Offices either Civil or Ecclesiastical,
solicited by sinister and unlawful means, and the Pride that makes men once
qualified in those stations inaccessible and morose to inferiors, which they
look upon with scorn, (believe me,) carries but little marks of Christian
Humility, or conformity to the pattern Christians are obliged to copy in their
lives.

Contentions and Divisions frequently fomented by Envy and Emulation among men,
not of the inferior rank, but of the best quality, relishes more of Satan's
confused Empire, than the Kingdom of Christ, which cannot consist but of
members united in Peace and Charity, nor can we expect a Blessing from Heaven,
if Diss^ntions and Animosities, National and Provincial distinctions break the
ties of Charity, which by Divine Institutions is established in the essential
life of Christian Perfection:

The dissolution and liberty of some of this Age that wallow in the abominatlon
of Lust and Sensuality, is grown to such a pitch of Iniquity, that to have
committed enormous Crimes, seems too small a satisfaction to their brutish
Voluptuousness, if they do not blaze their infamous actions, glorying in them,
to instill the poison of corruption into the hearts of others, and to encourage
them by their perverse Examples, to become Impious.

What is the Concussion of Magistrates, the prevarication of Advocates, the
frauds of Merchants, the exactions of Usurers, the cheats of Tradesmen, the
extortion of Soldiers, and the oppression of the Poor b^ the Powerful and
Rich; but a general defection from, and a deformity to the Law and Examples of
Christ, and a combination with the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, to receive
at their hands what Almighty God by his heavenly Commandments forbids us to
usurp.

D. C. I will only offer you two short considerations upon the whole matter,
and then conclude. The first is, that all the Treasures of the world are vain,
afflicting, and inconstant in this life, as I have showed; they are but a
vapor that vanish's in a moment, that precludes the passage to eternal
felicity, that hides from us the incomprehensible splendour of perpetual light,
that robs men of the true knowledge of Celestial Bliss, that finally deprives
us of the Honor of everlasting Glory, and are followed in the other World by
immortal disgrace, endless misery, Bern. Epist. 103.
and infinite torments; Vapor est ad modicum parens quod aeternae faelicitatis
adytum intercludit, quod perennis luminis in circumscriptam claritatem
abstondit, quod universitatis scientia fraudat, quod summae private dignitatis
honor.

The Second is that the Soul of Man is of so vast a Capacity in the Extent of
its desires, that it cannot be adjusted or filled by any thing the world can
afford; which every Man may find to be true by his proper Experince of an
Inclination that Aims at some further Contentment, which he still wants in
whatever Degree or Condition he can be in, whereby it is manifest, that the
accomplishment of his happiness Consists in something above Nature, and this is
determined by Faith and Religion, to be the Vision and Fruition of God, from
these two Considerations, This Inference Rationally follows; Therefore Men
ought not to seek their happiness in Natural things, or fix upon them an
affection Incompatible, with the duty they owe the Acquisition of that Supreme
and Supernatural Felicity, which only ought to be the mark of our Aim in all
our Actions, and these are the two documents, that fill up the Two parts of my
Text; Nol^te ctc. He^p not up to your selves Treasurs on Earth, where the Rast
and Moth do Corrupt, and the Thieves digg through and steal; But heap to your
selves treasurs in Heaven where your Riches will be secured, where fraud cannot
Circumvent you, nor Chance betray you, nor vicissitude overthrow the
Establishment of your happiness, nor time make a change in the Blessed state of
your affairs nor none other of the Domestic Enemies of the Earth, disturb the
Possession of your full content and joy.

The Circumstance of time, and the present state of Affairs are two grand
re-inforcements upon the obligation we have not to defer our obedience to this
Sacred Command. The Church Proposes our Savior Fasting and Praying forty
days, which no Necessity could oblige him to, having no Sins to Expiate, but
to leave us an Example to follow in the Austerities of a Mortified life, to
make Satisfaction for the Crimes We Committed by Excess.

The State is Threatened with no less then a Total Ruin, and an absolute
overthrow, which never happened to any Kingdom but for unpunished Sins; it is
therefore the Interest of our Souls and Bodies to Reform our manners, and to
Conform our selves to the life of our Savior in this holy time, in Fast and
Prayer; To make our public and private Continual humble Addresses to Heaven
for the preservation of his most S: M: and the Prosperity of his Affairs, to
avert from him and us the Fatal blow; Threatened by a proud Usurping Enemy,
whom we need not fear, if we pacify the wrath of God by true Penance and
Repentance, and an amendment of our lives, it is the best Preparation we can
make to have good Success in War: Let every man therefore begin the Lent from
his peace made with God in the holy Sacrament of Penance, Let us Resolve to
obey those that are in Power over us, to undergo hardship and labors, and when
occasion offers to overcom or dye. It was the Maxim of wise Heathens to
preserve Kingdoms and Cities, Parere magistratibus patientem esse laborum, et
in praelio vincere aut mori, as Plutarch tells us of the Lacon^ans, how much
more ought it to be the Rule of Christians, who are in Conscience oblidged to
obey their King, and defend his Crown and Dignity to the last drop of their
Blood, and to the loss of their Lives and Fortunes.

It were to be whished that such as are Members of our Army had as strong a
Sense of Honor and Conscience to discharge their duty with Courage, Care,
Vigilance and Circumspection, as they have itch of promotion; which sort of
Ambition as it is Commendable in a Soldier that Strives by his Actions to make
himself worthy of preferment, so in those that Act Sluggishly like Mechanic
mercenaries, it is no less infamous then Damnable, whereas faults Committed in
that duty, do tend to dishonor God, to Dethrone the King, to Expose him to the
Fury of his Blood-thirsting Enemies, to betray the Country, and to banish
Religion, I wish all Officers did first Conceive a horror against any thing
that may bring them under such black Hellish Charracters, and then make the
Impression upon those that are under their Command, to prevent losses that may
not be retrieved, and Lessen the occasions, of so frequent Sessions of Courts
Martial as we see, whose punitive sentence perpetually brands the accused with
an infamy if not Really deserved, at least Commonly believed and Suspected.

And to accomplish all things that may Earn a Blessing to our Cause: S: M. let
Ambition, Partiality and double dealings by your Commands, be Banished from the
Court: Let not the Mighty men of your State make your Laws a Spiders Webb to
Catch and Devour the small Flies, and let the Bigg ones pass untouched, Lest
the Cry of Orphans, the groans of Widows, and the Blood of the Injured poor;
should call for Vengeance to Heaven and Obtain it. Let not Lent be Converted to
a Carnaval in the Houses of great Men, nor the Tables be Laden with
Superfluous Dishes, to feed Lackeys and Foot-boys even to Gluttony, and the
Poor of Christ Languishing in the Street starving for Want of Bread, Let not
the Taverns be Crowded from Morning to Night, and the Churches and Chapels of
God left waste, let Equity and Justice govern the Bench without Partiality or
Respect of Persons, Let Conscience overule the Covetousness of Exacting
dealers; Let modesty in Apparel, spare somt^ing to cover Christ naked in the
persons of the poor, Let Blasphemous Tongues learn from just Chastisements to
bear Respect to the holy name of God. Let public punishments suppress the
Infection of public scandals, let Christian Discipline put an End to
Antichristian dissolution which Raing'd these many years among us, and Finally
let the love of Heaven proscribe and banish from our Hearts the disordered love
of Creatures, of vain Dignities, Afflicting Riches, and Inconstant pleasurs,
that Piety Ruling our Actions here in Grace may lead us to Triumph in
Everlasting Glory. which I wish your S. M. etc. and all your Faithful Subjects.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page three line 1. read Thesauros. ibid l. 11. r wild beasts, page 4. l. 32
instead of then, r. but. page 7. l. 11 r. and still do labor page 8 l. 27 r.
4th psalm. page 10 l. 11 r. substance. ibid. l. 12 r. hunger. ibid. l. 23 after
defense, put a point. page 11 r. in the margin praesentia et dormierunt in
ipsis preasentibus. ibid. l. 16 A. A. signifies Christian Auditors. page 12 l.
4 r. thorn. page 13 l. 19 after Ruin, put a period. ibid. l. 26 r. Caresses.
ibid. l 34 r. pour.


