A DISCOURSE HISTORICAL AND POLITICAL OF the War of Hungary, AND Of the causes
of the Peace between Leopold the first Emperor of the Romans, and Mahomet the
fourth Sultan of Turkey.

By LOUIS DE MAY of Sallettes, Knight, and Counselor of his Highness the Duke
of Wirtemberg.

Translated in English.

GLASGOW, Printed by ROBERT SANDERS, Printer to the Town. M. DC. LXIX.

EDINBURGH 18. February 1669.
ORdered by the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council that a Book, entitled, A
Discourse Historical and Political of the War of Hungary, etc. Translated in
English, shall be printed: And discharges all other persons, after the first
Impression, to print or import any Copies thereof for the space of ten years,
without license of the Translator, under the pain of two hundredth pounds Scots.

Ext. per me THOMAS HAY.

TO THE READER.
THIS Book, which was written for the satisfaction of a particular person has
been esteemed worthy of the public view; neither had the intention been good,
to have kept it from the sight of the world. These who have seen it, say, when
it sees the light, it will be well received. In this conjuncture of affairs,
every man talks of the Peace the Emperor has made with the Turk according to
his own fantasy, without enquiring what moved that great Prince to come to an
accommodation with the Infidells. Many do importunatly desire to hear the
Relation of the late war of Hungary, with all its circumstances, and yet are
ignorant of the original of the troubles, the cause of the Hungarians
misfortunes, the pretentions of the Ottomans, the designs of the Transilvanian,
and the rights the House of Austria has to that Kingdom: This Book does
exactly clear all those things; It gives us a short abridgement of the Turks
wars with the Hungarians. It mixeth Policy with History: It descrives
succinctly the Ottoman exploits in that Country, how they have afflicted it
three hundredth years, since Bajazet was invited to come to it: And it gives us
a pretty Relation of the late troubles till the Peace was concluded. And upon
that Peace has a particular Discourse, which shows what moved the Emperor to
embrace it, and of the interest the greatest part of the Princes of Europe has
in it. And still the Author with a polished politic style, speaks like a
faithful and uninteressed Historian. And though he be not a Frenchman, yet
there is nothing of rudeness to be seen in his discourse. His expressions are
not strained or affected: And his language on this subject, is no other then
what would have becomd a native of France. If you will be at the trouble,
Reader, to peruse the Book, you will be the better able to judge of it. And if
you reflect upon the Dialogue of which it is composed, you will cry up the
dexterity of the Author, who assumes the more liberty to speak, because he is
to answer the demands of a Prince who interrogates him.

THE TRANSLATOR.
I Have seen Florus Hungaricus, and another piece entitled, The History of the
Turkish Wars in Hungary, Transilvany, etc. The Authors of both which, acquits
themselves very well; but if their intelligence, especially of the late
troubles in Hungary and Pole, be not so exact as that of this Counselor of the
Duke of Wirtemberg, it is no wonder; for he might more easily draw clearer
water then they, as being nearer the head of the fountain. They do not
determine the causes of the last war between the Christian and Turkish
Emperors, so well as he seems to do, neither does any of them speak of the
Peace, or the motives to it, both which he does. If it be said, that the late
rupture between the King of France (of whose praises, and some other
Frenchmen, this Writer is profusedly liberal) and Spain, does show that his
conjecture of the continuance of Peace between them, proved not right; it may
be answered: First, that he could but guess, with probability, of future
contingencies. And next, if the Emperor did forsee that breach, he had the more
reason to accept the Peace was offered him by the Grand Vizier. A little time,
perhaps, will tell us, that the Author has not taken up his measures right, in
his discourse of the election of a King of Pole, yet it cannot be denied, that
he has written very rationally on that subject. And who knows, but the result
of the Polonian consultations at this time, may be such, as may make it appear,
he has not far over-shot his mark? For these reasons, I thought that they who
understand English best, would not think it unworthy of their labor, to hear
him speak in that language.

Errata.
Page 5. line 3. for all read it. p. 8. l. 6. for with, read by. p. 12. l. 28.
for banded, read bandied. p. 13. l. 19. for adress, read address. p. 15. l. 22.
for number, read numbers. p. 16. l. 4. for specoius, read specious. ibid. l. 8.
for spoke, read spoke. ibid. last line, for Sciticum, read Scithicum. p. 17. l.
6. for fatihless, read faithless. p. 23. l. 1. for was, read were. p. 26. l. 9.
for successors, read successor. ibid. l. 15. for vigorus, read vigorous. p. 27.
l. 2. for they are, read he is. p. 29. l. 18. for excluded, read exclude. p.
35. l. 12. for he conjured, read he had conjured. p. 51. l. 15. for forces,
read forces. p. 55. l. 8. Rodolp, read Rodolph. p. 72. l. 2. for never, read
neither. p. 83. l. 9. for maring, read marching. p. 86. l. 3. for amuniton,
read ammunition. p. 94. l. 14. for ever, read every. p. 95. l. 23. for Cossaks,
read Cassacks. p. 103. l. 13. for settling, read setting. p. 106. l. 29. the
co^ma should be at Burgundy, and no co^ma at Austria. p. 110. l. 14. for it as
easy, read it is as easy.

A DISCOURSE HISTORICAL AND POLITICAL OF THE causes of the Turkish War. Or an
Abridgment of the History of Hungary.
By which may be seen how injuriously the Great Sultan has attaked us: And all
that is passed since the year 1350. to the end of the year 1664. By way of
Dialogue.
P. THE Spaniards, whose words ordinairly weigh much, say, There is no good
which does not arrive, nor evil which is not accomplished. I am of the contrary
opinion; for we enjoy no sweets in this life, which are not mixed with
bitterness: and we find the end of one evil to be but the beginning of another.
These persons whom we account happy, have often more reason to lament then
rejoice: And the misfortunate, who far exceed the other in number, fall
continually from a less disaster in a greater. I remember that George Ragotchy,
Prince of Transilvany, entered Pole, not long ago, as victorious, and came out
of it with broken wings. At that time you discoursed with me of the inconstancy
of Fortune, and show me, that these alterations were no new emergencies, in
regard many have been seen led in triumph, who triumphed but a little before.


G. What ever I have said to you before, I did ever believe, and I hold it
still for a certain truth, that most part of men have more reason to be
thankful to God for the good they receive from him, then to petition him for a
deliverance from the evils which afflict them: And yet we hear more complaints
then praises, because we are more sensible of pain then pleasure. A Prince is
not so much contented to have been victorious all his life, as he is afflicted
to see Fortune turn her back upon him in one single rencounter. A great Man who
almost found nothing impossible to him, till he was fifty years old, and who
had seen his most redouted enemies brought under his power, said, That Fortune
was a woman, and loved young men better then old. And retired himself to a
solitary life, because he saw his ambition limited by one of the greatest
Empires that ever was. There are some who take a permission, rashly to hazard
on any enterprise that pleases their capricious humor; and do excessively
complain, when these things which themselves began without judgment,
contributeth to their misfortune. Certain it is, that the Divine Providence,
which the vulgar nickname Fortune, often abateth the pride of the most
successful, to make them acknowledge that what they have obtained, proceeded
from his Bounty, and not from their prudence. We see many Statesmen, who see,
or think they see all things, and yet are blind as moles to these calamities;
which threaten both their Country and their persons. This I could confirm with
infinite exemples; but I pass them over in silence, that I may hear your
Demands, and answer them as exactly as possibly I can.


P. Let us speak then of the present wars of Hungary: And because a Discourse
you had with me three years ago, led us to the sight of a dangerous cloud which
rose above Transilvany, and that out of it since has issued a tempest which
has dejected George Ragotchy and Janos Remin, to mount Abaffion the throne,
entertain me with the cause and effects of that alteration, that I may know,
whence it comes that the Grand Seigneur, who has been but a pure spectator of
the Tragedy which Europe has acted full thirty years, should now insolently
invade our Neighbors, and thereby give us opportunity to take arms, and with
joint forces and affections, make him repent his enterprise. I am confident,
that this rupture has so many circumstances, preceding, accompanying, and
following it, that I may with advantage spend some days to weigh and ponder
them; and that these who shall consider them after me, may thereby reap both
pleasure and profit.


G. I have always looked upon your will as a law which should overruled me, yet
I am to obey you in this with some reluctance; because, I fear, I must speak
more then perhaps willingly I would: And because you must know from whence the
remedies must be taken which are intended for application, I shall endeavor to
satisfy you; And that you may have reason to acquiesce to what I say, I will
lead you to the source and fountain from whence sprung our miseries; and will
briefly represent to you, what the Turk has done in Hungary since Bajazeth
came there to support the rebellion, and foment the discord. I know, that these
who know no better, say, when the Turk intends a war, he has little regard
to justice; and that the small difficulty he proponeth to himself to meet with
in the prosecution of his enterprises, is the principal cause of his
undertakings. For my part. I profess, that little faith should be given to an
infidel; and that the end of the Turks designs, is seldom other then his
advantage: yet it is not impossible, for all that, but that he may many times
find a specious pretext, wherewith to cover the ugly face of these disorders,
which his ambition procures in the world. And therefore I will show you what
reason the Otthomans conceive they have to keep the soveraignity of
Transilvany, whereby you will also learn the causes why we are now calling our
forces together, and begging assistance of Strangers, to defend it against
them. And then I shall come to these resolutions that are now concluded at
Ratisbone, by which these will be satisfied who desire to know the manner our
Princes use to contribute for the preservarion of Germany, and for the
maintenance of the war we are engaged in, for our defense, against so mighty an
enemy.


P. I should not receive that contentment which I promise to my self by your
discourse, if you should only relate simply to me what is a doing on our
frontiers, how numerous our forces are, and of what worth and merit the
Commanders of them be; for these who look upon any novelty, desire to know the
cause of all. And this war of ours having had its rise from the disrespect was
given to the Sultan of Turkey by Ragotchy, and the protection which the Emperor
vouchsaved to give to Remin Janos, I cannot choose, but hear with much
satisfaction the reasons why the Grand Seigneur offers to chastise these
Princes of Transilvany, who offer to raise a war without his consent, and the
causes which oblidgeth the Emperor to defend them against him. Speak then to
that as clearly and succinctly, as possibly you can.


G. You demand two things of me, which seem to be incompatible, yet I shall not
despair to reconcile them, provided you be attentive.

In the year 1350. or as others write 1383. Lewis the first of that name,
reigned peaceably over the people of Transylvania, Moldavia, Valachia, Mysia,
Dalmatia, Sclavonia, which were appartenances of his Kingdom of Hungary: But
his repose was interrupted by a mischief which he could not prevent, because he
could not foresee it. Joanne Queen of Naples, a Princess extremely dissolute,
having preferred in her affection some young Neapolitanes to her husband King
Andrew, put him to a cruel death. The news whereof, with the letters of those
who abhorred the parricide, did quickly stir up a desire of a just revenge in
the soul of King Lewis. This generous Prince finding himself oblidged in honor
and justice, to take arms, to avenge the death of his brother, raised a
puissant army, and marched straight to Naples. His expedition was fortunate,
for having chased away the Queen and routed her party, he very soon reduced the
Rebels to obedience, and then punished the principal Counselors of that
detestable Regicide.

This being done, supposing Hungary stood in need of his presence, he bethought
him of his return to his ancient Kingdom, but not till he had provided for the
preservation of his new acquired one. He had brought with him, many brave and
noble persons, both for birth and merit; amongst the rest Steven Vayvod of
Transilvany, who though young, had a very hie place in the Kings favor: Him he
appointed his Lieutenant, and with him left sufficient forces to keep the new
conquered Neapolitans within the limits of their duty. The departure of Lewis
encouraged Joanne, and the Prince of Tarente her new husband, to make an
attempt to remount the throne. But the prudence, valor, and fidelity of the
Transilvanian, rendered their endeavors ineffectual, till Pope Clement the
sixth put an end to the war. The signal services which the Vayvod had done to
the King his Master, both in Naples, and to his friend and Ally, Francis
Carcarius, Prince of Padoua, made him dream of vaste recompenses, wherewith his
hopes fed him: But he did but flatter himself; for Lewis not only frustrated
him of his great expectations, but recalled him also from the Government of
Naples jealous of the worth and virtue of so eminent a person.


P. Other great Potentats have done the like, before and after King Lewis.
Narses and Gonzale have furnished matter enough to the Writers of their times,
to lay foul imputations on the Emperor Justinian, and Ferdinand King of
Arragon. But how did Steven carry himself in this his disgrace?


G. This Transilvanian, as accomplished a Courtier as he was a Captain,
dissembled his ressentiment till some favorable opportunity should be offered,
whereby he might with advantage revenge himself. This proffered it self by the
death of the King, who left no other successor but a daughter, named Mary,
affianced to Sigismond of Luxemburg, King of Bohemia. The nonage of this
Princess, the unconstant humor of the Hungarians, and the practices of our
Vayvod, procured such a contempt of Mary, that many said publicly, They would
not be governed by a Girl. This Cabal knowing the dexterous adress of the
Bishop of Zagabria, who was an Italien, both by extraction and inclination,
sent him to Charles the second King of Naples, the son of Andrew, and
Cousin-germane of Mary. The Bishop did exactly that for which he was sent. He
offers the Kingdom of Hungary to the King of Naples, and prays him to come and
take possession of the Estates, which (as he said) of right belonged to him.
Charles gave a favorable audience to the Bishop, and finding his mind perplexed
with passions of diverse natures, required a time to resolve of a business of
so great importance. He broke the matter to his Queen, who forgot not to
dissuade him, both with reasons and tears, from an entreprise dangerous, for
the wavering unconstancy of the people; and shameful, for the great injustice
he should commit, in robbing his near Kinswoman of her inheritance, without any
color of reason. But at length, both Equity, Justice and Reason, must yield to
Ambition. Charles equippeth a great Navy, and accompanied with an army suitable
to such a King, he landeth in Dalmatia, and in few days came to Zagabria, where
he was met with many of these Nobles who favored his entreprise. From thence he
marched to Buda: and though he met with some resistance by the resolution of
Nicolas Gara, and some other faithful subjects of the Queen, yet he was
established in the Kingdom by the favor and assistance of the Transilvanian
Vayvod. Sigismund King of Bohemia, and husband of Queen Mary, seeing the loss
of Hungary inevitable, retired himself to his own Kingdom. And then Charles
thought he had struck a nail in the wheel of Fortune. His joy notwithstanding
was but short, and his usurpation no longer lived then other violent actions
are. Sigismund is recalled by the enemies of the Usurper; and having routed
Charles, killed or chased all that offered to resist him, reestablisheth
himself in the Dominions of Mary his Queen.


P. These were mavelous alterations, and no question, such as were of hard
digestion to the Transilvanian.


G. The loss and defeat of the King of Naples, made the Vayvod despair, and
forget all that is dear and precious to men, Religion, and Country. He trod
upon all considerations, divine and humane, and has his recourse to Bajazet
King of Turks, to whom he promises his daughter, on condition that he should
assist him to chase Sigismond and Mary out of their Kingdom of Hungary. This
was the beginning and original of the miseries of this (till then) flowrishing
Kingdom; and of the hopes the Infidels conceived to make it a part of their
Empire. Bajazet lays hold on Occasion, marches with a mighty army toward
Hungary, meets with King Sigismund near Nicopolis, between whom was fought a
fierce battle, where twenty thousand Christians, and three score thousand
Turks, were laid in the dust, upon the 18. of September 1396.


P. I believe it was there where John Duke of Burgundy was taken prisoner, with
the loss of a thousand Gentlemen, whom he had carried with him to that war.
But if I be not deceived, the Turk made no great progress in Hungary during the
reign of Sigismund.


G. These Burgundians kept company with the Hungarians who died at that time.
But in Sigismund and his Successor Albert of Austrias reigns, the Turk gained
but little ground in Hungary. He resolved to go softly, and to be first Master
of Constantinople, before he would fix his thoughts else where. But for all
that, he learned the way to give us visits. Mahomet the first beat the
Hungarians at Tautemberg, in the year 1400. And the Infidels advanced by little
and little immediately after the death of Albert of Austria. This Prince at his
death left his Queen with child, which occasioned great divisions amongst the
Nobility. Some thought it fit to wait till the Queen were brought to bed,
before any thing should be done in order to the election of a new King. Others
made difficulty to obey a child, though she should be delivered of a son, and
therefore resolved to choose a King, capable to govern them. Hungary being thus
divided, a faction of the Great Ones sent an offer of the Kingdom to
Vladislaus, the son of Casimir King of Polen. Another party preferred Ladislaus
the son of Albert, though he was yet in his cradle, and in it they set the
Crown upon his head.


P. Truth it self does teach us, what danger Estates are in, when they are
divided amongst themselves: And assuredly Hungary has suffered irreparable
losses by its divisions.


G. This division of affections and forces moved Amurath the second to take the
field: and taking his advantage of the discords of Hungary, pierced to the
heart of the Country, and besiedged Alba Royal. Yet he got not all done he
desired; but on the contrair, he lost almost all his army, and was forced to
raise the siedge. This affront did irritate the Tyrant. who to have his
revenge, entered Hungary with new forces, where he was defeated by John
Huniades Corvin. This action, as it gained much reputation to Corvin, so it
enflamed Amurath with spite and rage: and therefore opposes to Huniades, who
was constantly General of King Vladislaus his armies, two of his bravest
Captains, these were Isaac and Mezets, who entered Hungary and Transilvany both
at once, and filled all places where they came with terror, fire and confusion.
Huniades runs to the rescue, renconntreth them laden with spoil, charge
them gallantly, but unfortunatly; for he was beaten back, and put to flight.
Amurath encouraged with this victory, thought on nothing but the utter ruin of
the Christian Countries. Mezets returns to Hungary, spoileth and wastes many
fair Lands: and having destroyed and put to the sword a world of poor
innocents, was thinking of his retreat, Huniades thought he had a fair occasion
offered to repare his former loss, meets with Mezets, charge him, and
defeateth him so entirely, that scarce one Turk was left alive to carry the
unwelcom news to Sultan Amurath.


P. This good success should have encouraged the Hungarians to have attaqued
the Turks territories.


G. And so they did with much advantage: and without all doubt, there had been
a remarkable change of the face of affairs between Hungary and Turkey, if the
general good had not been sacrificed to particular interest. King Vladislaus
had in his Court Julian the Legate of the Holy See, and George Despot of Mysia,
who speaking of nothing else but the great fortune and happiness of Vladislaus,
the generosity and gallantery of Huniades, and how easy it was to recover what
had been formerly lost to the Turks, carried on the young King to an high
enterprise. Preparations being made, and the troops gathered together, Huniades
is sent away with the Vanguard. His expedition was so fortunate, that he
regained many places: And if he had not been kept up by the irresistible cold
of a rigorous Winter, it was believed he had marched into the heart of Thracia,
and subverted the Turks Europeans Dominious. In this expedition, Huniades
fought eight conflicts with Carambo, a valiant Turkish Captain; in all which,
he came off with honor and advantage. The rigide violence of the Season
prohibiting him further action, he retireth to Buda, carrying along with him,
as a Trophee of his victory. Carambo, who having fallen in a pit of snow, was
forced to yield himself prisoner. After these achievements, which tended so
much to the glory of Vladislaus, and the immortality of the name of Huniades,
the Ambassadors of the Constantinopolitan Emperor, the Venetians, and the
Genouays, came to complement the Hungarian King, and exhort him to the
continuance of the war, which he had so gloriously, and fortunatly begun. They
assured him, that all the forces of Christendom would second him. That they
should send a Navy to stop the Turks passage over the Hellespont: And that the
Grecians seeing their deliverance at hand, would pluck up their hearts, renew
their ancient courage, and break in pieces the iron bonds of their servitude.
The Despot of Mysia added to these motives, all such reasons as his vehement
desire to recover both his Principality and his children (who were in the hands
of the Turk) could suggest to him: So that all things, accidents and
emergencies seemed to dispose the King to the prosecution of a War, as
profitable, as honorable for the Christian Commonwealth.


P. I am in expectation to hear the happy success of so strong a Confederacy.


G. But it tended to the disaster and ruin of Hungary, and I shall tell you
how. Amurath the second King of Turks perceiving all Europe banded against him,
and fearing the powers of Asia, in so great an exigent, had his recourse to
prudence; and by an admirable dexterity, obtained that peace of Vladislaus,
which the evil aspect of his affairs made him so vehemently desire. He sent
Ambassadors, in appearance to treat concerning the ransom and liberty of
Carambo; but in effect to conjure that thunder, and divert that storm which
threatened to destroy him. The Turks Ministers knowing what power the Despot had
in the Kings Counsel, and in the affection of John Huniades Corvin, cast up a
right account, and concluded, that if they gained him, they had done their
business. They cast up therefore two strong batteries against him, and out of
them roared upon him with the great Ordinance of Affection and Interest,
against which few men are proof. They offer him a full restitution of his
Estates, with the liberty of his children, if he would obtain of King
Vladislaus that Peace which they desired of him on reasonable conditions. The
Despot was marvellously well pleased with this proposition of the Infidels: And
by his dexterous adress, got Huniades to be of his party. These two having
agreed upon the matter, found no great difficulty to move the King to an
accommodation. The Peace is concluded, Amurath retireth his guarisons from all
these places he kept in Mysia, and restored them faithfully, and kept exactly
every article of the Peace, not failing in any one of his promises. But while
both parties are busied about the execution of the Treaty, comes letters out
of Grecia, showing that the Greeks, who knew nothing of the Peace, did expect
every minute the beginning of the war. That in a game wherein they were so much
concerned, they intended not to sit still with crossed arms. That the absence
of the Sultan, then in Asia, gave them a favorable occasion to advances their
affairs. And that the Italian Navy, which then advanced toward the Hellespont,
with great importunity demanded the same thing. When these Letters were read in
the Kings Counsel, there were not any; nay, even of those who had most
violently carried on the Peace, but were extremely grieved that it was
concluded. But no man durst propone the breach of an agreement which was
confirmed by oath made in the most solemn manner. Cardinal Julian, the Popes
Legate, a man powerful enough to persuade, of great eloquence and credit,
instigated by an indiscreet zeal, and by an impious piety, endeavored by a
stout, but well ordered and learned Discourse, to prove that the Treaty
concluded with the perfidious Turk, should be broken. He chid the scrupulous,
encouraged the fearful, and comforted the afflicted, till he moved the King,
and the Great Ones, to a rupture of the Peace, He said, he had sufficiently
foreseen the mischief; but he would not oppose the Treaty, lest he should seem
to accuse John Huniades Corvin of want of prudence, or be esteemed merciless to
the Despot of Servia, who could not get his beloved children out of the Turks
power, but by a Peace. He assured his Audience, that the business was not past
the hopes of a remedy, in regard they might safely break Covenant with the
Infidel, who by craft and fraud had brought them to the breach of the sacred
knot of a Christian League and Alliance. He represented to them, that the
Hungarians could not make Peace with the Turkish King, without the consent of
their Brethren: and that men could not keep an oath unjustly taken, without a
double breach of Justice. He endeavored to prove, that the promise made and
sworn to Amurath, was void, and did not at all bind their consciences: and that
they ought to give trust to him, as to one best seen and known in affairs of
that nature. And concluded, that they should bring their forces together, and
march to Thracia, there to join with the rest of the Christians, before the
fault they had committed should be known over all Europe. These and such like
reasons pronounced with the authority of a Legate, and by a person extremely
eloquent prevailed so far with the Hungarians, that they agreed unanimously not
to disert their Christian brethren in this fair occasion. And for this effect,
their forces are rendevouzed, and Huniades marching with the Vanguard, is
followed by King Vladislaus with the gross of the army. On his march, Dracula
Vayvod of Valachia, came to him, who told him he wondered of his confidence,
that would with so inconsiderable troops hazard to seek and provoke so mighty
an enemy, who used to go a hunting accompanied with as great number, as those
the King then had with him, and counseled him to return. His advice was
rejected, and so the Vayvod leaving four thousand horse under the conduct of
his own son with the King, retired himself. Amurath being informed that Hungary
armed against him, left Asia, and came to Europe; drew his forces together, as
speedily as he could, met Vladislaus at Varna, a town in Bulgary, and gave him
a total overthrow. The loss of this day, so dismal to the Christians, and so
joyful to the Infidels, did let us see by the death of Vladislaus. of Julian
the Legate, and a world of brave Gentlemen, that faith should be punctually
kept: and that God punishes the perjured, though they cover their perfidy with
cloaks of specoius colors. They say that Amurath seeing his men worsted at the
beginning of the battle, pulled out of his bosom the Treaty that was concluded
between him and the Hungarians, and looking toward heaven, spoke these words
with much zeal and passion: JESUS CHRIST, Behold the agreement which the
Christians made with me, and swore to me by thy Godhead; and by breaking it,
has mocked thee and me. Now, O CHRIST, if thou be a God, as they say thou art,
revenge the injury they have done to both thee and me: And make it appear to
these who yet know not thy Name, that thou knows how to punish such as violate
the Religion of faithful promises, confirmed and sworn by thy Divinity. This
prayer was seconded by the entire defeat of the Christians. The head of the
King was carried on a lance through many places of Greece and Asia, as an
assured testimony of a complete victory. The body of Cardinal Julian, the
detestable Author of the perfidy, was found stark naked, pierced and hacked
with many wounds. The Epitaph of this King, both valiant and fortunate, so long
as he was careful to keep his promises, is worthy your knowledge: and it is
this.

Romulidae Cannas, ego Varnam clade notavi;
Discite mortales non temerare fidem.
Me nisi Pontifices jussissent rumpere foedus,
Non ferret Sciticum Pannonis ora jugum.
As Varo Cannaes fatal fields did die
With noble Roman blood, so Varna I
Stained with Hungarian gore. Learn, mortals, then
To keep your faith and promise made to men.
The Pope importuned me the Truce to break,
Which I with Osmans faithless race did make:
Hence the brave men of fair Pannonias lands,
Must now obey the barbarous Turks commands.
This misfortune fell on Hungary the 11. of November, S. Martins day 1444.


P. You have often told me, that the promises of men ought to be inviolable,
and I was ever of that same opinion, and this sad example confirms me fully
in it. But did this mischance spread it self over the whole army?


G. It was then the Almighties pleasure only to chastise this unfortunate
Kingdom; but not wholly to ruin it, and so preserved John Huniades Corvin, who
seeing all things in a desperate condition, after the death of the King, saved
himself by flight. The year following, the Hungarians who till then had
rejected Ladislaus the posthume son of the Emperor Albert of Austria,
unanimously acknowledged him for King, though he was but five years old: and
because of his tender age, they committed the management of affairs to John
Hunniades who two years after increased Amuraths trophies with the loss of
22000 Hungarians, which he had brought in the field against him. Not long
after, Sultan Amurath died at Adrianople, and left his son Mahomet to succeed
him; who surpassed all his Predecessors in greatness of courage, and subtilty
of spirit. This daring Prince in the third year his reign beseegeth
Constantinople, and takes it within the space of fifty days, on the 29. of May
1453. As this loss discouraged the Christians, so it raised Mahomets thoughts
to a hie pitch, and furnished him with hopes to add Hungary to his conquests of
Greece. To effect which, he laid Mysia waste, and laid siege with two hundred
thousand men to Belgrade, which in ancient times was called Alba Graeca. But
the place being notably defended by Hunniades, who for that purpose had cast
himself into it, the proud Turk lost almost his whole army, with an hundred
great pieces of Canon. Hunniades did not long survive this gallant action, but
died the 8. of September 1456. Mahomet carrying his hie designs to Persia and
Italy, gave liberty to Hungary to breath a while, hoping the ambition of the
Nobles, and the nonage of the King, would raise intestine troubles in time of
Peace, which would give him some fair opportunity to subdue the Kingdom,
sparing it for some small time.


P. But it was no small good fortune to King Ladislaus, that the Tyrant did not
molest him in his younger years after the death of Hunniades. But tell me, what
did he when he came to age?


G. The History tells us, that when Ladislaus was 19. years old, he married
Magdelene of France, the daughter of King Charles the seventh, and that he dyed
of poison at Prague in the time of the solemnity of his marriage, so that he
had but little time to make either his virtues, or his vices appear; yet there
passed some considerable contingencies between the death of Hunniades, and that
of his Master the King. Hunniades having left two sons, who were perfect
imitators of the virtue of their noble father, gave some occasion of jealousy
to Ladislaus, and of an earnest desire to his favorites, to be rid of them
both. These being envyous of Hunniades his glory, wrought the matter so with
the King, that he caused Ladislaus the eldest sons head to be struck off, for
killing the Count of Cilie in a combat, to which the Count had appealed him.
About the same time they clapped Matthias, the second son of Huniades in
prison: and not being able to suffer the children of that famous worthy, who
had saved the State, they had assuredly made his process, if the death of the
King, and the Almighty Providence, which had ordained him to wear the Hungarian
Crown, had not put a stop to their malice. The Kings death, which fell out in
the year 1457. occasioned a wonderful alteration, Matthias Corvin, the son of
John Hunniades, is brought out of prison, where he expected a sentence of
death, and placed in the throne: And all these who envyed both his fathers
glory, and his own, could not hinder a man but of an indifferent quality, to be
preferred to the whole family of Austria, in the year 1458.


P. These effects of the Divine Providence, are admirable. But reigned he
gloriously?


G. Hungary has had but few Kings like to Matthias: He was ignorant of nothing
that belonged to the knowledge of a great Prince, and his reign was glorious,
both in the time of peace and war. Many great Hungarian Lords opposed his
election: and after it, they importuned the Emperor Frederick the third, to set
the Crown (which he had a keeping) on his own head; which, some say, he did.
Once certain it is, he did not restore it till six years after he got in
exchange of it, three score thousand dukats at Newstadt, a town in Austria. A
little before its restoration, some of the factious offered the Kingdom to
Casimir, the son of another Casimir King of Polen, who sent his son to receive
it, with a powerful army: but Matthias made haste to the frontiers, from which
he forced the Polonian to return. These intestine broils gave both the courage
and the opportunity to the Turk to make himself Master of Bosnia, Rascia, and a
part of Servia. But King Matthias after his Coronation, valiantly regained all
was lost, and reduced Transylvania and Valachia to their duty. This happy
progress prompted Matthias to undertake an irreconciliable war with the Grand
Seigneur: and without all peradventure, he had given him work enough, if his
heroical design had not been obstructed by the Emperor and the Pope. And this
does evidently appear by the letters which he wrote on that subject to the
Electors of the Empire, and to the Cardinal of Arragon. To the first he
remonstrats, that when he was on the river of Savus, going to fight with the
Infidels, he received certain intelligence that in a Diet at Vienne they had
resolved to invade him. To the second he wrote, that the Pope favored the
Venetians, who had taken from him the I Will of Valga, without any occasion given
by him: and not satisfied with that, his Holiness endeavored to take from him
the power to confer Ecclesiastical Benefices within his own Kingdom, of purpose
to disgrace him with his own subjects.


P. But I think there is little appearance that these two Princes, whom it most
concerns to chase the Turk out of Europe, should endeavor to keep the swords of
those in their sheaths, who would gladly draw them against that common enemy.


G. I should also be of your opinion, if Peter de Reva had not told us, that he
copied these things out of the original, and adds that which seems more
incredible. In his fifth Century of his Monarchy of Hungary, he tells us that
the Emperor seized on all the moneys which the Spiritual and Temporal Lords of
Hungary had contributed for the war which Matthias intended against the Turk:
and that the Pope helped to drain the Kingdom of moneys by ordering Collections
to be made for the Knights of the Rhodes. Yet all these blocks that were laid
in his way, did not hinder Matthias by his Generals Paul Canisi, and Steven
Battori, to defeat and chase Ali Beg out of the field, with the loss of
threescore thousand Turks: and thereafter in person to regain Jaitsa, and
reduce Bosnia to his obedience. Yet these traverses at home necessitated him to
make a truce with Mahomet: And the Tyrant dying in the year 1481. Matthias with
all his force resolves to renew the war; and for that purpose desired a
Safe Conduct from the Emperor for his Ambassadors to come and treat of an
accommodation; but could not obtain it. He entreated also the Pope to give him
Zemini, the son of Mahomet, that he might make use of him against his brother
Bajazet, who a little before had taken upon him the government of the Turkish
Empire. But this was refused him by his Holiness, which spited Matthias the
more, that it was done, not to loose a piece of money which was yearly paid to
the Pope by Bajazet, for the detention; or, as it was called, the maintenance
of his brother Zemini. Besides, this Pope by his Spiritual Authority obliged
Matthias to confirm the Truce with Bajazet, which he had made with his father
Mahomet. Shortly after, this brave King, looking upon all the indignities he
had received from the Emperor, as insupportable for any generous soul, declared
open war against him: which proved so fortunate on his side, as having brought
the greatest part of Austria under his obedience, at length he over-masters
Vienne and Newstadt, the two great bulwarks of that Arch-Dukedom: From thence
he marched to the Kingdom of Bohemia, and made himself Master of Silesia and
Moravia. But Casimir King of Polen, would have a share of the booty, and
therefore entered Silesia with a mighty army; but by the mediation of the
Princes of the Empire, these two Kings agreed, that both Matthias and
Vladislaus, the son of Casimir, should bear the tittle of Kings of Bohemia: but
Vladislaus should alone enjoy the Electoral dignity, and the Kingdom: Matthias
keeping in his possession the Provinces of Silesia, Moravia and Lusatia,
redeemable after his death for four hundred thousand Crowns. While Matthias was
busied in these wars, the Turk breaks the Truce, and seaseth on Killen and
Nester-Alba, which (at that time) were accounted strong holds on the river
Danube. At length this valiant King, having reigned five years at Vienne, and
while there was a Treaty on foot for the restoration of it to the Emperor, he
dies on the tuesday before Easter, in the month of March 1490. His corpse was
carried to Alba Royal, and interred with his Predecessors the Kings of Hungary.


P. It was fitting this martial Prince should die on Mars his day, and in the
month which has its name from Mars. But it is pity his valor was not still
employed against the common enemy: and I am sorry that these who should have
exhorted him to it should have diverted him from so glorious an undertaking.
But I pray, who succeeded him?


G. Matthias Corvin having no lawful issue, wished that his natural son John
Hunniades, might have been elected to be his successor. But after his death,
the spirit of division possessed the Hungarians. Four Princes pretended to this
divided Kingdom; and the Nobility being divided in four Cabales, favored him
with their votes whom they conceived most worthy of so great an honor. John the
son of the late King, had the suffrages of these who reverenced the virtues of
his Grand father, and father, which eminently appeared in him, and of such also
who would more gladly obey a born Hungarian, then a stranger. The second party
stood for Albert Jagellon, the second son of Casimir King of Polen, whom his
father furnished with forces to fight against Vladislaus his elder brother, who
made the third party; Casimir thinking his son Vladislaus might well enough be
satisfied with the Crown of Bohemia. The fourth Cabale inclined to elect
Maximilian, son of the Emperor Frederick; but he was excluded, because
Vladislaus his party prevailed. During this interraign, the Emperor recovered
all that Matthias had taken from him in Austria: and at length Vladislaus,
maugre all the Competitors, mounts the throne. The beginning of his reign was
troublesome; for his brother Albert, assisted with his Uncles the brothers of
Casimir King of Polen, beseegeth Cassovia, the capital City of the higher
Hungary, and so gave him work on that side. Blaise Magger a dependent of John
Corvin, being offended that his Master was rejected, refused to deliver the
Crown which was in his keeping, to the new King: upon which, he was beseeged at
Vissegrad, which he held bravely out, and would neither deliver Town nor Crown,
till he had command so to do from his Master. Maximilian having recovered his
losses in Austria, advanced toward Hungary: and being assisted by these who
had favored his election in the interreign, made a successful progress.
Vladislaus fainting under the burden of so many troubles, came to an agreement
with Maximilian: the tenor whereof was so hateful to the Hungarians, that the
Palatine Emeric Prini, caused proclaim through all the streets of Presburg,
that he neither did, nor ever would consent to it. But this generosity of his
lasted not long; for being gained by presents, he signed the articles of Peace
by which the Crown and Kingdom of Hungary is entailed to the House of Austria,
if Vladislaus died without issue. You may see here a disease cured by the
application of a remedy odious to the whole Nation. This tempest not yet well
allaid, ushered in another, conjured up by Albert, another Polonian pretender,
whose heart could not brook it, to see his brother King of Hungary: he takes
arms, and beseegeth Cassovia the second time. But while he endeavors to take
it, he is taken himself, and forced to give surety to suffer Vladislaus to live
in quiet. Shortly after Vladislaus married, and within three or four years had
a son and a daughter, Anne and Lewis; both of them famous in the Hungarian
History. Anne was married to Ferdinand of Austria, Grandchild to the Emperor
Maximilian, who by her had a numerous issue, whose posterity reigns yet in
Germany and Hungary. The accidents of the birth, life and death of Lewis were
extraordinare. He was born without a skin, which made his subjects fear he
should be spoiled of his Kingdom. He wore a beard when he was but fifteen years
old, and was gray haird of eighteen; which made most men conclud his life to be
short. He died in a marish, at Mohats, when he was but twenty years of age; at
which time, the greatest part of his Kingdom fell in the hands of the
Mahometans: Which makes us see, that these preter-natural accidents proved
truly ominous, as we shall find hereafter. Vladislaus making no more account of
what had passed between him and Maximilian of Austria, caused crown his son
Lewis at Alba Royal by the hands of Thomas Cardinal of Strigonium, in the year
1508. And the year after, he got him to be crowned King of Bohemia at Prague,
when he was but three years old. The Emperor Maximilian was hugely dissatisfied
with these things; but Vladislaus entertaining peace with the Turk on the one
side, and supported by Polen on the other, he was forced to dissemble his
ressentment.


P. Ordinarily a great calm is followed by a great tempest: and if it fell not
out so with Vladislaus, he has been fortunate beyond his merit.


G. Toward the end of his life, and after the death of Bajazeth, a civil war
began in Hungary, which was like to ruin it entirely, upon this occasion. The
King had a great desire to invade Selim Emperor of Turkey, who was kept busy at
home disputing the Crown with his brother Achmet: which design he communicates
to Pope Julius the first. The Pope approves of it and promises his assistance;
but preve^ted by death, left the management of it to his Successors. Mean while
Vladislaus bethinks himself better, and renews with Selim the Peace he had made
with his father Bajazet. This Peace exceedingly displeased those who loved war:
and a little after, Cardinal Thomas Legate for the Holy See, came to Hungary
with a Croisade, to join the Nobility and Commons in a vigorus pursuit of a war
against the Infidels. The common people who had been ever till then used with
much rigor, thinking the time to recover their liberty was now come, turned
their arms against the Nobles. Their numbers made them insolent: and they
elect one George Sekell, first for their General, and then for their King. He
and his rabble having committed a world of mischiefs, laid siege to Themisware,
where his army is defeated, and himself and brother Lucatius taken prisoners by
John Zapoliha, Vayvod of Transilvany. This action put Zapoliha in so high
credit with the better sort, that Vladislaus was contemned, and nothing more
spoken of then degrading the King, and mounting the Vayvod in the throne. But
Vladislaus prevented the disgrace by his death, which fell out in the year 1516.


P. By what you tell me, I am persuaded the Hungarians are hugely loyal and
affectionate unto their King, when they are gallant; and that they are easily
moved to change him for another, when he is not so.


G. A warlike people desires ever to see their King a horseback when the
preservation of his Estate requires him so to be. And though experience ofteu
teach us, that the preservations of the persons of Kings preserves Kingdoms,
yet a people is ever desirous to see their King on the head of their army. But
for all that, the Hungarians have reason to be of another opinion: and their
History will let them see, what a misfortune it is to loose a King with loosing
a battle. Lewis in his tender years succeeding his father Vladislaus, was
vilipended by Sultan Soliman, who knowing his weakness, and the divisions that
then were amongst Christian Princes, thought this time convenient to bring
Hungary under his subjection. To this effect he makes peace with the Persian,
and rusheth upon Lewis with all his forces. This young King knowing how unable
he was alone to grapple with so mighty an enemy, prayed other Christian
Potentats to send him succors, and not to permit the Bulwark of Christendom to
fall into the hands of the common enemy of believers. His prayers prevailed
not, for Christendom then was tearing it self in pieces* so Lewis was forced to
take the field, yea even before these troops were brought together, of which
his army was to be composed. The Turk had already passed the Save and the
Drove; and meeting with the Hungarians, both few in number, and evil provided
of a General, did without any difficulty obtain the victory; and that so
completely, that the King and the most part of these that followed him, were
lost, one way or other, either in battle, or the flight.


P. I have heard say, that two and twenty thousand Christians died at this
fatal field: and that besides horses of service, five thousand wagons,
fourscore pieces of great canon, and six hundred lesser ones, with all
furniture and ammunition necessare for such a train of Artillery fell in the
hands of the Victor.


G. The loss of the battle was but a small matter, in comparison of that which
followed. The Turk killed and took more then two hundred thousand persons. And
did so far advance in Hungary, and fixed himself so firmly in it, that till
this hour he could never be removed out of it. And no doubt, he has now more
hopes then ever to abolish our Religion in that unhappy Kingdom: so we have
reason to write the 29. of August of the year 1526. amongst the most dismal
days that ever afflicted Christendom, or Christianity. This King died without
children; and his want of issue did much augment the right which the House of
Austria pretended to have to the Crown of Hungary. Yet that illustrious family
did not find the Hungarians much inclined to submit themselves to their
domination. John Zapoliha, Earl of Sebusia, and Vayvod of Transilvany, who came
too late with his forces to defend the Crown, thought he was come soon enough
to set it on his own head. He had of a long time employed both his means and
his pains to gain the affections of the whole Kingdom. And by the defeat he had
given not long before to George Sekell, and the peasants who had made him King,
he had opened to himself a way to the Royalty. Seeing himself now in a
condition to have the greatest hopes, he prays, he exhorts the whole Nobility,
and every one of them in particular, not to loose the right and privilege they
had to elect a King, and to make their generous resolutions in order thereto
known at the next Diet. He remonstrats to them that Hungary had never been
happy in subjecting it self to the dominion of a strange King. That Sigismund
of Bohemia and Vladislaus of Pole, the first by his defeat at Nicopolis, the
last by his overthrow at Colembat and at Varna, had given sufficient evidence
how misfortunatly strangers govern that Kingdom. He endeavored to make them
believe, that though a strange Prince might reign gloriously in Hungary, yet it
would be both more profitable and honorable for them to have a King of their
own Nation. That the best governed Commonwealths excluded the feminine sex
from the Scepter, for fear it should come in the hands of strangers. That the
Hungarian Nobility was not so degenerated, but there was heads amongst them
worthy to carry a Crown. And though himself was none of the bravest, yet he
thought not himself incapable to govern a great State, and defend it with the
point of his sword.


P. There are few Nations who do not abhor the yoke of a stranger. What was the
result of the Hungarian consultations?


G. The great merits and exhortations of Zapoliha prevailed so far with the
greatest part of the Nobility, that they invested him with the Royal dignity,
and caused crown him by Paul Deverda, Archbishop of Strigonium, on Martinmas
day 1526. But to help the course of this miserable Country to its ruin,
Stephen Battori, and some other Great Ones, who looked upon the advancement of
Zapoliha with an envyous eye, sided with Ferdinand of Austria, and supported
his interests. This Prince fortified with the accession of his new Kingdom of
Boheme, with the victorious forces of the Emperor Charles the fifth, his
brother, with the marriage of Anne, sister of the late King, with the
pretensions which Ladislaus, son of Albert the first, left to the Austrian
family, and the help of some Hungarian Lords, thought that the Kingdom could
not escape him. In effect, Ferdinand assisted by his right, and his friends,
declared himself King, and takes the field with an army: and knowing the
readiest way to kill a creature is to strike it at the heart, he marches
straight to Buda, the capital City of the Kingdom. King John astonished at this
blow, abandons the Town, Ferdinand makes himself Master of it: and shortly
after beats his Competitors army, and chases him entirely out of the Kingdom.
The course of this good fortune was stopped by the Turk, who regains Jaitsa,
the chief town of Bosnia, which Matthias Corvin had taken with extraordinary
valor. This loss, and the safe retreat of Zapoliha, made King Ferdinand
believe, he had not yet done his business; but that Soliman and John would cut
out more work for him, then he had reason to desire.


P. I would gladly know whether this titular King retired himself, and what he
did to recover his Estates?


G. This poor Prince beaten by Ferdinands force, and the revolt of his
subjects, betook him to his shifts. He went to Pole, and adressed himself to
Jerome Lasco, Vaydod of Siradie, an illustrious person, both by birth and
virtue. Lasco over-joyed with the presence of such a guest, offered him all
that was in his power: and having maturely considered and reconsidered all
means for his reestablishment, at length advises him to have his recourse to
Sultan Soliman. And because these who give counsel should ever be ready to put
it in execution, he undertakes the journey himself: and having obtained a
recomme^datory letter from Sigismund King of Pole, he goes straight to
Constantinople. This great Man, who had been before Ambassador at the Port,
made it soon known how fit a person he was to agent a business of that
importance. He gained on his side by presents of great value, Abraham the first
Vizier, Lustibey, and Lewis Gritti, who were in hie favor with the Grand
Seigneur. These being well instructed by the dexterous prudence of Lasco,
easily persuaded the Sultan that it would be both honorable and profitable for
him, to take the exiled King in his protection, and restore him to his Kingdom.
Mean while, Ferdinand fearing the practices of Lasco, sent John Oberdans, a
Hungarian Lord, Ambassador to the Port, to desire the friendship of Soliman,
and to demand (a little unseasonably) the restitution of all he had taken in
Hungary since the death of Lewis the second. This highly offended the proud
Sultan, who answered, That the Ottomans were not accustomed to grant their
friendship to those who had offended them. That Ferdinand was in the wrong to
desire it, after he had invaded an Estate to which he had no just pretension.
That he thought him unworthy of that he desired, That he would be revenged of
the injury he had done him: And commanded Oberdans to be instantly gone out of
Constantinople, and tell his Master, that he denounced war against him. That he
would come into Hungary and bring the keys of these places with him which
Ferdinand demanded.


P. The Turk speaks with a wide mouth: and if his actions corresponded with his
words, assuredly he made Ferdinand repent that he had given an interruption to
Zapolihas repose.


G. Soliman did not all he would; but desiring to be a man of his word, he took
the field with a dreadful army, and in the Spring advanced to Hungary. King
John went to wait on him at Bellgrade, accompanied with Lasco, and as splendide
a company of the Nobility, as was possible for him to bring together. And in
that great Assembly he did homage to the Infidel, and acknowledged him for his
Lord. The Sultan a little moving himself in his seat, gave him his hand, and
assured him that nothing could be so pleasing to him, then to support and
restore the afflicted and oppressed. He bid him be of good courage, and told
him, He would restore to him all he should recover from his enemy Ferdinand.
These promises were confirmed by a most solemn and pompous oath, after the
fashion of these unbelievers, who in all their actions will appear beyond that
which they are. All things being set in order, Soliman marched to Buda, which
he might easily take, in regard it was abandoned by the German guarison. And
then he forced Thomas Nadasdy to give over the Castle whereof he was Governor.
This victory gave opportunity to the Turk to reestablish John in the Royal
dignity, which accordingly he did. Then treading over the bellies of all that
durst offer to resist him, he laid siege to Vienne. He battered it with all
imaginable fury and artifice: but if it was well attaqued, it was as well
defended by Philip the Victorious, Prince Palatine of the Rhine, and Nicolas
Count of Solms, who forced him to retire with shame; and to confess, that who
would take Vienne, must have good mittains.


P. That place has been for more then an age the mark at which the ambition of
the Ottomans has aimed. They fancy to themselves, if they had once possession
of the seat and ordinary residence of the Emperor of the West, they would
quickly pluck from us the head of the Roman Eagle, which is yet amongst us. But
in regard, the Turk did rather fly then retire, and that he was rather covered
with Cypress then with Laurels, let us follow him, and see what he did
afterward.


G. I shall pass over all he did which makes not to our purpose, neither shall I
speak of his inhumane cruelties, or the horrible marks he left of his
indignation. Let it suffice that I tell you, that being arrived at Buda, he
caused bring before him all the Royal Ornaments, and in presence of many great
persons, as well Christians as Mahometans, he said thus to King John: Brother,
and Friend, Since next to God, thou had thy recourse to me in thy calamity, I
was pleased to be favorable to thee, and I have handled the matter so, that
thou art Master of thy Kingdom: Now I deliver in thy hands the City and Castle
of Buda, with all Hungary; whereof I declare thee King. And turning to the
Hungarian Lords, he proceeded thus: I command you to be faithful and obedient
to your King here present: If you do so, I shall be your friend: If you do
otherwise, I will destroy you with my seimeter. And thou, O King, my friend,
Rememher of the great benefit thou has received of God, and of me. Thou has
the Crown, which thou and thy Successors shall enjoy peaceably, if all of you
continue in my friendship, and the duty you owe me. When he had spoke so, he
left Lewis Gritti (son to Andrew, since Duke of Venice, by a Grecian
concubine) in Hungary with some Cavallery, and so returned to Constantinople.


P. I wonder that Soliman having suffered so great losses in Austria, did not
recompense them by the detention of Hungary: for I have heard that the Turk is
not a slave to his promise.


G. Soliman did as these who break young horses, he used this gentleness to
tame the Hungarians: and he gave that to John, which he was afraid he could not
well keep to himself. But then King John fearing with much reason, that the
Grand Seigneur would weary of his succors, and perceiving his affairs to be
in a bad condition, he sent to Vienne that same Lasco whom he had employed at
the Port. This active man procured a years truce; in which time, the edge of
their animosity being somewhat blunted, they came to an agreement; By which
John was to enjoy the Kingdom to his death; after which, Ferdinand or one of
his sons should succeed him. But because it was not impossible but John might
have children, it was provided, that if he had a son, that son should enjoy all
these Lands and Castles which belonged to John before he was King of Hungary:
And besides all that, he should be Prince of Transilvany. This treaty was ill
observed. Ferdinand caused invade Transilvany, by Baltasar Bamfy: Sclavony, by
John Coatenerus, and the Province of Sebuse, by Leonard Baron of Velts. But all
these attempts were rendered vain by the prudence of King John, and the valor
of George Martenusias a Monk, and the Kings great favorite, commonly called,
Friar George. And so they came to another accommodation. The calm which John
enjoyed after he conjured away the tempest, gave him leisure to think of his
marriage: And for that effect sends to Sigismund King of Pole, and demanded his
daughter Isabel or Elisabeth for his wife. And having obtained her, the
nuptials and coronation of the Queen were magnificently solemnized.


P. I believe King Ferdinand was not well pleased with a marriage from which
might proceed an addition to his troubles, and an opposition to his
pretentions: neither do I think Soliman could approve of the transaction which
John made with Ferdinand, without his knowledge, or at least without his
consent; in regard a vassal can innovate nothing of that he holds in fee,
without the approbation of his Sovereign.


G. In this exigent, John was like to him that holds the wolf by the ears He
saw well enough that he had reason to fear as much mischief from Soliman, as
from his Competitor, yet he conceived stronger hopes of a Christian Prince,
then of an Infidel: notwithstanding whereof, we shall presently see that his
successors submitted to the Turk, to preserve a part of their dignity. Not long
after King John's marriage, Stephen Meylats and some others, take arms against
him in favor of Ferdinand. John desirous to quench the fire before it grew
inextinguishable, leaves his Queen at Buda, and marches to Transilvany, where
he easily received these in his favor who acknowledged their fault: which act
of grace moved many to return to their duty. But Meylats shuts himself up in
the strong Castle of of Fogaras, to wait for the succors which Ferdinand was
to send him under the conduct of Nadasdy. The King beseegeth the Castle, and
after a long siege, takes it. Mean time comes a Courrier, who brings him the
glad tidings of the birth of a son whom God had given him. Such News uses to
be very acceptable to these who have no children, especially to such who are
stricken in years: You may easily imagine that John received them with an
excess of joy, which he witnessed by drinking (after the Hungarian manner) more
then enough. This augmented his sickness, which at Sassebs sent him to his
grave a few days after his sons birth, and in the fifty and third year of his
own age. His death was kept quiet, as much as possibly might be done; but at
length it was published with the tenor of his testament: by which he declared
his son the universel heir of all his goods, and George Martenusias, or Friar
George, Tutor of the pupil Prince. Some days before he died, he exhorted the
Nobility to have a regard to the honor of the Hungarian Nation, and to prefer
his son to any stranger whatsoever, if they should fall upon the election of a
new King; assuring them that the grand Seignior would protect him, if they had
their recourse to him. The desire of a dying King, and the jealousy the
Hungarians had of a strangers domination, moved many of the great ones to set
the Crown upon the head of the Infant, the very day of his Baptism, and to send
to the Port to beg Solimans protection.


P. Hungary is most misfortunate, yet little or no mischief has come upon it,
which it has not deserved. What an eternal shame was it for a Christian King
on his death bed, to exhort his Subjects to have recourse to a Turk, to free
his posterity from that obligation himself had put upon it by a solemn Treaty?
What inexcusable folly was it in them to crown a Child, and thereby render him
the object of the indignation of a powerful neighbor Prince? What insupportable
impiety was it, to run to an Infidel for shelter, before they knew, if he whom
they feared, would exceed the bounds of Reason? Certainly, the Hungarians had
lived more happily and quietly, if they had religiously observed the Treaties
and Promises of their Kings, and the faithless Turk would have found stronger
bars to his Ambition, if the House of Austria had not been so much traversed
and crossed in its just pretensions.


G. When the ruin of great Estates approaches, all things contributes to
their destruction. Kingdoms that have changed Masters, have been the principal
framers of their own misfortune. The condition of Hungary was so depraved, that
almost every one gloried to be inconstant and perfidious: But let us follow the
thread of our story, that we may come near our own times.

King Ferdinand having heard of his Competitors death, sent Nicolas Count of
Salms to the Queen Douager, to dispose her to the observation of the Treaty
which had been made between him and her husband, and willingly to grant that to
reason, which she would be constrained to yield to force; That she and her son
would find it a greater advantage to them to acquiesce to what the late King
had concluded with mature deliberation, then to draw upon Hungary the mischiefs
and evils of an obstinatly sought for war. That himself was ready to perform
all he had promised, and to use her with favor more then ordinary. The Queens
answer to the Earl was, that her sex, her age, and her grief, rendered her
incapable to fall upon any resolution in a business of so great importance,
till she had the advice of the King her Father; and therefore entreated
Ferdinand to allow her some few months for that effect. That the Emperor
Charles his Brother and Himself, would reap but little honor, to make war on a
woman drowned in tears, and a Child swadled in his Craddle. This answer did not
at all please Ferdinand, who immediately sent Leonard, Baron of Velts with an
army to bring her to reason. The Queen in this extremity sends Ambassadors to
the Port, who were well received by Soliman, and graciously dispatched. They
returned with an embroidered scarlet robe, a Mace of Iron, the Pommel of which
was of Gold; a Shable, the sheath whereof was set with precious stones, as
tokens of his Amity and Protection. And at the same time, ordered all the
Governors of the neighbor places, to draw to the field without delay, to
succor the Queen. While these things are a doing, Lasco who had changed his
Master and taken himself to Ferdinands service, and was then his Ambassador at
Constantinople, demanded of the Sultan the Kingdom of Hungary, upon the same
conditions which were granted before to John Zapoliha: which proposition did
displease the Turk so much, that he clapped the Ambassador in prison, and said,
he deserved to die, for offering to mock him. Soliman having absolutely refused
Ferdinands demands, and sending strong supplys to Queen Isabel, Hungary became
the Theater of most horrible confusions; and was dyed with the promiscuous
blood of Germans, Turks and Hungarians. Rogendorff a new General of Ferdinands,
beseegeth Buda, This siege put Soliman on his way to raise it: But he might
have saved himself the labor, for his forces had done the work before his
arrival. Rogendorff having lost twenty thousand men, saved himself by flight.
The Turk notwithstanding keeps on his Journey, and being come near the City,
sends Presents to the young King. But afterward, desiring to have satisfaction
for the great charge and trouble, he and his forces had been at, he desired the
Queen to send her son to him, assuring her, he demanded it for no other reason,
then to oblige his children to love the young King more tenderly. At the same
time his messengers had order to tell her, the cause why the Grand Seigneur did
not give her self a visit, was, that he would not do any thing that might bring
a blemish upon her reputation. The Queen returned her humble thanks to the
Sultan for his civility; but wavered in her resolution, whether she would send
her son to him, or not. George Martinusias told her, that she neither might or
could refuse it. Overcome by invincible necessity, she puts him in a craddle,
worthy such a child, and having commanded his Nurse, and some other Matrones,
and a great many Lords to accompany him, she sends him to the Turkish camp.
Soliman to do him honor, caused meet him with a gallant troop of horse, he
looked upon him, embraced him, courted and dandled him, and caused his children
do so also. And in the mean time caused seize one of the ports of the Town, by
which his troops entered, and secured all the streets of the city. Then were
the Citizens commanded to deliver up all their arms, if they desired to save
their lives, which was instantly done without any noise, This being past,
Soliman sent back the young King to his mother, but kept the Lords who had
convoyed him. The Queen seeing her Town and Officers of State in the Turks
power, laments, weeps and prays; but her lamentations, tears and prayers
availed not, nor did hinder the Infidel to put it to the debate in his Divan,
whether he should keep the Kingdom of Hungary for himself, or restore it to the
young King?


P. The great Turk is so absolute and formidable to his subjects, that I
presume in his Councels, all speak according to his humor and inclination.


G. It was not so here, for all the opinions (which were several) were well
debated and considered; neither did Soliman fall upon the election of the most
unreasonable result. Mahomet and Ustrofi, were of opinion, that the Sultan
should carry the King to Constantinople, and with him the principal Hungarians:
That he should place a Governor in Buda, who using the people which loved
liberty, with moderation and sweetness, might bring them piece and piece, and
by degrees, to receive the Ottoman yoke; and in the mean time, permit them to
enjoy their goods. Rustan, Solimans son in law, gave a more honorable advice,
persuading him to keep his promise, wherein he was so deeply engaged: that the
violation of it, could not but bring with it the irrecoverable loss of his
honor and reputation. But Iahaoglis Basha of Belgrade, void both of honesty and
humanity, advised his Master, to rid himself, once for all, of the necessity to
come so often and so far to relieve a woman and a child. He represented to him
the impossibility, the mother and her son would meet with, to resist the
Germans without the forces of his Highness, and consequently his troubles
should be endless. He desired him to remember, that within these twenty years,
he had marched into Hungary five several times, to his infinite charges and
hazard of his person. The first time, to reduce Belgrade to his obedience,
which before was a den of thieves. The second, to revenge an affront done to
his Ambassadors, to which he sacrificed King Lewis, and that then he had given
with a prodigious prodigality, the Kingdom to a person, who was considerable
for nothing, but for the mischief he had done to the Ottoman armies. The third
to succor the said King against Ferdinand of Austria, and at the said time he
had shaken and wasted Germany by the siege of Vienne; and by his roads and
cavalcades, which brought threescore thousand Christians to chains and fetters.
The fourth, in regard his Highness retreat had encouraged the same Ferdinand to
attack King John, with hopes to wrest his Kingdom from him, he was forced to
return and relieve him. And the fifth time, for these affairs concerning which
the present question was. This Basha who had been present at all these
expeditions, did exaggerate the evils that his master had endured, the great
and vast waste of treasure, the great and many persons he had lost, and the
obligation he had laid upon himself, to neglect all his other affairs for this
alone. And concluded, that war being only made to procure the means to live in
peace, the Sultan should reduce into a Province, a Kingdom which he had so
often taken and defended. He should send the Queen to her father Sigismond King
of Pole. He should carry the child to Constantinople to be bred in the
Mohammedan Law. He should put the whole Nobility to the sword, and raze all
their forts and strong holds; transport a number of families to Asia, and keep
the rest in subjection with sufficient guarrisons.


P. This last spoke like a true Turk, for they are all cruel and merciless, and
sworn enemies to Christians.


G. Jahaoglis advised nothing, but what Soliman might have done, and what many
of his predecessors would have done, in the like occasion. But he resolved for
all that to use greater moderation. He left a strong guarrison in Buda,
entreating the Queen to be satisfied with what he did, and to retire her self
with her son to Lippa, and reign over Transilvany, in the neighborhood of her
father the King of Poles Dominions. And gave her assurance of the affection he
would ever keep for her son: He ordered some troops of his own guards to convoy
her, and caused furnish her with wagons, chariots and beasts for carriage, to
transport all the movables she had. The Queen perceiving the necessity of her
departure, endeavored to seem willing to go from a place, where it was not in
her power to stay longer. Some noblemen of the Country followed her joyfully,
as if they had been delivered out of prison. The Transilvanians swore fealty to
their young Prince, with the Turks consent. And remembering, that his father
John had governed them mildly, and with much moderation the space of thirty
years; they promised to the son a perfect obedience, without constraint. The
affairs of Hungary being in this condition, King Ferdinand would gladly have
appeased the Turk, whom he much apprehended; and for that purpose, he directed
Presents to him worthy of him who sent them, and of him who was to receive
them. There was besides other things, a great cup of pure gold, enriched with
precious stones, and an horologe of silver, of an admirable workmanship. It was
a globe, which before had honored the Cabinet of Maximilian Ferdinands
grandfather. It show, besides the hours, the course of the Planetes, with the
distance of the Sun and Moon, imitating the fabric of the world, as far as art
could reach. And the motion of all did not terminate, till a whole year went
about.


P. Did these Presents produce any good effects? or did they acquire to
Ferdinand the tranquillity he hoped for?


G. Soliman was extremely well pleased with the globe, and looked upon it with
much delight* as one who had some skill in Astronomy, but it did not oblige him
to repay any civility. Ferdinands Ambassadors demanded the Kingdom of Hungary,
upon these conditions, which were granted formerly to John Zapoliha. Which
being very honorable for Soliman, and advantageous to his Estates, there were
strong appearances he should have granted them: But the contrare appeared by
the answer delivered to them, out of Rustan Basha's own mouth, which was this;
That his Highness would grant peace to their Master, upon these terms, that he
should deliver up all these places which appertained to Lewis the second: That
henceforward, he should not come near the Frontiers of Hungary. That the House
of Austria should be obliged, to pay Soliman such a tribute, as he should be
pleased to impose, to preserve the honor of the Ottoman Majesty, which
notwithstanding should be but a small one, in comparison of the great pains and
travel the Grand Seigneur had taken, and the immense charges he had been at in
the war. And if these conditions seemed heavy to Ferdinand, then Soliman would
make use of his power to force him to that accommodation. After this final
answer, the Turk returned to Constantinople, having first wasted and spoiled
some Provinces. This proud and imperious procedure of Soliman, was looked upon
at Vienne, as a Declaration of the war. And therefore, Ferdinand appoints three
Generals, to oppose so formidable an enemy, and made application to George
Martinusias, who refused not to serve him. This Monk whom King John had chosen
to be Tutor to his son, prime Minister of Estate, and Director of all his
revenues, intending to tyrannize over his Master, and the Queen his Mother, had
constantly more strings to his bow, then one. And whatever he promised either
to the Queen, to the Turk, or the King of the Romans, it was only to serve
himself with the one of them against the other, and in the mean time, by his
dexterity, to keep the absolute power of the Government to himself. Such was
the ambition of this petty gentleman, who from a contemptible and underling
domestic of John Zapoliha's Mother, came to be a Monk, from an ignorant Monk,
to be King John's servant, and then Bishop of Varadine, and first Minister of
Estate, and could now suffer no equal. He possessed the Queen with fears, that
he would do her self a bad office, and dethrone her son. The just apprehension
of this danger, moved Queen Isabel to represent to Soliman, that the proud Monk
had demanded assistance of King Ferdinand, to bring about the design he had to
establish himself in the Throne, by the suppression, and perhaps the death of
her son. Martenusias on the other hand, represents to Ferdinand; that having
had infinite obligations to the late King John, he could in gratitude do no
less, then employ all his power to procure the standing, welfare, honor and
utility of the son of so deserving a father. But that the quality of a Prelate
did oblige him much more to have an eye to the preservation of Christendom.
That he had to do with a fearful woman, who upon the least suspicion, would not
miss to implore the Turks succors. And if the Government were not taken out of
her hands, then undoubtedly Transilvany would fall in the Turks hands. To
obviate which, he entreated Ferdinand to offer the Queen a recompense to yield
up her Estates: and he conceived it would be prudently done, to offer to her
son, all these advantages which were offered to his father. Ferdinand, who knew
Martenusias well enough, made no doubt, but that he intended to cheat him; for
all that, he resolves to make his profit of the Monks craftiness. And
therefore, making fair weather with him, he praised his Christian zeal, and
conjured him to persevere in so laudable an intention, sends him some Canon,
and a thousand Horse paid for four months, Things tending thus to a change,
every one of the parties endeavored to make his advantage of the present
conjuncture of affairs: Ferdinand acquaints his brother the Emperor with all
that passed, and of the hopes he had to be a gainer, if he would be pleased to
assist him with his counsel and his forces. Charles relisheth the proposition,
and sends to his brother, John Baptista Castaldo, a Spaniard, a prudent and
valiant gentleman, whom he might entrust with the conduct of the whole design.
Queen Isabel of Iagello, who knew and apprehended the practices of Martenusias,
called a convocation of the Estates of the Country, to gain the good will of
the Nobility; thinking by this mean to preserve to her self and her son, that
rank and dignity which belonged to them. The Monk fearing the Estates should
fall upon some resolutions, which might diminish his greatness, makes all
possible haste to Agnabet, where the Diet was assembled, breaks it up, forces
the Queen to retire to Alba Julia, and commenceth the war against his Master.
While this is a doing, Castaldo arrives at Claudiopolis, which the Hungarians
call Calesvar, and the Germans, Clausemburg: from whence, in order to his
instructions, he entreats Martenusias to perform what he had promised to King
Ferdinand. This Prelate then knowing the Queens fears, went and paid her a
visit, show her her escapes, and exhorted her to an accommodation with
Ferdinand, to which she consents. To this effect, the Transilvanian Estates are
convocated at Claudiopolis, where Don Castaldo lets them see the Commission he
had to treat with the Queen. He endeavored to make it appear to her, that it
was purely impossible for her and her son to defend Transilvany against the
Turk. That for the good of Christendom, it would be expedient, perhaps
necessare for them both, to make a resignation of it to the King of the Romans.
And in lieu thereof, he promises to John Sigismund, the two Dutchies of Opeln
and Ratibore, the revenue whereof extended to five and twenty thousand ducats a
year, and Joanne the daughter of Ferdinand, with an hundred thousand crowns of
portion, and to the Queen fifty thousand crowns, with the payment of all her
debts. This was Castaldo's proffer.


P. When I consider Transilvany, I think this compensation was very
insignificant: yet it may be thought considerable enough, in regard by the
renunciation, the Queen and her son did fairly rid themselves of an inevitable
necessity to make war, either with the great Turk, or the House of Austria: and
the sex of Isabel, and the nonage of John Sigismund rendered them both
incapable for that. But did the Queen accept the proffers?


G. This courageous and prudent Princess being exceedingly desirous to free her
self from the yoke of Martenusias, acquiesced to what Ferdinand had offered,
and instantly delivered up all the Royal Ornaments to Castaldo, and entreated
that Spanish Lord to move the King of the Romans to perform without delay that
which was promised on his part, and immediately retired her self to Cassovia,
which was given her for a retreat, till the entiere execution of the Treaty.
Castaldo having now the Hungarian Crown in his hands, believed they should all
acknowledge his Master for King, and therefore desired the Transilvanians to
take the oath of fidelity to King Ferdinand, who unanimously did it, after
George Martenusias, who by the bargain had got the Archbishopric of
Strigonium, and a Cardinals hat, procured by the King of the Romans. The matter
having passed so, each party prepared for war, the Hungarian well knowing the
Turk would not so easily suffer a Province which had acknowledged his
Sovereignty, to fall in the hands of another without his consent. The event
made it appear they had made a right conjecture: for he enters Transilvany with
an army, but made a sorry progress, so long as Martenusias lived, or that the
Queen had any hopes that Ferdinand would observe the agreement she had made
with him. As to Friar George, it was observed he desired to serve the
Christians, without giving too much occasion of offense to the Turk; for at the
surrender of Lippa to Castaldo, he saved Ulmani Bey, whom they resolved to cut
in pieces; and protected within his Castle of Vivaria, him who received the
tribute which Transilvany paid to Soliman. These actions cost him his life;
for Castaldo having entered in a deep distrust of him got Mark-Antony Ferrero
his Secretary (who because of his charge had frequent access to him) to stob
him with a dagger. Sultan Soliman being informed of the death of Martenusias,
and of the oath the Transilvanians had made to the King of the Romans,
commanded Stephen Prince of Moldavia, the Governor of Buda, and some other
neighboring vassals of his, to take arms, and fall upon them. This order was no
sooner issued out of the Port, but it was put in execution. And Transilvany in
a short time had reason to say, that the death of one Tyrant had not delivered
it from slavery. Mean time Queen Isabel seeing she could not obtain the
performance of the promises were made to her, prayed the Grand Seigneur once
more to have pity of her son. Soliman either moved with compassion of the
widow Queen, or touched with his own interests, assists her powerfully, and
reduces the Transilvanians to that necessity, that they implored Ferdinand to
permit them to treat with Soliman in favor of John Sigismund. Ferdinand, though
much against his will, gave his consent. And they obtained for their Prince,
that same favor that was granted to John Zapoliha his father, for these
submissions, duties and tribute that it should please Soliman to impose on him.
This fell out in the year 1551. The Queen having entered in repossession of her
Estates, her brother Sigismund August mediated another treaty between Ferdinand
and her. By it she obtained more advantageous conditions then by the former
one. Her son should espouse Joanne the daughter of Ferdinand, and enjoy for
ever in Sovereignty for himself and his heirs, Transilvany, the County of
Abavivar, Muran, Huzth, Marmet, and a part of the revenue of the territories of
Ceregh, and of Ugocha.


P. I am of the opinion few Countries are to be found which have changed their
Masters so often as Transilvany. And I know not if I be obliged to believe, that
a King of the Romans, brother to one of the puissantest Emperors that ever
reigned in Germany, and father of so many children, should put on a resolution
to part with a Principality, which he had acquired, partly by consent, partly
by right, and partly by force.


G. I know that Potentats do not give away willingly that which they have
gained. It is notwithstanding true, that Ferdinand gave up that Sovereignty
whereof we speak, and that he permitted John Sigismund to do what he pleased in
Transilvany, except the assuming the tittle of King. Yea, the business was
carried on a greater length, for this Transilvanian supported by the Turks
forces, demanded that the Danube should divide Hungary and Transilvany, and
that the Kingdom of Hungary should be entailled to him and his successors, in
case the masculine line of the Austrain family should chance to be extinct.
This insolent demand vexed Ferdinand: he takes arms, and constrained the
Transilvanian Prince to be contented, that the river Tebiscus should be the
utmost bound of his Estates. This agreement displeased either Sigismund, or the
Great Turk, who prompted him to act, because he might not enter publicly on
the stage himself, in regard of a truce he had made with Ferdinand for eight
years. Hereupon John Sigismund denounces war against Maximilian the second,
who succeeded his father Ferdinand, and took Zackwar, Hudad and Corazzo, and
had taken Cassovia also, if the rigor of the Winter season had not hindered
him. But these victories were short lived, Maximilian grievously offended with
these insolences, takes arms, and attacks him vigorously, regains what he had
lost, and forces his enemy to a Peace Soliman being returned from Malta, where
fortune had not favored him, begins a new war in Hungary, where he dies at the
siege of Zigeth, which was surrendered to Basha Mustafa, his Lieutenant
General, the 7 of September 1566. Selimus who succeeded to his father, made a
truce with the Hungarians for eight years, and in it comprehended the
Transilvanian, who by the recommendation of his Uncle Sigismund August King of
Pole, got an addition to his Dominions, of some Territories which the Emperor
yielded to him, and the town of Guila, which he bought from the Turk, in the
year 1568. John Sigismund perceiving the die of war run favorably for him,
offered to corrupt some Hungarians, to carry on his designs with more advantage
in that Kingdom. But his endeavors and practices dyed with himself in the year
1570. and in the thirty and third year of his age: And in him, and with him,
ended the race of Zapoliha. He had chosen Gaspar Bekez for his successor, but
he was rejected by the Grandees, who put in his place Stephen Battori, on the
14. of May 1571. This Prince acknowledged the Grand Seigneur for his Sovereign,
as his Predecessor had done. And being elected King of Pole, after the retreat
of Henry of Valois, he made it appear that virtue and fortune are not
incompatible in one and the same subject. This brave Gentleman was within a
very few years, a Baron, a Prince, and a King, and eminently worthy of the
highest of these degrees. Being chosen King of Polen, he delivered up
Transilvany to his brother Christopher Battori; who not finding the House of
Austria favorable to him, because his brother Stephen in the election of Pole,
was preferred to Maximilian the second, was forced to seek support at
Constantinople. This was a most virtuous Prince, who having suppressed the
boldness of Bekez, who endeavored to supplant him, reigned gloriously till his
death which put him in his grave 1581. To him succeeded his son Sigismund,
being yet a child. Stephen Battori his Uncle, King of Pole, having appointed
him three Tutors, sowed jealousy amongst them, which gave him shortly occasion
to thrust them all three out, and to put the person and affairs of his Nephew
in the hands of John Geczi, Governor of Varadin. This was a gallant and an
orderly Gentle man, who quickly made himself known to be a man of courage, as
well as conduct. Scarce had he laid his hands on the reins of the Government of
his pupils Estate, when King Stephen dies in the year 1586. The powerful
factions which bandied one against another in Pole for the election of a new
King, gave Geczi an opportunity to show what worth was in him. He joined his
forces with these of Samoisky, who favored Sigismund of Sweden against
Maximilian of Austria, his Competitor, who was beaten, taken, and forced to
quite his pretensions to the Swed. In the mean time, the Turk made a fierce war
in Hungary against the Emperor Rodolp the second. And though the Officers and
Commanders of his Imperial Majesty's forces were men of sufficient worth, and
gallantery, who sold to the Sultan all the victories he obtained at a very dear
rate, yet in the year 1595. Sinan Basha Lieutenant General to Selimus, reduced
to his obedience the admirable fort of Javarin, at that time deemed impregnable.


P. I have heard say that Sinan vaunted, that he had brought the Emperor
Rodolph to the necessity to beg Peace, by the loss of that wonderful strength.
But Sansovia says, that Sinan lost there fifty thousand men, and that a little
after the war began again hotter then ever.


G. The Emperor had too much courage to seek Peace after so considerable a
loss: He knew he could obtain none, but that which would have been exceeding
disadvantageous: and for that reason he resolved to continue the war, and so
sought the help of all those who were able to give it; and got Sigismund
Battori Prince of Transilvany, to be of his party. This Prince was easily moved
to be pertaker of so noble a design, because he was a person of a great spirit
and courage; as also, because he thought it a shameful thing for a Christian to
join with these who aimed at nothing so much as the entire subversion of
Christianity. He concluded therefore a Treaty with the Emperor, whereof these
were the principal Articles.

That Sigismund taking arms against the Turk, it should not be permitted to the
Emperor to make Peace without him. And if the matter should come to an
accommodation, the Principalities of Valachia, Moldavia, and Transylvania,
should be comprehended in the Treaty. That Sigismund should enjoy the name, the
honors and prerogatives of a Prince of the Empire. That an honorable rank
amongst them should be assigned to him. That the Emperor should give him a
Princess of the House of Austria, for his Consort. That as long as the war
lasted, the Emperor should furnish him every year one hundred thousand florins
of the Rhine, which will amount to thirty and three thousand pounds sterlin.
And should entertain to him a good Body of Germane horse and foot. That all
these places that Sigismond should take in the war should remain in propriety
to him, and these that should be of his issue, of both sexes. That if the
mischance should fall out, that the Turk should by force of arms expel him his
Dominions of Transilvany, the Emperor should be obliged to assign him as many
Lands within the Empire, as should be sufficient to entertain him like a
Prince. That there should a general act of oblivion pass for him, and all those
who had served under the Turks Banner, against his Imperial Majesty. That the
Prince should enter in possession of all these Lands which he enjoyed before in
Illyria and Hungary. That the Emperor should provide him with canon, powder,
and other munitions of war. That the Transilvanian should take the field with
fourscore thousand fighting men, Valachians, Moldavians, and Transilvanians.

This agreement was sealed with the marriage of Prince Sigismund, with Mary
Christine daughter of Charles Archduke of Grats, with the Order of the Golden
Fleece, which Philip the second of Spain sent to him. By Pope Clement the
eight's present of a Hallowed Hat and sword, and by a great mass of moneys,
which was sent to him from several places of Christendom. This League did much
satisfy many great Potentats; but did so displease and exasperate Sultan
Amurath, the Princes of Sigismunds own family, and the greatest part of the
Transilvanians, that presently followed terrible invasions, troubles, and
murders. Upon which, the Prince called these Nobles to him, who he knew to be
affectionate to his person and interests; and having all his thoughts taken up
with the meditation of horrible revenges against his kinsmen, and the Great Men
of Transilvany, he summoned his Estates to meet at Claudiopolis. There it was
that he put to death Balthazar Battori his Uncle, and many other Lords, and
declared them guilty of rebellion, and leze Majesty: and amongst the first,
Stephen and Andro Battori, his cousin germans, the sons of Balthazar. At the
same time, Sigismund thinking he had extinguished the fire of the Rebellion,
caused publish through all his Territories, the League which he had made with
the Emperor against the Ottoman family; and exhorted and commanded all his
subjects to take arms, to deliver themselves from the tyranny and slavery;
under which they had so long groaned. A few days after, he brought fifty
thousand men in arms; and having provided them with sufficient and able
Officers, he advanced with them toward the Danube, to act the first part of
the Tragedy. Now he is in the fields, Fortune sides with him; he takes seven
ships laden with silver, and other rich merchandises, which Sinan Basha was to
employ to corrupt the Officers of Vienne, to betray it to his Master the Grand
Seigneur. This good luck put Sigismund in a capacity to beseege Themiswar. But
he had scarce begun to attack it, when he receives intelligence, that the
Tartars were wasting and making havoc of his Territories and subjects, which
called to him for their defense. Having raised his siege, he marches against
them, but finding them lodged in an inaccessible place, where valor could not
avail him, he has recours to policy: he fires theirs quarters, and having
smoaked them out, gives them a total overthrow, without any difficulty, and
with no considerable loss on his side.


P. Thus far Prince Sigismund Battori was fortunate and gallant, and if it were
not, that the death of his Uncle, and some other Transilvanian Lords, seem to
argue him of some cruelty; I see not wherein his conduct can be blamed. I would
gladly know, if fortune accompanied him to his grave, and if he left any
children behind him to inherit his virtue and Estates?


G. I come softly to that ye desire to know: The Valachians and Moldavians
admiring the Transilvanians victories, would gladly share with them: and
therefore, make a conjunction of their forces. Sultan Amurath seeing that his
losses occasioned this revolt, endeavored to set his affairs in better order,
and to that effect, commands the Basha of Themiswar to attack the rebels, and
make them feel the rigor of fire and sword. The Basha takes the field, but is
defeated by Prince Sigismund toward the latter end of the year 1594. This
victory of the Prince was seconded by another, which he obtained by the
overthrow of twenty thousand Tartars, who were returning home laden with spoil
and booty. About that time died Amurath the second, leaving Mahomet the third
to succeed him; who coming to the Crown about thirty years of age, gave great
largesses to his Janissaries, and made huge preparations for the war against the
Christians. And understanding, that the Cossacks and Podolians had entered in
League with the Transilvanians; he sent an Army of one hundred thousand Turks,
under the command of Sinan, whom he commanded to chastise these rebels
exemplarly. Sinan prepares himself to give a full obedience to the commands of
his impersous Master; and while he studies to gain friends in Moldavia, he
gathers a formidable Army for the execution of his design. But all his
preparations came to naught by the industrious vigilance of Sigismund, who
brought up Sinans rear so close, that as he repassed the Danube, the bridge
overcharged with numbers of flying Turks, broke, and Sinan falling himself in
the river, was in danger to have born company with an infinite number of his
Army who were there drowned* This great action joined to many more, in all
which the prudence, valor, conduct and good fortune of Prince Sigismund
appeared to admiration, acquired him the name of Invincible: And forced Sultan
Mahomet to take upon himself the conduct of his Army. You might see him then in
the field in person with two hundred thousand fighting men, and these dreadful
forces gave him the confidence to advance as far as Agria. There it was that
the Archduke Maximilian and Prince Sigismund, by the custom they had gotten to
overcome, contemning the Turks great numbers, gave him battle; which had in all
appearance bettered the condition of Christendom, if the infamous desire of
spoil and booty had not made victory, which hovered over the Christian Army,
take wings and fly to the Infidels. We lost twenty thousand men, and the Turk a
great many more: but after that time, it seemed that fortune, which had gone
hand in hand with Prince Sigismund, turned her back upon him; for forgetting
his former valor and magnanimity, he resolved to make an exchange of his
Transilvanian Principality, with some Territories in Silesia. And to come the
better to his purpose, he brought as many of his forces together as possibly he
could, to make his last attempt. He lays siege to Themiswar, and was forced to
raise it, as he had done before: Not long after, Ibrahim Basha beseegeth
Varadin. Basta the Emperors Lieutenant General entreats Sigismund for the
relief of it, to join his forces with these over which he commanded, which he
promised to do, but proved not a man of his word. After that there was nothing
to be seen in him, but irresolution and unconstancy. He caused proclaim his
Cousine Cardinal Battori, Prince of Transilvany: but not being able to maintain
him in it, he resigned to the Emperor Rodolph all his Estates, who gave him the
Dutchies of Ratibore and Opeln for his life time, with a yearly pension of
fifty thousand Crowns, and a Cardinals Hat, which the Emperor promised to
procure to him from the Pope.


P. I thought the Transilvanian Prince had been married, and you say, he sought
to be a Cardinal.


G. I told you before, that Sigismund Battori, Prince of Transilvany was
married to Mary Christine of Austria, but being as great a coward in the
rencounters of Venus, as he was brave in those of Mars, he declared himself to
be impotent, and so his marriage was declared null. But I have not yet told
you, that after infinite miseries, which his change procured to Transylvania,
Valachia and Moldavia, resigned by him to Rodolph: and after that he had
repented himself of that folly, and given sufficient testimonies of his
unconstancy, he died at Prague the 17. of March 1603.

His death did not at all confirm the possession of his Estates to the Emperor,
for the Turk never wanted these who practiced for him in the Country; and the
people believing, that their liberty was infringed by the agreement made
between the Emperor Rodolp, and their late Prince, there was not any content
with his present condition: George Basta, the Emperors Lieutenant General
tyrannized over the Country. The Turks, the Tartars the Polonians had made
Transilvany the theater of a long and bloody tragedy; so that the people longed
and breathed for nothing so much, as for their former condition. In end,
Stephen Boskay, having chaced away the Decemvirate which the Emperor had
entrusted with the Government, established himself into it more by the good
will of the people, and by these faults and disorders which the Emperors
Generals committed, then by his own proper forces. The commonalities complained
grievously of the Inquisition, of the insolence of strangers, and of the
abrogation of their ancient privileges and immunities. Boskay fomented the
discontents, and by aggravating the faults of the Government, he took a
powerful and deep footing in the possession of the Principality. For this cause
Gabriel Bethlem (to whom the Turk had given hopes of the province) seeing it was
not time for him to have such thoughts, submitted himself to Boskay. But in the
mean time, joining himself with Bechtes, Basha of Themiswar, endeavored to
surprise Lippa, but was near surprised himself, and forced to fly in his shirt;
fear made him forget his breeches behind him, and in them the treaty of his
conspiracy. This paper coming to the hands of Count Belljoyoso, put a flea in
his ear, and seeking for a remedy for this disease, he found it to be
incurable. In fine, Boskay lost no time; he beats Beljoyoso and reduces him to
a great extremity; and puts himself in possessiou of many places: And having
the favor of the Nobility, the Towns and the Commons; he found himself in a
condition to speak like a Master. But fortune, who delights to make her self to
be admired, turned suddenly on Basta's side, who having obtained some
victories, exhorted Boskay to lay down Arms, and submit himself to the Imperial
yoke. But he who pretended to no less then the whole Principality, made answer.
That if they suffered him not to enjoy Transilvany; if they did not place
Hungarians to be Governors of the Provinces and Towns, if they did not send
their militia of strangers sum where else, if they did not permit the free
exercise of his Religion: He was resolved to prefer war to peace. Fortune who
is frequently a friend to rashness, takes Boskays part, and made him surmount
all the difficulties he rencountered with in this war. Basta, who most opposed
him, saw his victories followed with an entire disobedience: his sojors
mutines, and tells him, he paid them with nothing but words. They set upon him
in his lodging, and these who were appointed to be a guard to nine and twenty
wagons laden with money, cloth and other things robbed them, and went away;
some to Pole, and others to the Enemy: Transilvany being delivered of the fear
of Bastas Army, many of the hundred towns of it were taken by Boskays friends,
the rest rendered themselves to him before they were summoned. This progress of
Boskay forced the Emperor to send Demetrius Nabradi Bishop of Vesprin, and
Sigismund Forgas to treat with him. These Deputies found that prosperity had
made him insolent; all the answer they got from him was, That if they had come
from the Nobility of Hungary, they should have been very welcome; but if they
came from the Emperor, they might return, for he was so far advanced, that he
could not retire. This language was so well understood by the Emperors
deputies, that they knew they had no more to do there, and that Transilvany had
changed its Master. And in effect, the Estates of the Province being assembled
at Kerene, Boskay was confirmed in the usurpation he made of the Principality:
upon condition, that he granted a tolleration of the exercise of the Roman,
Lutheran and Swisse Religions. Then under him, Sigismund Ragoski was made
Governor of the Country, and Valentin Homanay General of the troops. The Grand
Seigneur who had kept a watchful eye upon all these commotions, sent a Chiaux
to Boskay, who presented him with a Mace, a Shable, and a Cloth of State, to
confirm him in the possession of his new Principality. In acknowledgement of
which favor, Boskay sent to the Port Stephen Corlat, and George Kikedi, to
assure the Turk of his fidelity, and to present him with the marks of his
homage and obedience.


P. They say, this Embassy of Boskay was infamous, because of the present his
Deputies made to the Great Turk, of some Germane boys and girls.


G. These who dare invade the Estates of another Prince, and sacrifice to their
ambition infinite numbers of mankind, feels no sting of conscience at all, to
plunge some poor innoce^ts in unredeemable slavery* Machiavel says, That men
can hardly become perfectly and entirely wicked. But Boskay gave him the ly;
for having endeavored to take, and taken these places which gave lawful
obedience to the Emperor, his wickedness and felony went a greater length: for
though he, and his party, did mask their Rebellion with the pretext of
Religion, yet they made it no scruple of conscience to accompany the Turk in
his courses and roads that he made in Moravia, where having put a world of poor
Christians to the sword, he sent four thousand to the chain. Never was seen any
zeal like that of these religious troops. They sold to the Turks numbers of
their Christian brethren. And as their crime had no precedent, so that which
followed on it, was an unheard of prodigy. Blood was seen to run out of the
gold that they received for the Christians, which they had sold to the
Infidels. These civilities and marks of friendship which Boskay paid to our
common Enemy, were followed by an agreement between them. The Turk offered him
the tittle of King of Hungary: but Boskay fearing a change of Fortune, refused
the favor, alleging the Emperor had been lawfully crowned. But by the accord,
Boskay was made proprietare of Transilvany, and it made free for ten years of
the tribute it used to pay formerly: and that time being expired, it was to
send yearly ten thousand ducats, in token of vassallage. Things passing so in
Europe, the Basha of Aleppo and Caramania, cut out some work for the Sultan in
Asia. For this reason, desiring to be free of the obligation lay on him to
assist Boskay, he gave him permission to agree with the Emperor. On the other
side, his Imperial Majesty being weary of so long and chargeable a war, and
perceiving that Boskay had no children, and therefore a change of the
Government would quickly ensue, he agreed easily to all was desired of him. The
principal Articles of this Peace, were these: An act of oblivion to be passed
on all sides. That the Religions of Rome, Augsburgh and Switzerland, should be
tolerated through all Hungary. The Palatine of Hungary should be elected by
votes. That the Government of all places should be given to Hungarians, except
Comore and Javarin, which the Emperor might bestow upon Germans. That all
Transilvany, and that part of Hungary which belonged to Sigismund Battori,
should be given to Boskay, and that thereto should be added Zacmar, Ugoc and
Totkai, with Bereg. That endeavors should be used to make Peace with the Turk:
and if it could not be obtained, then Boskay should join his forces with the
Emperor against him. This treaty was approved and sworn by the principal Lords
of Hungary, Bohemia, Austria, Silesia, Moravia and Lusatia. Neither did any
make difficulty to sign it, except Melchior Clesel, at that time Bishop of
Newstadt, and since Cardinal; because, said he, no succors ought to be given
to an Heretic; yet at length he gave his consent. This Peace was followed with
a Truce of twenty years between the Emperor and the Turk. By this Accord, the
Grand Seigneur was obliged to call the Emperor, Father, and the Emperor to give
to the Sultan, the tittle of Son. They should both be called Emperors. The
controversies that might in the future arise between them should be determined
by the Governors of Javarin and of Buda. All forts and strong holds should
continue as they were for the present: neither should any new ones be built by
either of the parties. The Emperor should give to the Turk two hundred thousand
crowns at one time: And after that, they should send presents one to the other
every third year, by their Ambassadors, to continue the firmness of their
friendship This Transaction was made in the year 1606. and followed by the
sickness and death of Boskay, who declared for his successor Valantin Homonay,
but the Estates of Transilvany any preferred to him Sigismund Ragosky. But he
loving his repose and quiet more then honor, refused the offer; But seeing it
would be forced upon him, he accepted it with as much reluctance, as he could
have against an honorable slavery.


P. Though they say that Crowns are heavy, yet it falls out seldom that any
refuses them; and if I be not deceived, the moderation of Ragoski was a sure
token, that he deserved to govern.


G. There is no less glory in refusing Crowns, then in endeavoring to deserve
them; and I avouch unto you, that if I did not know that this refusal proceeded
merely out of contempt of honor, I should say it proceeded from fear. The
Emperor Rodolph repented he had agreed to the tolleration of more Religions
then the Roman Catholic. The promises of the Persian Ambassador, with the
rebellion of Gambolah, who had drawn on his side Aleppo, Damascus and Tripoli,
made his resolutions waver in order to the observance of the Treaties. This
gave occasion to the Hayducks to continue their insolences, and to the Arch
Duke Matthias, to take arms to reduce them to obedience. Which being done,
Matthias resolves to pursue his design, so long as he was in a capacity to do
it with an Army: which proved the strongest Argument he could use to persuade
his brother Emperor Rodolph to resign Hungary and Austria to him. Having then
the power, he had not the scruple that Rodolph had, but instantly signed the
Treaty of Vienne, and added one article more to it, which was the expulsion of
the Jesuits out of Hungary, and received homage from Ragosky for his
Principality: Shortly after, Ragosky gave an infallible demonstration of his
contempt of sublunare greatness, for being in peaceable possession of
Transilvany, equally cherished by Matthias and the Great Turk; he resigned his
Principality to Gabriel Battori, when he had reigned but one year. Achmet
Emperor of Turkey confirmed the Election, and Matthias did not oppose it.
Battori was neither so moderate nor so modest, as Ragoski thought he should
have been; his insatiable lust rendered him insupportable: and the honor of the
most virtuous Matrons and Virgins, not being assured under the Domination of a
Prince so horribly debauched, they conspired against his life, and assassinated
him in the year 1616. Bethlem Gabor, who had contributed much to his death,
seized on his Estates; and to appease Matthias, who was then Emperor, and
Sultan Achmet, who were equally offended with him, he promised to the first a
reasonable obedience, and delivered some Places in the hands of the second.


P. I believe, Gabor be very famous in the History of our time, and that he
gave no small trouble to the Emperor Ferdinand the second.


G. This Transilvanian, made it his study all his life to fish in troubled
waters; but his fortune being much inferior to that of Ferdinand, at the long
run he was forced to submit to him: mean time, let us see, how things went in
these parts, during the reign of Ferdinand. This Arch Duke was the most zealous
Catholic in the World, and one who could least suffer the diversity of
Religions, which his predecessors had permitted in their Territories. His zeal
and good fortune, moved his Cousine Matthias to prefer him to all the other
Princes of his family. And intending the succession of the Empire for him, he
caused him to be acknowledged King of Hungary and Bohemia before he died.
Ferdinand begins his reign with the oppression of the Protestants, he caused
shut up some of their Churches, and demolished others in Bohemia; He recalled
the Jesuits to Hungary, and rejected all these articles which favored any other
Religion, then the Roman Catholic, in all the Treaties that had been made by
the former Emperors with the Hungarians and Bohemians. This action, which bred
much evil blood in a Body formidable at that time, gave occasion to the
Bohemians to reject Ferdinand, and to elect Frederick Prince Palatine of the
Rhine, to be their King. And Ferdinand was forced to see in a short time the
Bohemians and Hungarians before the walls of his capital City of Vienne. At the
same time, Gabor clothes himself (as all rebels do) with the pretext of
Religion, and for the maintenance thereof, enters in a League with the
Bohemians, and sets an Army a foot of eighteen thousand men, and eighteen
pieces of canon, and with it enters Hungary; where finding men's spirits
prepared for rebellion, his progress proved successful, which furnished him
with the confidence to proclaim himself King. At this time, Ferdinand was at
Franckfurt, where he was elected Emperor. This high dignity administered to him
both authority and forces, neither did he think of any thing else, then shortly
to recover the Kingdoms which he had well near lost, and to humble those, who
durst so insolently attack him. He spoke loud of the wrong, dishonor and
injustice was done him: he remonstrated to the Electors of the Empire, to the
Kings of Great Britain, and France, the just right he had on his side to look
for his own. He drew to his party all the Roman Catholics of Germany, and the
Elector of Saxe also, who was one of the great Pillars of the Protestants, and
endeavored withal to keep the swords of strangers within their sheaths. Not
long after, the Elector Palatine, whose forces were very considerable, was put
to flight; Gabor made more resistance, and had put the Emperors affairs in a
bad enough condition, if his associats had done their duty better at Prague.
Count Dampiere General of the Imperialists lost his life, viewing the Castle of
Presburg, in which Gabor had put a garrison: And Charles of Longueval, Count of
Buckoy* having reduced Moravia to the Emperors obedience, and made a great
progress in Hungary, died there, after he had received sixteen wounds. The
death of this great person gave means to Gabor to recover many places, to
dissipate those who opposed his designs, and to overrun all the Country. But
at length seeing his Confederates beaten, and his own forces scattered, he
desired peace, and obtained it in the year 1622, upon these conditions; That he
should retain all Transilvany, Tokai, Cassovia, and seven other Lordships of
Hungary. That he should deliver up the Hungarian Crown, and all the other Towns
that he kept in that Kingdom. That he should absolutely quite the name of
King, and content himself with the tittle of Prince of the Empire, with the
Dutchies of Opeln and Ratibore, and that he should re-possess the Jesuits of
these places they enjoyed before the war. This peace lasted not long. Gabor
gives Vaczia to the Turk, who sends him fourscore thousand men, which the Count
of Torn had obtained for him. With these he once more invades Hungary,
alleging the conditions of the Treaty of Odinburg were not kept to him: That
his Religion was oppressed, and that the money they owed him was not paid him.
The Emperor desirous to be at an end of this business, caused remonstrate to
the Grand Seigneur, that Gabor did but abuse his authority and his forces; and
that he was invaded by him without any reason. To his words Ferdinand added the
powerful arguments of arms, and by them constrains his enemy to an
accommodation less advantageous then the first. By this Treaty in the year
1624, Gabor lost the tittle of Prince of the Empire, and some of these
Territories in Hungary, which had been granted him by the former Treaty.
Shortly after, this restless spirit joined his forces with these of Charles
Ernest Earl of Mansfield. But forty thousand Tartars, who were coming to him,
being defeated by the Polonians, he left him to go and take care of his own
Estates. And having only for the space of four years enjoyed the company of
Catharine, Daughter of John Sigismund Elector of Brandeburg, he died in the
year 1628. having suffered incredible torment in his feet; and at his death he
made it known that he honored the Emperor and the Turk equally, for he left to
every one of them a horse, whose Caparison was garnished with rich stones, and
forty thousand ducats in speces. He left to the Princess his wife one hundred
thousand pieces of Gold, every piece of the value of ten shillings sterlin, one
hundred thousand dollars in silver, and one hundred thousand Florins, and three
Lordships, which she was to enjoy during her life.


P. This Princess having above four score thousand pound sterlin in coined
money, and Jewels suitable to a personage of her quality, had enough to help a
younger brother of a noble family; and it is probable, it was for that, that
Francis Charles Duke of Saxon Lauemburg married her some years after the death
of her first husband. But I would gladly know who succeeded to Bethlem Gabor,
and what fell out in that Country after his death?


G. When the heir of a Principality is not certainly known, the death of the
last Prince is ever followed with trouble; Princess Catharine, the widow of
Gabor, not having learned the Art to reign, nominated Stephen Czac to be her
husbands successor, and entreated the Turk to confirm him. But this Election
displeased all the Transilvanians, who divided in two factions, the one
favoring Stephen Bethlem, the brother of their late Prince, and the other
inclining to George Ragoski. The first was so misfortunate, that his own
children rose up against him: the second having overcome all opposition, made
an agreement with the Emperor, and gained the favor of the Turk, and so enjoyed
Transilvany peaceably, yet his good fortune was not constant. Stephen Bethlem
who had yielded all his pretentions to him, chanced to kill one of his kinsmen;
and fearing the punishment he deserved, endeavored to shun it by a greater
crime. He demanded assistance from the Port, from whence he received an army of
Turks and Tartars, with which he beseeged Giula. Ragoski detesting the
infidelity of the faithless Turk, submits himself to the House of Austria, who
assisted him with three Regiments of foot and one of horse: with these and his
own troops, he routed five and twenty thousand Turks near Szabuta. At length
Bethlem returning to his duty, was received in favor, and Ragoski confirmed in
his Principality by the Sultan. While these things are a doing, Ferdinand the
second dies, and left his son Ferdinand the third his successor to the Kingdom
of Hungary, and all his other Estates. This Prince having a most dangerous war
to manage in Germany, was exceeding desirous to preserve peace in Hungary, yet
it was broke by the advice of these who counseled him to discharge the
Lutherans the use of a Church they had at Presburg, and to revoke all he had
promised in their favors, This stroke of State relished not well with these
Politicians, who thinks good actions lose their price, when they are done
unseasonably. There is nothing that more exasperates men's minds, then the
violence that is offered to their consciences, and there are few things in the
world which need more circumspection, then does the work of reforming an
Estate. The Lutherans of Presburgh, who could never endure the loss of their
Church, or recover it without the assistance of strangers, call to Ragoski for
help. This Prince fearing to embark without biscuit, and to enter in a war, in
which he could not rationally expect much assistance from the Turk, who was
kept busy in Asia, prayed the Emperor, and his Concel, to perform what was
promised to the Hungarians. But he received no satisfactory answer from the
Emperor, who seemed to contemn both his prayers and his power. Therefore
conceiving he was more obliged to his Religion, then to his Bene-factor, he
suffered himself to be persuaded by the Ambassadors of the Confederates, who
earnestly solicited his alliance: And having denounced war to the Emperor, he
enters Hungary with seventy thousand fighting men. And that the world might
see he began not the war without reason, he declares by his Manifest, that
since the year 1619* they had put Hungary in the number of the hereditary
Provinces of the House of Austria. That they gave these Offices to Church men,
which belonged to secular persons. That the Protestants were thrust out of all
Charges; nor could their complaints be heard. And that against their wills, the
Jesuits were settled in the Country. Ragoski his first action was to waste and
spoil the territories of George Homonay: after which, he brought to his
obedience all that resisted him, even to Cassovia. It being taken, the Emperor
desirous to calm this storm sends against him the Count of Bouchaim, with an
army of eight and twenty thousand men; and with it was the Palatine of Hungary
also. But not being able to regain Cassovia, he hearkened gladly to a Peace. By
the agreement, seven Lordships of Hungary were given to Ragoski: And to please
him, fifty Churches were opened to the Protestants, wherein they might freely
teach their doctrine, and the Hungarians restored to all their privileges.
This Treaty seemed disadvantageous to the Catholics; but it was more
prejudicial to the Sweds: for the Emperor having picked this thorn out of his
foot, sent secours to Brin, and forced Torstenson to raise the siege he had
laid to it. At which time, Lewis Count of Souches, a French Gentleman, and who
had been the principal cause of the preservation of the place, received the
Government of it, for the recompe^se of so signal a service.


P. I can hardly believe that such remarkable, and so frequent alterations are
to be seen any where so much as in Hungary and Transilvany. And I admire, that
a people which cannot almost stir without drawing into their Country either
the Germans or the Turks, does run so often and so readily to arms.


G. These Countries breeds a very warlike people, and such an one, as can
hardly live in quiet: And their Princes very often throw them in the fire, when
they think to draw them out of the furnace, making their condition worse, when
they endeavor to make it better: whereof Ragoski has given a demonstration,
when he espoused the quarrel of the King of Sweden, and thereby equally
disobliged the Emperor and the Grand Seigneur. This Transilvanian being
ambitious to have a share of the glory and conquests of King Charles Gustave,
marched with very considerable forces to Pole, and joined with him. And not
having done any great feats, was forced to return, either with much shame, or
with very little reputaion. But his misfortune did not stop with the loss of
his army, it pursued him further, and armed the Great Turk against him, and
made him die in a battle, where with his life, he lost his Principality, which
he should have left to his son. Some writes, that they were Christians who
stirred up the Turks hatred against him; and that that should be one of the
causes of the present war, and one of the truest too. Remin Janos, his
Lieutenant General, endeavored to step up to the Throne, in the room of his
dead Master: and for that effect, submitted himself to his Imperial Majesty,
sought, and obtained his protection. But he was not able to preserve these
Estates, on which he had seized. Then it was that the Court of Vienne,
endeavoring to save Janos, and not to offend the Ottomans* did neiter the one,
nor the other. Janos lost his life in a conflict, and the Turk was very evil
satisfied with the Emperor, who (as he said) had contraveened the Truce which
was between them. This misunderstanding occasioned a great alteration on both
sides, and procured several Embassies and Negotiations from one party to the
other. The Sultan protested constantly, that he breathed nothing but the
continuing the Peace; and his Ministers complained modestly, that we were
desirous of war, which they intended not to make, unless necessity constrained
them to it. While things stood thus, Nicolas Count of Serini, thinking the war
was already at our doors, fancied it would be very advantageous for him to
build a fort on both sides of the river Mur; which he did, and began some acts
of hostility. This Fort augmented the Turks complaints, who demanded the
demolition of it by a Chiaux, and an Aga; whom I saw at Vienne in January 1662.
These demands obtained no favorable answer; and it seemed they were made to men
who had no ears. And to speak truth, seeing them put on a fierce resolution to
grant nothing to the Turk; I imagined, they sought nothing but war; and that
Serini's Fort was a place of that hie importance, that it was able alone to
give work to many Ottoman armies; yet experience has made us see, that it is
worth nothing, and that we needed not to have engadged in a war of such
consequence. I will not give my reasons, because any man may imagine them. It
shall be enough for me to say, that the Imperial Court seeing the Turkish forces
in Transilvany, and fearing to be taken napping, they sent the Earls of
Montecuculi and Souches, with two little bodies of armies, whereof a great part
perished without any stroke of sword, and without hindering either the loss of
Remin Janos, or the establishment of Abafi. The Grand Seigneur then seeing
Transilvany in his power, and that Abafi was firmly enough set in his saddle,
and obliged to serve him, demanded the demolition of Serini's Fort, with
greater instance then before; as also a reparation of the wrong which he
alleged was done unto him. But the Court could not resolve to grant his
desires: and therefore without further tergiversation, he resolves to do
himself reason, and make a trial if his first arms would prove as fortunate, as
he hoped they should. Then he began that war which he prosecutes yet with great
vigor. and in which all Christendom seems to concern it self. I adjure you to
consider well all I have hitherto said, and then (I doubt not) but you will be
able to judge of the equity of the cause of both parties. We must now see in
what manner the Turk attacked us in the year 1663. what forces we opposed to
his, and that which both parties has done since the beginning of the war, that
so you may see what grounds we have, either for our hopes, or our fears.


P. I should think, that his Imperial Majesty's interest should have obliged
him rather to have demolished the Fort of Serini, and to have given the Sultan
that satisfaction he demanded, then to have entered in a war against him, for
both Hungary and the Empire stand much in need of Peace, and we see but little
probability to wrest Transilvany out of the Turks hands, which he has seized
upon with some appearance of Justice.


G If it were permitted us to measure Counsels by their successes, we should
have just reason to blame the resolution was taken at Vienne. But I suppose the
Court did believe, that these who sat quiet with crossed arms all the time that
our intestine bloody wars gave them a fair opportunity to attack the Empire,
would not have the boldness to measure the length of their scimiters with our
swords, now that we enjoy a wished-for Peace. But we have seen the contrare;
for Mahomet the fourth resolved to begin the war by that rupture which he made,
after he had kept us long in suspense. For to speak truth, I doubt not but all
his Embassies, and the great show he made of moderation, was done for nothing
else but to amufe us. These who were sagacious, and pierced deeper then the
outside of affairs, thought it hie time to make leavies. The stupidest could
say, we ought not to trust these who had no faith. The Emperor seeing he would
stand in need of help, sought it: and the manner it was given, and received,
was the only cause that he was not ready when the war was at his doors. The
Confederates offered considerable troops which they had already on foot; but
they would continue Masters of them. His Majesty thought it an affront to his
Imperial dignity, to receive them upon that condition. The Empire making these
same offers, and these same demands, rencountred with these same difficulties.
Hence it came that the Grand Vizier having advanced to the higher Hungary,
attaked Newheusel, which the Hungarians call Vivar, defeated three thousand
men, who sallied with intention to surprise some of his army, sent the
prisoners to Constantinople, as marks of his victory; and at length forced the
guarrison to render the Town upon articles, and triumphed not a little for the
acquisition of this strong place, which gave him means to make his courses to
the ports of Vienne, and to waste and harrass the frontiers of Germany.


P. I have heard already of the loss of Newheusel, and of the Incursions the
Tartars made in Moravia; But I know not what you mean by the Confederates, or
what difference you put between them and the Empire. Do me the favor to clear
me in that, and then ye may speak of our forces, and the exploits they did
after the retreat of the Grand Vizier.


G. The Treaty of Munster, which was concluded the 24. of October 1648. having
given some Territories to the French, some to the Swedes, and others to some
German Princes: All of these were afraid, the House of Austria, and the Princes
thereof might repent that they had bought peace, that they might attempt the
recovery of these limbs of the Empire which the Treaty had cut from it, and
that some others might redemand that which they had lost. To obviate which
considerable inconvenience, Cardinal Mazarin persuaded those who had any cause
of fear, or who loved the quiet and peace of the Empire, to make a strict
union, whereby all of them should be obliged to defend one another mutually, in
case any of them should chance to be molested in the possession of that which
the Treaty had adjudged to belong to him. Ten or twelve Princes, Ecclesiastical
and Temporal, and of all these Religions that are permitted within the Empire,
entered in this League, twenty thousand men, or thereby, being to be
entertained by this League for their mutual defense, under the command of the
Counts of Solms and Hollach; each of the Confederates were to contribute for
their intertainme^t, according to their several proportions. The Emperor
extremely displeased with this Confederacy, endeavored to dissolve it; but not
being able to do that, he resolved to make his profit by it, For this effect,
seeing himself threatened with a war from the Turk, he remonstrates the danger,
and desires that these forces already on foot, should be employed for the
defense of the Empire. The Confederates consents, provided their Army should
not be obliged to take any oath but to them, and be employed only against the
common enemy. In the contrare, the Emperor desired, that these forces should
absolutely obey him, and that they should be sent to him without any condition
at all. The business was so long debated, that these troops came very late to
Hungary; whence you may easily judge, that though the greatest part of this
League be composed of German Princes, yet it is accounted to be a thing
different from the body of Germany; either because some strangers have signed
it, and contributes to the maintenance of its Army; or because the two Kings of
France and Sweden who are members of it, are more powerful then all the rest of
the Confederates together. For the present, their Army is under the command of
Wolfgang Julius, Count of Hollach, and make a body a part, separated from the
forces of the Emperor, and these of the Empire.


P. Speak now of these forces which the Vizier employed against us last year,
and whence it came, that the storm was not diverted by a quick conclusion of
the Treaty which was then on foot?


G. That I may satisfy you in order to your demand, you may be pleased to
know, that the Sultan having resolved to cut out work for us, sent into Hungary
his Great Vizier, who arrived at Belgrade the eigth of June. The Baron of Goes
Ambassador for his Imperial Majesty came there the day after, and upon the
tenth of the month was brought to the Visiers presence. This great Basha had
upon his left hand two of his Brothers, on his right hand the Mufti, and round
about him, no fewer then two hundred Officers: At this first audience, the
Baron told him, after he had complemented him, that he was come there to
conclude the Treaty that had been begun between him and Ali Basha. He was told
that he was come too late, and that they would think further of the matter when
they came to our Frontiers. The Baron replied, that then they had done him
wrong in making him come so far, that he saw no reason why they should not come
to a conclusion at that time; that greater difficulties would arise after the
war broke out; and that God would punish those, who occasioned the shedding
innocent blood. The Grand Vizier subjoyned, that he had thought very
deliberatly on all these reasons at Constantinople; and if that had been
offered there, which was done here, he had not undertaken so long a voyage;
neither would he hear any thing of the Treaty of Themiswar, but made grievous
complaints of those who had violated the peace. The Baron told him, All these
things had been already spoken of, and fully answered. This was all was done at
their first meeting, but the Vizier said, that the Baron might yet send a
Courrier to the Emperor and tell him, that if he would disburse such a sum of
money as should be demanded of him, evacuate the places, which yet he kept in
Transilvany, and Zekelheid in Hungary, and demolish the Fort of Serini, there
was yet hopes of an accommodation.


P. I believe by this proposition the Vizier intended only to amuse the
Imperialists: for I cannot fancy that the Turk having advanced so far in
Hungary with an army of seventy thousand men, and an dred and thirty pieces of
Canon, would return without so much as one blow.


G. I think so too, for I do not fancy, that any Minister, how great soever he
may be, either in merit or credit, dare fall upon any resolutions, but such
as his Master has prescrived to him. The Army then began its march the
eleventh of June 1663. with so great pomp, that one would have thought that it
consisted of two hundred thousand fighting men. The noise of Camels, Horses and
Mules, the rattling of Drums and Timbals, the sound of Trumpets continued almost
night and day, till the eighteenth of the same month. The Officers moved but
slowly, for though every day some went away, yet it proved to be almost none
but Bashas, and their equipage, which being splendid, made a show brave to
admiration. At length upon the fifteenth day, the Agae of the Janisaries
marched with four thousand of his Body, and was followed by the rest of his
Army till the eighteenth day: on which the Grand Vizier put himself on his way
with royal magnificence. He sent before him a thousand footmen, each of them
having one or twoled horses. After them came the Spahi Alagarsi, who is General
of the Gentlemen that serves a horseback; his great Standard went before him,
and he was followed by six hundred Spahi Edeli, the valiantest men in Turkey,
having their banner exceedingly fine. These were followed by a long stave, at
the end of which, there was a button of brass, from which did hang a horse
tail. A little after you might see two great Banners which were carried before
the Visiers two Brothers, and other Persons and Commanders of quality, who were
accompanied with seven hundred Hosvadars or Grooms, almost all covered with
Jacks or Coats of maile to their knees. At length the Collors, Ensigns and
Banners of the Great Vizier marched, and were close followed with sixteen led
horses, decored with Saddles and Caparisons, embroidered with gold and precious
stones. The Grooms who led them, had coats of cloth of gold, and breeches of
crimson velvet. Eight Lackeys of the Vizier were in the same habit; and amongst
them Himself marched, accompanied with two Janisaries, carrying on his Head a
Turban of a great value. After the Vizier came the Rosevendy, or Great
Chancellor; the Testadir, or Commissar General, with some others of the
Principal Officers of the Army. The Gentlemen of his Chamber, all young men,
between twenty and thirty years of age, covered with Cossacks, six hundred
Hosvadars, or Grooms, forty Cimbals and Trumpets, two hundred ordinary
horsemen, and threescore horses, which carried the Great Visiers Tents and
Pavilions. With this formidable and magnificent Company, he arrived at Bukovar
the twenty fourth of the month; and there he was told by that Aga, whom he had
sent to the Cham of Tartary, that in stead of fourscore thousand men which he
had promised, he would send ten thousand under the conduct of his own son. The
excuse he made for not keeping his word was, that the white Tartars and the
Muscovites had made incursions in his Territories, which obliged him to keep
his troops for the defense of his Frontiers. Two days after he arrived at
Esek, where he sojourned ten days, waiting for these who were to come and join
with him. At length he passed over the Bridge which is twelve thousand paces
long, and came to Buda the fifteenth of July. There after many consultations,
the Seege of Newheusel was resolved on, and on the seventh of August the place
was invested. Three thousand men which Count Forgas Palfi, and Marquess Pio
commanded, maring out to surprise the enemy, were taken in the net themselves,
and either killed or taken prisoners. The place was so close beseeged, that it
was forced to capitulate and render on composition the eighteenth of Sepetember
that same year.


P. The defeat of so great a number that sallied, without doubt weakened the
garrison, and occasioned the loss of the Town.


G. It is probable it might have held out some longer time, but having no hopes
of relief, it would have been constrained at length to submit to the yoke. It
endured three assaults, in all which the Turk was vigorously beat off and
repulsed. Yet Count Forgas was put in restraint, accused not to have done his
duty in the Siege. But I believe his misfortune was greater then his fault;
they talked here when that place was taken, that the Officers were young and
unexperienced: And in the contrare, the Vizier is a man of thirty and five
years, very active and diligent in his expeditions, skilled in the
Mathematics, and of an heroical courage; and it is certain he was night and
day in the trenches, exhorting and encouraging his sojors both by precept and
example. The Town being taken, he caused fire seven pieces of Canon in sign of
victory; and having sent one of his brothers to the Port to carry the news to
the Grand Seigneur, he caused repair the breaches, and then retired to prepare
for the next expedition. This loss wakened the Empire, which till then seemed
to be asleep; and the Diet being appointed to hold at Ratisbone, some Princes
appeared in person, and the rest by their Ambassadors. There might a man behold
the magnificence of our Germany: for though the Emperor had entreated the
Princes to come without pomp, yet nothing was to be seen but that which was
glorious and splendid. Many old Officers came and presented their swords to the
Emperor; and these Princes who had been accustomed to smell powder, offered
themselves to be disposed of as his Majesty thought fit. The number and known
deservings of these who pretended to be Commanders, took away the liberty of
choice from the Emperor, as the variety of flowrs does with Ladies, when they
walk in a garden in the month of May. But there was a necessity to choose some
for the new levies that were to be made. His Imperial Majesty having already
three Armies under the Command of the Earls of Serini, Montecuculi, and
Souches, thought it expedient by the addition of some more Officers, to render
them more able to act. To this end, without making any change of the inferior
Officers; and leaving the supreme Command of the three Armies to these three
Earls, he adjoined Philip, Prince Palatine of the branch of Sultsback, and
Count Spar, who are persons of great merit and high reputation. The first was
to command his Majesty's Cavallery in the quality of Captain General, and the
second was to conduct his Infantery and his Canon. Leopold William Marquess of
Baden was to be Captain General in Chief of the Army of the Empire: Under him
Count Fugger, Governor of Jngolstadt, commanded the Infanetry, and Ulrich Duke
of Wirtemberg was General of the Cavallery. John Adolph, Duke of Holstein, and
Gustave Adolph Marqucss of Baden served in that same Army, in quality of
Mareshals of the field, the one for the horse, the other for the foot. The Army
of the Confederates having lost the Prince of Solms, a little before the
beginning of this war, was ever since under the command of Wolfgang Julius
Count of Holach or Hohenlo, who had under him Officers and Sojors of good
account and reputation. Count Serini commanded an Army of Hungarians and
Cravats, who were very numerous. Count Souches had a flying Army, with which he
made incursions in the enemies Country, and defended our Frontiers, and
obtained with it frequent victories. He took Neutra and Levens in the beginning
of the Campagn, and fell upon the camp of these Turks, who were endeavoring to
regain these two places, that they might the more easily come into Germany. By
this action he laid six thousand Turk in the dust, and put five and twenty
thousand to flight; whereby he much encouraged all the rest of the Christian
forces.


P. I would gladly know the number of the sojors of whom these Armies were
composed, by whom they were leavied, by whom they were entertained, and by whom
they were furnished with provisions and amunitons, without which they could not
subsist.


G. Armies are ever more numerous in paper, then in the field, so that I cannot
certainly tell you the strength of ours; but they say the Army of the Empire
consisted of four and twenty thousand, and that of the Confederates of twenty
thousand. The Emperor was said to have in Montecuculies Army twelve thousand
light horse, seven thousand Curassiers, and eighteen thousand foot: In that of
Count Serinis, there were between five and twenty and thirty thousand Cravats
and Hungarians. In the Count of Souches Army were ten or twelve thousand men of
several Nations. If ye add to all these, the Voluntaries and French
Auxiliaries, which amounted to four thousand horse and as many foot; you will
find that the number of all our forces far exceeded one hundred thousand men,
so many the Christians have not had in the field in a long time, and which
might seem to be of sufficient strength to chase the Turk out of Hungary. And
it is probable they would have proved able enough for it, if all these several
bodies had acted with one Spirit, or that there had been one Generalissimo of
such a quality, that all the rest of the Generals should have been obliged to
pay him respect because of his birth, and to give him obedience because of his
charge. If then our misfortune was such, as that our Armies suffered our strong
places to be taken by the enemy; we must attribute it to the want of order, and
to the hatred that was amongst the several Nations, whereof our Armies were
composed. As to the rest of your demand, the Princes then at Ratisbone, when it
was resolved to assist the Emperor, every one promised to do according to the
proportion of his Revenue and Estate. And in the mean time every one levied
sojors, who were entertained at the charges of those who raised and sent them.
But it was necessare, notwithstanding that the Emperor should make Magazines
from which all the Armies might be furnished with munitions, both for the belly
and the war. And certainly, if the orders of his Imperial Majesty had been well
observed, the forces had wanted for nothing: For every Prince, Lord and
Commonwealth being careful to send that pay each to his own as was promised, it
is more then probable the soldiers had been well enough entertained; and so
nothing to have been wanting but the spirit of union, to have made them act
with success. It is true that as the great body of the Empire moves but slowly,
so the troops came too late to the Rendezvous, and Canisia was relieved by the
enemy before our forces were together.


P. The Gazets assured us, that the Forts of Serini, Little Comorra, Vesprin
and Papa, were taken in the very sight of our armies, and that these who were
stoutest, were apprehensive the Vizier would have followed his good fortune
further.


G. Ordinarily victories and losses are followed by others of that nature, and
the one increases, the other abates the courages of men. The Grand Vizier
having retired to Constantinople after the taking of Newhausel, caused attack
the Earls of Serini and Hollach. They having repulsed the enemy with a notable
loss, breathed after nothing but conflicts and victories: In effect these brave
men taking the advantage of the Bashas retreat, run over a part of Hungary
which belonged to the Turk, took and plundered Raboska, Segues, and five
Churches; burnt the Bridge of Ezekiel, carried the terror of their name throughout
all the Country, and burnt to ashes all the corns, hay and straw, which the
enemy had on the border of the river Drove. The fame of these victories spread
it self over all the Empire, gave great reputation to the Generals, inflamed
the courage of their soldiers, filled their purses with money, and furnished
them with abundance of proviant whereof they stood in need. These two Earls
seeing affairs look with so favorable an aspect, sought the means to lead them
to victory: they went to Ratisbone, and proponed some military exploits, made
it known that the Bridge of Ezekiel could not be rebuilded, till the season were
far spent; that in the mean time they might beseege and take Canisia, which
already they had blocked by the taking of Buzats, Ziguet, and by the garrison
they had in Serinswar. They demanded all these things that were necessare for
the siege of so important a place, and undoubtedly believing they should be
sent to them, they vigorously begun it at the opening of the spring. This siege
proved a Murderer, for it hugely diminished the number of the beseegers, and
endured longer then they at first did imagine; the enemy approaching for
Canisias relief, the siege is raised, and before the Christian forces could
draw together, the Turk takes Serinswar and little Comorre. These successes
were followed with greater: For after our Army was assembled, he continued his
victories by the taking of Vesprin. But fortune weary of following the wrong
party, turned on our side, after which time the Vizier and his Turks were not
so successful. Lewis Count of Souches Governorof Comorre defeats the Infidels
at Sernevits, and pursues them so vigorously, that he made them abandon Barcan,
and ruined a bridge of boats, which they had upon the Danube. Raimund, Count of
Montecuculi made them repent that they offered to pass the river of Raab, and
the Earls of Coligni and Fueillade, cut in pieces all those that had passed the
same river near to Saint Godard.


P. They say indeed, that the Count of Coligni and Fueillade did great things,
and therefore I should be glad, before this discourse be at an end, to know
something of the assistance the Emperor desired of foreign Potentates; for I
suppose it has been one of the great members of our Armies, and one of the
great motives that obliged the Grand Vizier to hearken so soon to a peace.


G. There is no doubt to be made of that, for the Emperor being very careful to
make himself strong against so powerful an enemy, sent his Ambassadors to
implore assistance from all these who were able to give it. These he sent,
found good words in all places, and in some, good deeds; all Germany was
alarmed, Italy, Sweden, Lorrain, Spain and France, took the preservation of
Hungary to heart. Spain and Italy promised to furnish great sums of money;
Sweden Lorrain and France offered to send troops entertained at their own
charges. I cannot tell precisely what the rest did. But it may be said truly,
that the zeal of the French surpassed that of all other Christians. The King
who has as much piety as Saint Lewis, as much valor as Philip August, as must
wisdom as Charles the fifth, and as much courage as Henry the Great, and more
zeal for Religion then all his Predecessors, did hear with much grief, that the
Turk had begun the war; and with much joy, that the Emperor sought his help.
The mischiefs the Tartars had done upon our frontiers, and the numbers of poor
Christians that were every day brought in slavery, and put in fetters, moved
him to so much compassion, that when Count Strozzi limited the succors which
he sought in name of his Imperial Majesty, to four thousand foot, and two
thousand horse, he wished they had not offered to set bounds to his liberality.
Then the words Christian and Royal which came from his mouth, did make it
appear, that all that can be said of his piety toward God and his pity
toward Hungary, is far below his merit. He exhorted his Nobility to this
glorious Voyage; and told, even those whom he loved best, that they would make
their Court as advantageously in Hungary, as at the Louver. He protested in
presence of many Princes and Lords, That if his son the Daulphin were ten years
of age, he would send him in this expedition. And which is more strange, he
assured his Audience, that if it should be Gods pleasure to afflict Christendom
so much, as to suffer the Emperor to be worsted in this Campagn, he would go in
person the next, to repair his losses, and repulse his enemy. These Discourses
full of martial heat, and Christian zeal, did put such an edge upon the French
Nobility, that instantly hundreths were seen who preferred the satisfaction of
their consciences and generosities, to all the pleasures and contents they
could expect, either in the Court, or in this life. Prince Philip, Knight of
Lorrain, knowing his Predecessors had reigned in Jerusalem* after they had
expelled the Sarasens, and that the Count of Harcourt his father, was grieved
that his age would not suffer him to put on armor, nobly supplied his place,
and gave in this occasion so many proofs of his courage, that it may be said,
he has revived the memory of these Princes of Lorrain, who in former times
conquered the East; and of the Duke of Mercoeur, who in the beginning of this
last age, made himself be admired at the retreat of Canisia, and the taking of
Alba Royal.

The Princes of Rohan and Soubize, having a thousand of their Predecessors to
imitate, did make it appear at this time: that if the Dukes of whom they carry
the tittle, knew how to defend these of the Reformed Religion, they knew as
well to expose their lives for the defense of Christians. The Duke of Brisac
remembering the reputation which the Mareshalls of Cosse and Brisac his
Ancesters acquired, did neither spare his body, nor his spirit* to follow their
trace, and to win glory to himself. The Count of Sault, and the Marquess of
Ragny and Canaples show a burning desire they had to equalize the merit of the
Constable of France the Duke of Lesdiguieres, the Mareshalls of Crequi, the
Lords of Pontdormi, and an infinite number more of their illustrious
Predecessors who went before them in the road of Military virtue. The Duke of
Bouillon, and the Count of Auvergn his brother, led by the example of their
brother and their Uncle, and by that of the glorious Godfrey, who filled all
Europe with admiration in the year 1096. did so signalize themselves; that if
they did not reign in Jerusalem, as their Ancestors did, at least they will
reign in the hearts of those who were spectators of their valors, and who knows
the laudable ambition they have to equalize the ancient Earls of Bologne, of
Nassaw, of Berg, and the Princes of Orange. The Count of Selle, the Knight of
Saint Aignan, the Marquess of Castelnaw, and all the other French Lords and
Gentlemen, who were about two thousand horse, remembering they had Lewis the
Victorious both for their King, and their Pattern, made the world see, some by
their glorious deaths, and the rest by their heroical exploits, that they were
resolved, either to pluck the palm out of the Visiers hand, or die honorably in
the quarrel. In a word, the Auxiliaries which the King sent us, under the
conduct of the Count of Coligni, and the Lieutenant Generals Bodewels and
Gassion, did contribute much to the Victories which we gained: and we may say,
that there was not amongst them a simple soldier who had not been an Officer,
nor Captain, who had not very much experience. So that this little Body, which
might have furnished an army of fifty thousand strong with Officers, had a
great share in these advantages we acquired of the Turks in this Campagn. And
the glorious actions of the Count himself, has gained him as much reputation
as may make him shine in History, as bright as an Admiral, an Andelot, or a
Gaspar, his Ancesters.


P. I doubt not but the gallantery and courage of all these brave men, did
exercise the valor of the Grand Vizier to some purpose.


G. The destruction they made in all the Ottoman troops, their covering the
fields with the carcasses of the valiantest of the Spahi, their passing the
river of Raab over the bellies of the Janisaries, struck such a terror in the
Turks, and abated the courage of the Great Vizier, in such a manner, that
fearing a Rebellion, which cost him his head, he thought on nothing else but to
obtain an honorable Peace for himself; and profitable for his Master. The
Emperor, on whom Fortune did then smile, fearing the turning of her wheel,
consented to what the Vizier desired, and against the opinion of his men of
war, agreed to his demands.


P. I have heard, that this Peace was as soon concluded, as proponed. And the
Discourses which I have heard upon that subject, seemed to me not to be
favorable to his Imperial Majesty: wherefore, I conjure you to defend him: I
shall only hearken to you, provided you examine all that is said against him:
and that you show me wherein the Gazeter has probably mistaken himself.


G. I did imagine, that the Gazets would awake your curiosity: I have examined
them all, and finding some things in them that brangles some spirits. I have
set down in writing, all that I thought worthy your knowledge upon that
subject. I pray you, take it, and read it at your convenience: I am hopeful you
will relish the reasons which I bring in his Majesty's favor: and after you
have well considered them, you will be pleased to tell me, whether you approve
of them, or not.


A POLITICAL DISCOURSE OF THE TREATY OF PEACE, MADE BETWEEN LEOPOLD the most
August Emperor of the Romans, and Achmet, or Mahomet Sultan of Turkey, the 21.
of October 1664.
THE witty Boccalini, having weighed the vaste Empire of the Ottomans in the
balance, found it did grow lighter ever day, and that the weight of it was but
half that it was in the days of our Fathers. I am of that same opinion: and the
facility Emperor Leopold met with, to bring the Grand Seigneur to an
accommodation, will permit no rational man to doubt it. These wise couards who
offer to abuse us, by telling that the Turk will shortly water his horse in the
river of Rhine, must change their language, and say with me, that Hungary and
Transilvany are the limits which he shall never pass. These who have heard of
the threatenings of the Great Turk must imagine, they are like the waves of a
tempestuous sea, which seem to approach with so great fury, as if they would
overflow the whole earth, and yet are resisted and broken by the smallest rock
that stands upon the shore. A few Christian forces, a great many whereof were
but novices, gave a stop to the power of the Great Vizier, covered the fields
with his valiant Spahi, and passed the river of Raab in spite of his
Janissaries. These gallants who make it an article of their faith to contemn
death, did learn here, that nature persuades more efficaciously then their
Alcoran, when she taught them to fear the hail of our muskets and the thunder
of our canons. Sernevits and Saint Godard are names they will never forget: And
while they live, they will imagine, that the Counts Souches, Hollach, Coligni
and Fueillade, are in their rear, and with them the Princes of Baden and
Sultsbach. Their posterity will never hear speak of these Lords but with
terror, and ours with admiration. The Janisaries never saw so fearful a thing,
as the French Cavallery, nor will they ever see Blew Cossacks chamarried with
silver, but they will call to mind the extraordinary valor of our Volunteers.
The Moldavians will tremble, when they think of the battle of Levens, so will
the Turks when they remember the fury of these blows, which forced them to
abandon Barcan, before they had formed the design to beseege it. Hungary and
Germany has made war with the Mahometans with advantage, under the Ensigns of
Vladislaus, Matthias Corvin, Charles the fifth, Ferdina^d the first, and
Rodolph the second John Hunniades, George Castriot Scanderberg, Sigismund
Battori, George Martenusias, Nicolas Serini, and Philip Emmanuel of Lorrain
Duke of Mercoeur, made the Turks repent many times, that they crossed the
Hellespont. But never were they reduced to the necessity to seek Peace, but by
the forces that threatened them in Asia; and now by the good fortune of Leopold,
and the conduct of his Majesty's Generals. This Peace has made it known, that
the Grand Vizier imagined our swords were in his reins, and that there was no
assurance for him, but by a reasonable accommodation. The Emperor then seeing
the terror which accompanied his enemy, and being apprehensive the discord that
was amongst the Chiftains of the Christian Armies, might convert the pleasure
we had to be victorious five or six times in one summer, in sorrow and tears,
laid hold on occasion, entered in Treaty with the Vizier, and granted him
Peace, whereof we stood as much in need as he. The discourse of this Peace, is
the ordinary entertainment of curious people. These who are taken up with other
important affairs, busy their thoughts notwithstanding with this Peace. Men of
abilities talk of the consequences of it, and every one speaks of it according
to his fancy. Some blame it, others praise it, and few or none believes but
there is a mystery in it; yea the common people, whose apprehensions seldom go
deeper then the outside, will needs be Judges of what the Gazeter writes. And
the most ignorant will needs pierce into the Intrigues, yea the Interests of
both the Emperor and the Empire. We see none but such as carry evil news, and
who to alarm Germany, say, that Peace is made with the Turk, of purpose to make
war in the Empire; and that we have spared the blood of strangers, to shed the
blood of Patriots. And they talk openly that the Emperor intends to break that
Union, which is amongst the Confederate Princes; that he desires to favor one
of the parties in the war of Erfort, and force the Lutherans to go to Mass.
Some Prophets who will needs foretell the downfall of the Turkish Empire by
the French Arms, will assure us, that the smell of the Lillies will suffocate
the Roman Eagle; and that he who favored us with so seasonable succors, must
now be the object of our valor, and the subject of our misfortunes. And because
these malicious spirits know, that some of the German people have obligations
to the Swedes, and that they do bad offices to the Emperor, when they say that
he has some business to do with them; they endeavor to persuade the world,
that the Swedes have an eye upon Silesia, and that his Majesty has concluded
this Peace purposely to oppose more vigorously their unjustice. My purpose is
to stop the torrent of this malice, and to show the reasons which probably
moved his Imperial Majesty to this accommodation. I know not if I shall do all I
intend: At least I am very assured, that his Majesty has infinite more
religious thoughts, then these suborners, who dare blame his pure and pious
intentions. And I am verily persuaded, he minds nothing but the good of his
Estates. I know if these seditious persons durst ask him, why he entered in a
Treaty with the Port at a time, when all Europe believed he might have
remounted the Throne of Hungary, and been crowned with Laurels, he would give
them reasons for it, to which no reply could be made. But Sovereigns have not
yet been obliged to submit themselves to the judgment of the populace or
commons, or give them an account why they have made Peace, or why they have
declared war. And yet if they will hearken to me, I am hopeful to satisfy
their curiosity.

The wise Pilot who knows and sees the marks and forerunners of a storm,
causes pull down his sails, before they be torn by the tempest, or that his
ship be in danger to be lost. The Emperor did the like in this rencounter. He
saw that his own forces, those of the Empire, and those of the Confederates,
were in a continual difference one with another; he was justly afraid, that
this discord might give the Turks forces, which were more unanimous, an
advantage to give such a blow, as might not only make the rest of Hungary
submit to the Ottoman yoke, but also brangle Germany so, that he should find it
in an extreme disorder. He was likewise weary of begging assistance from his
equals and inferiors, and was forced with grief to hear continual complaints of
those who were obliged to send recruts, and entertainment to the troops they
had levied. He knew that many of our Patriots looked with no good eye upon the
Auxiliarites, and that every mean fellow endeavored to refuse them both
victuals, and lodging for their money: He knew he ought not quarter all the
Armies in his own Territories, and that he was not obliged by the ruin of his
own Estates, to preserve these which belonged to other members of the Empire.
He saw well enough the dangerous misunderstanding that was creepd in amongst
the German Princes, upon the account of the City of Erfurt, and had reason to
believe if the matter came to blows, they would recall the forces they had in
Hungary, and leave him alone against the whole power of the Turk.

Italy in this rencounter did move but little for his Imperial Majesty: and he
whose lawful and holy designs carried him to be most favorable to him, could
not do much, in regard, his frequent sickness and indisposition: The great
affairs he had to do, and the conjunctures of time, had ever been contrare to
him, as all the world knows. A twenty years war had so drained the Venetians,
that they were not capable to do great matters; and though they should attempt
something, yet their naval forces would not make the Grand Seigneur recall
those Armies of his, who lay heavy upon the Emperor, The King of Spain has not
yet had time to breath, and though his Interests are mixed with those of the
Emperor; yet being busied to quench the fire that burns his own house, he is
not in a capacity to assist Leopold with either great sums of money, or numbers
of men. All he can do, is to counsel him to take up his measures right, and
rather buy Peace, then want it: and thereby put himself in a condition, to
enter to the inheritance of his Ancestors, if he be called to it by the Laws of
that Kingdom. The King of Great Britain has made an alliance with the enemies
of the Illustrious House of Austria, which probably will hinder him to join his
forces with ours against a Potentate whom he never feared, or ever will be
afraid of. The Hollanders having been once members of the Empire were obliged
to the Emperor Ferdinand the third, for acknowledging them to be Sovereign, and
free Estates, at least indirectly, after the Peace of Munster, have some reason
to embrace the interests of his son, but they will not do it for all that,
because they can gain nothing but honor by it, and that is a morsel which does
not relish their Palats, as also because they may stand in need of all their
forces themselves, if the English chance to give them any work to do. The
Hungarians are fickle and volage, on whose resolutions, no certain foundation
can be laid. And because they find the inconveniences, and discommodities of
the war, (their Country being the Stage of it) the Emperor did believe, and
had reason to do so, that there was no better mean to keep them within the
bounds of their duty, then to procure Peace and Quiet to them, and to get them
to lay down arms under another pretext. The Polonians and Muscovites, whose
interest it ever was to weaken this formidable enemy of the Turk, were by the
ears, and destroying one another, at the time when they should have taken that
advantage against him, which we furnished by giving him work elsewhere. And the
affairs of these two Nations are in such confusion, that we have but small hopes
to put them in order, and reconcile them. The Cossacks are in the same
Category, and that warlike Nation, which in former times made incursions to the
Euxin sea, sides now with the Polonians, or else we ungloriously quiet
Spectators of their differences, without daring to hazard the enterprise of any
important action.

These are, as I conceive, the reasons which moved the Emperor to embrace
Peace: and it may be, the Pope, fearing he might be obliged to contribute to
the maintenance of the war, has advised him to do so, for his own particular
interest. These reasons should, if I do not flatter my self, sufficiently
disabuse those, who have entertained themselves with a contrare opinion. But
because some ill natured Patriots, whom I would gladly convince, bring reasons
on the other part which seem plausible; I will be at the pains to examine them,
and cast them one after another.

They say, the fear the Emperor had, that the Swedes would invade his
Dominions, while he was busied in the war of Hungary, gave a stop to the
pursuit of his victories there. I am not at all of that opinion: But if it were
so, what can any truly honest man speak against it. And certainly, no
Politician will blame his Majesty for having such thoughts. And if such
considerations of importance moved him to accept of an advantageous agreement,
there is a great deal of more reason to commend his prudence, then accuse him
of precipitation. I suppose, there are few or none in the world but knows,
there are some animosities between the Emperor and the Crown of Sweden. The
Swedes show themselves constantly ready to own the Protestants, whom the House
of Austria endeavors to bring back to the bosom of the Church of Rome. The
wars which the Sweds made in Germany under the conduct of the Great Gustavus
Adolphus, and the auspicious reign of Queen Christina, being directly against
the Imperial Majesty, has imbittered their spirits, and rendered their
distrusts and misunderstandings immortal. King Charles Gustave, wasted, spoiled
and ruined Pole and Denmark. He who is now Emperor, and was then but King of
Hungary and Bohemia, opposed his victorious conquests, which inflamed that King
with such a desire of revenge, that it is not dead with him. These
considerations, and that of the great number of Lutherans, that the Emperor
has in his hereditary Dominions, the desire they may have to change their
Master, to preserve the liberty of their consciences, the great preparations
the Swed incessantly makes, though he be always constantly well armed; were
capable to give just apprehensions and jealousies to a Prince, whose forces
were scarce able to resist that powerful and dreadful enemy, whom he had in
head of him.

These who will bring France in the play, and dare allege that the fear the
Emperor had, that the Most Christian King might sease on the Spanish
Netherlands, forced him to this acco^modation with the Turk, seems to have far
less reason on their side. The controversies which the Crown of France had with
the Austrian Family, are entirely removed by a solemn Treaty: And two Queens,
one whereof has the possession of the Body, the other of the Heart, and both
of them of the Ear of the King; the one in the quality of his Mother, the other
of his Consort, will never permit them to come to a rupture The tender love the
King bears to the Queen his wife, and the reverence he carries to the Queen his
Mother, are these indissoluble bonds of the good intelligence he intends to
keep with their kinsmen; and if this be not sufficient, yet there is one reason
that is infallible: This Prince is extraordinarly religious, and though the
heat of a gallant youth, a courage heroically martial, and immense riches,
might persuade him to a breach, yet his conscience will never suffer him to
enterprise any thing, that has in it the least appearance of unjustice. And if
he find he cannot live without the exercise of his valor, and the strength of
his admirable Genius, he will choose rather to go and gather palms in
Palaestine, then to employ against us the flashing sword of his warlike
Nobility. The Duke of Beauforts settling foot in Africa, is a forerunner of
what the Infidels have to fear, and the Christians to hope for. The Kings great
soul aspires to great things, but he weighs all his actions in the balance of
reason. The zeal he witnessed, by resenting the injury done us by the Turk, the
Christian words he spoke upon that subject, the brave and seasonable succors
he sent us, has blotted out of the Emperors mind all suspicions and jealousies
he could harbor of him. The affronts, which Charles the eigth put upon
Maximilian the first, and the wrongs done by Lewis the twefth, Francis the
first, and Henry the second to Charles the fifth are buried and entirely
forgotten. The attempt of Henry the Great, and the assistance which Lewis the
Just, and Lewis the Victorious, have given since to the enemies of Ferdinand
the second, and Ferdinand the third, and the opposition was made by the French
to Leopolds election to the Imperial Dignity, have now no more power in the
Emperors heart, then if he had never heard of them. His Imperial Majesty knows,
that his Predecessors have served the Kings of France in the same manner,
employing both Policy and Power against them. He is not ignorant, what evil
usage, Lewis the eleventh, Charles the eighth, and Lewis the twelfth received
from John and Ferdinand Kings of Arragon; and he has read in the History of
his Family, how Charles the fifth kept Francis the first prisoner, till he
was reduced to great extremities: And how Philip the second used all means to
rob Henry the fourth of the Inheritance belonged to him without any dispute.
And in one word the jealousy of State has ever been so great between these
two most Illustrious Houses, that the one never endeavored, or enterprized any
great action, but it was vigorously opposed by the other. But Lewis following
Maxims wholly different from these of his Ancestors, it is fit Leopold do the
like, and not suffer himself to be surpassed in any act of generosity: and that
there be now an entire good understanding between them. The propinquity of
Blood, the uniformity of Religion, the equality of Age, and which is much more
then all these, the Glory of God, the propagation of the Faith, and the quiet
and repose of Christendom, which depends much upon their Union, should oblige
them to love one another, to succor one another, and to have but one soul and
one will.

It may be said, that upon the death of this King of Spain, the Interests of
these two great Princes will prevail more with them, then all these
considerations that I have alleged. And* that both having pretentions to the
Inheritance of their Father in Law, they will share it with dint of Sword, and
the strongest will carry away the greatest part. To which I answer, that the
King of Spain dying, and leaving a lawful Heir Male, the administrators of the
Pupil will dutifully render to the Most Christian King all these respects, all
that friendship and good offices and neighborhood, which were promised to him
in the last Treaty of Peace by the Catholic King. The Emperor will do the same
upon his part, and knowing, that the love and amity of great persons is
entertained by Civilities, by Embassies, and other testimonies of honor and
respect; he will not be wanting to give all these Demonstrations of Courtesy,
that can be required for the preservation of so precious and so necessare a
friendship. But if it should please God (which we pray him to avert) to call to
another world, both the King and Prince of Spain without any other heir male, I
fear, we should be in danger to see bloody Tragedies. Yet we hope so much from
the prudence of the Spaniard, and the moderation of the Emperor, and the King,
that they will suffer themselves to be overruled by reason, more then
interest; and every one of them quitting something of their right, come to a
fair and arbitrary accommodation. Peaceable men would wish, that the King of
Spain might live yet twenty years, and that his son the Prince comd to a man's
age, might succeed him. Yea, I know some, who would gladly quite some of the
years of their own life, to prolong theirs who are so necessare for the repose
of Christendom. But these being vain wishes, I hope that he who has taught us
not to care for to morrow, will provide for his people, and will make it known
to men, that what seems impossible to them, is easy to him; and will let us
see, that he who can bring good out of evil, and light out of darkness, knows
how to bring strength out of weakness: And turn that to the glory of his Great
Name, which humane prudence made the matter of their fear and despair. For my
part* I think we ought not to dive in the uncertainty of things to come. But if
it were permitted us to think of them, we should meet with that which might
feed our hopes. I speak truth with some repugnancy, I am of the opinion, if
Potentates would suffer their differences to be removed, as easily as
particular men do, it would not be impossible to satisfy the pretenders, who
it may be, will demand their Inheritance with the mouths of Canons, and so clip
the wings of the ambition of all others. Don John of Austria may read in
History, that persons of his condition have reigned in Castile, as well as in
Naples and Portugal. But seeing the dignity and power of his Competitors, he
will let his sail fall, and will content himself to be Great Master of the
Order of Saint James, if they will not gratify him with some temporal
appenage. These of the House of Lacerda has been so long subjects, that they
think not now of reigning; and if they do, they will stiffle their hopes, when
they see the Emperor and the King agreed so, that France shall enjoy what
belonged to Mary of Burgundy and Austria, that which appertained to Joanne of
Spain. Other Grandees will rather choose to be governed by a Prince, who has
always been more eminent then themselves, then be Vassals to one who formerly
was but their equal. And if they would rather have a Spaniard for their King,
then a Germane, let them cast their eye upon the King of Portugal, and so
reunite all Spain in one body, and at one pull pluck up the root of all these
differences which have brought them so low. But I go too far, and enters
(before I be aware) in a strange labyrinth. It is better for me to remit this
so important an affair, to the prudence of these great Souls, who knowing how
to govern and manage great Estates, knows also how to divide them, when
necessity requires it.

I pass therefore from this odious subject to another, which is little better:
to answer those who assure themselves, that this Peace was made that the
Emperor might be in a capacity to force the Protestants of all his hereditary
Dominions, yea those of Hungary, which is elective, to go to Mass: and if that
succeed with him, he will go a further length, and try if his fortune in that
attempt, will prove better then that of his father, and grandfather.

They say, and all the world believes it, that the Princes of the House of
Austria hearkens much to the persuasions of devout and religious persons: and
that there is not one of them who would not gladly look upon the picture of the
last Protestant that should ever be in the world.

Histories teach us, that Philip the second King of Spain, lost a considerable
part of his Low Countries, with a great deal of more zeal, then policy; and
that by introducing the Inquisition in these places, he banished obedience out
of them. The Emperor Ferdinand the second brought Germany to the brink of a
precipice, when he made his aversion to the Protestants known, and commanded
them to give back the Church-goods to their ancient Masters. This Mandate put
rebellion in the hearts, and arms in the hands of a world of persons, who never
laid down either their swords or their animosities, till that Emperor and his
son had sufficiently drained their Provinces of men, and their coffers of
moneys; nay, till both of them had learned that God had reserved the Empire of
consciences to himself. I have seen with my eyes, and I have heard with my
ears, some Hungarians, men of quality, who said openly at Vienne, that the
Emperors Counsel would force them to submit to the Turk, by offering to
constrain them to embrace the Roman Religion. There are many in other places,
who in the like case, will do the same thing. And almost all men prefer the
liberty of their mind to that of their body. Men have been seen become fierce
as Lions, and women to eat their own children, rather then submit to these who
made war against their tenacious opinions. Many who live yet, will prefer death
to the Mass; and will show as much zeal against it* as these of Flanders did in
the time of our fathers. Austria had better imitate France, and in stead of
fire and sword, apply meekness and doctrine, to bring home these who they
conceive are out of the way. I suppose an age and a half has made the Emperor
and his Ministers know, that violent courses are not effectual for the
conversion of souls. The nature of man opposes it self to all things that
restrains its liberty. These Priests who advise men's consciences to be forced,
had better sing in the Quire, and read their Breviaries, then frequent Courts,
and give counsel to Kings. If any Church men be found who are fit to govern, it
is not they who are bred in Cloisters: Their maxims and resolutions being all
taken out of the Canon Law, are fitter to bring the world in confusion, then to
keep it in good order. There are an hundred occasions wherein the Law being
executed in its rigor, proves manifest unjustice: And therefore in such cases,
prudence is more necessare then knowledge. The Almighty has given to Princes
the sovereignty of the body, but has reserved that of the soul to himself. Men
may be forced to go to Mass, but cannot be constrained to believe the mysteries
of it. Fearful people may be threatened to a bowing the knees of their bodies,
without any reverence in their spirits. And some may be forced to acknowledge
themselves Catholics with their mouths, and yet are not Catholics in their
hearts. Spain has seen a thousand deplorable examples of this undoubted
verity. The fourth, yea the fifth generation of those who have been constrained
to be baptized, have been banished for their unbelief: and those who yet stay
there, renounceth every day their Baptism, and participates not of the
Sacraments without sacrilege. And in matters of Religion, to be forced by the
power of the arm of flesh, produces ever such effects. The extraordinary and
ill governed devotion of these Bigots who will have constraint to be applied to
consciences, procures the desolation of Provinces, and profanation of holy
mysteries. I have known some prating fools, who durst exclaim against Queen
Christina of Sweden, because she consented to the Peace of Germany, before she
had chased the Pope out of Rome. And, no doubt, there are hundreds of petty
Monks, who have thought, perhaps, said as much against those who signed that
Peace, before the Lutherans were brought to renounce their Belief. All such are
fiery zealots, whose maxims are grounded on their own capricious fancies. And
assuredly their zeal would wax cold, if they were put but for three days to the
duty of musketeers, and be allowed no other entertainment, but a pitance of
bread and water. But these fools imagine, that in every place a bell rings to
give notice of dinner time; and that all things are to be got in armies, as in
Convents; and that it as easy to win battles, as to tell their beads. If the
Emperor would not look upon such a people, but at the Altar, and in the Pulpit,
we should not have so much occasion of fear. His Majesty has traversed almost
all Germany, and having seen the bitter fruits of the former war, has put on a
firm resolution not to plunge any more his people in new calamities. His
principal Ministers and Counselors of Estate, have sufficiently felt the evils
and devastations which both civil and foreign wars have produced: And know,
that it is easy to begin, but almost impossible to end business of that
nature. They are not ignorant that the entertainment of armies, make the
richest coffers of treasure empty, and lays the most fertile Provinces waste.
They know that a war for Religion is the most plausible, and the most obstinate
that can be fancied; and that they cannot begin it, without bringing all Europe
in the play, and putting their Masters Estates in an evident danger to be for
ever lost. We may then be confident, that the prudence of the Emperor, and the
aversion he has from domestic broyls, will choke all the designs of
incendiaries, who would put a sword in his hand to thrust in his own bowels.

I am also informed, that some talk of designs the Emperor should have against
the Confederate Princes of the Rhine: and that there are some, who say, His
Majesty is dissatisfied with them, that the forces they sent to Hungary would
not obey his orders entirely, and therefore he thinks upon the means whereby he
may reduce them to the obedience they owe him* For my part, I think they speak
so without ground, and shall desire all who have such thoughts, to consider what
I am to say to them. This League is a hard bone to gnaw; and I am of the
opinion, that his Majesty may more easily impose his yoke upon all that of
Hungary which the Turk possesses, then force ten or twelve German Princes,
supported by the most considerable powers of Christendom, to submit to him. It
is not to be doubted, but this League making the distrust that is between the
Head and the Members of the Empire, known, cannot but infinitely displease his
Imperial Majesty, making his power less by the half, himself less to be
regarded and honored amongst the Germans, and more vilipended amongst
strangers. Good Patriots should wish that all causes of jealousy might be
buried in perpetual oblivion: and that the several Princes would both seek and
find the preservation of their authority, in the good graces and favor of their
Chief The Allies themselves wishes the Emperor would banish that which
occasioned their confederacy; and that he would bring back that mutual trust
which the unhappiness of the times has chased from amongst them, and so his
Majesty should oblige them to think of nothing else but his service, to seek
the honor of his favor, and to procure with all their power, his content and
satisfaction. But I shall never be persuaded that the Emperor will make use of
his power, where it will not only be unprofitable, but very hurtful to him;
yea, and where moderation it self will serve to little purpose, if it be not
sustained with the favor of the times, and by many examples of an extraordinary
friendship. They say there was no good understanding between his Majesty's
Generals, and those of the League: And our speculative Statesmen will assure
us, that there is as little between their Masters: But conjectures are not
always convincing. And because the Emperor has little inclination to love
those who do not trust him, it is not permitted to conclude, that he will
attack them with open force. I should rather think, he intends to gain them by
demonstrations of kindness and love, and that he hopes their own good nature
and duty to their Country, will be strong motives to induce them to contribute
both their counsels and forces for the preservation of the Empire, and to
assist him to remove all mis-understandings from amonst them. And if these
thoughts seem below the flight of a young Eagle; at least, I would have them to
persuade themselves* that he is extremely generous, and that will not permit
him to have any obligations to these who serve him out of no kindness or love:
and therefore, seeing these Confederates to be always puissantly armed, he
concluded the Peace, that he might be in a condition to resist them, or any
else would attack him. If it be said, this League is merely defensive, that it
has no other end then the good and quiet of the Confederates; it will be
answered, that the taking the Cities of Munster and Erfurt, and the danger
other Towns apprehends, lets us see, that this defensive League, and these who
made it, can lay their hands about them when they think it time to attack, or
enterprise any thing. The Bishop of Munster, as brave as he is, durst never
have hazarded to besiege the Capital City of his Diocese, if he had not been
assisted with both the troops and moneys of his Allies. The like may be said of
the Elector of Mayence, who is a Prince both rich, and wise, yet the City of
Erfurt would not have been afraid of him, in the time of the war with the Turk,
if the Confederates of his Electoral Highness, had not contributed to the
misfortune of that insolent City. It is therefore very expedient, that his
Imperial Majesty should be in a posture to concur with these confederated
Princes, when their pretentions are reasonable, and to oppose them when they
are unjust. And this was not in his power to do, while he was busied in a war
with the Infidel; and this is that which serves for a justification of the
Peace he has lately made, that by it he is in a condition to countenance
those, who shall stand in need of his Arms, and of his Protection.

I suppose there be some in the world, who will grant, that this discourse
bears with it* some show of truth; and these who are not too much wedded to
their opinions, I hope, will believe that his Imperial Majesty had no suspicion
of either the French or the Swedes: yea I shall find some, who dare give
assurance to both the Protestants and the Confederates, that this Peace shall
not trouble their repose; as also to all Germany, that it is an advantageous
Peace to both great and small; and that none of them shall have reason to
complain of it, unless it be, that the Emperor made it without seeking the
advice of the Princes of the Empire. I made this objection, before any spoke of
it to me, and I thought as my adversaries do, that the war having drawn these
Princes to an extraordinary trouble and expense, they would look joyfully on
that Peace would rid them of both. And in regard contempt is insupportable to
men of quality and courage, I persuaded my self, they could not hear without
some emotion of spirit, that his Majesty had valued them so little, as to
conclude a Treaty of such importance, without seeking their advice. I know
there be many who complain, that these of the Court of Vienne never consult
with them, but when they stand in need of either their troops or their moneys,
or both, and that this manner of acting is altogether unsufferable. I should
acknowledge this complaint to be just, if the Peace had been subscribed and
published without the approbation of those who contributed to the war. But I do
not believe, that any persons of Judgment and experience, will think it
strange, that to shun the tedious delays. which accompany the resolutions of
all Imperial Diets, affairs have been debated, and brought to the point of a
conclusion, without seeking the advice of these who might have re^arded it. The
interests of the several Estates of the Empire are so different, and so hard a
matter it is, to get them all to agree to one thing, that the Treaty should not
have produced that effect, which his Majesty desired, if he had called them all
to Council. These who complain, sees not, nor knows not so well what is in the
Emperors coffers, as they who advised him to this accommodation. The affairs of
Transilvany having obliged his Imperial Majesty to keep numerous forces a foot
five or six years, has eaten up his Fronteer Provinces, and even forced his
Council in prudence, to shun more quarterings on them, lest they should have
been laid entirely waste. If all the Germans loved the Emperor, as well-bred
children love their Fathers, they would believe all he does, aims at nothing
but the good of the State. None would blame his conduct, but all the world
would praise him, for the care he has had, and the pains he has taken, to
acquire to us the inestimable benefit of Peace. But I shall suppose, that the
Estates of the Empire, have some reason to complain: and therefore will ask of
these who are most capricious, and least reasonable, if they will be satisfied,
if the Emperor tell them, that he waits for their approbation to conclude a
business advantageous and profitable to all Germany, and particularly to them?
It is like, there are some who will say, that will not satisfy, and will offer
to assure us, that the charges they have been at, and the trouble they have
suffered to succor his Imperial Majesty, has deserved something more then
that. And here, I profess, I had rather hold my peace, then speak. I know the
services the Emperor has received from the Estates of the Empire, cries for a
thankful acknowledgement, and that he is unworthy of any favor, who intends to
pay it with ingratitude: As also, that he who exacts more then is justly own to
him, serves to be paid with little, or with none at all; for I hold it to be
unquestionable, that the acknowledgement should be proportionable to the favor.
It will be rash and insolent, to demand of the Emperor an entire submission of
his will to that of his Princes, because they assisted him, and it were to
oblige him to an impossibility, to pretend, he might do nothing of himself in a
Kingdom, which has no dependence on Germany. I should think it sufficient,
that his Majesty descends so low, as to demand their consent and approbation:
And that he lets them see, that he entertains as high an estimation of them, as
he should, and values them as much as ever any of his Ancestors valued any of
theirs. If all this will not satisfy, the Emperor will let them see, the
succors they gave him, tending to the preservation of his Estates, aimed also
at the preservation of the Empire. His Majesty will confess, that his
hereditary Dominions are more exposed to the injuries and incursions of the
Turk, then any other of the Empire; But he will never be induced to believe,
that they only are in danger. The common enemies ambition is not arrested by
the conquest of some places, a world will no more satisfy him then the Great
Alexander. And Hungary shall no sooner fall in his hands* but he will advance
with his victorious arms further, if the united forces of Christians retain him
not within the bounds of his duty. The Princes then assisted his Imperial
Majesty, by saving themselves: And whoever will expostulate with him for such a
favor, will lose the fruits of it, and will show that he knows not, that the
Grand Seigneurs ambition has no other limit, but that of his power.

Believing then, that the Estates of the Empire will easily acquiesce to his
Majesty's just desires, I shall leave them, and make a step over to Pole and
Venice, and see with what assurance, and upon what grounds it is said, that the
Emperor made haste to make this Peace, to prevent the Venetians, who were busy
in clapping up one with the Sultan, and to be in a condition to receive the
Crown which the Polonians promised him.

As to Pole, all Europe knows that in the year 1655. the King of Sweden invaded
that Kingdom; and that in a short time he reduced it to the necessity to
implore assistance from its neighbors. Neither can any be ignorant, but it
found the Emperor disposed to furnish it with means to resist its enemy, and
ready to send sixteen thousand men to restrain his further progress. They say,
that amongst the conditions of the Accord, that of the Election of Leopold,
after John Casimirs death, was the most considerable: And upon this, they
ground their opinion, who say, that the Peace of Hungary was made, that the
Emperor might with less opposition enter to that great Inheritance. Treaties of
this nature comes to the knowledge but of a few, and therefore it were rashness
to avouch it to be true, and folly obstinatly to deny it. It seems not
improbable, but the Polonians being brought to misery, might promise all could
be desired of them, by these who would put them in a more hopeful condition.
But I see very great difficulties in the performance of this promise, as well
on their part, who made it, as on his to whom it was made. These who made it,
are the Polonians, who in a business of this nature, do not easily agree, and
yet an accord amongst themselves is necessare to make the election of their
Kings valide. He to whom it is made, is Leopold, Emperor of the Romans, who
cannot receive that Crown, without putting Europe in a flame, his own Estates
in danger, and imposing on the Empire a necessity to take arms. No Prince or
State will sit with crossd arms, when a powerful neighbor acquires new
Provinces. The Swedes, the Muscovites, and the Turks, cannot see Pole in the
power of the House of Austria without resentment. The first will be afraid,
they may be forced to give back that which they have gained with the point of
their sword, and with solemn Treaties. The second will apprehend, they may be
necessitated to keep within these bounds which they would gladly enlarge. And
the third will imagine, that upon the union of Pole with Austria depends the
ruin of Constantinople. The Muscoviter will make Peace with his neighbors, the
Swed will conjure up his old practices; And the Turk will raise up Asia; and
all of them will endeavor to hinder the Emperor to enjoy the fruits of his
election in Peace. The Turk will employ all his industry and wiles, the Swed
all his Arsenals and Magazins, and the Muscoviter all his riches and treasure,
to divert Pole from the performance of what it has promised, Germany will not
desire to see the Emperor on the Throne of Pole, nay its Princes will bind all
the nerves of their power and prudence together, to hinder him to mount upon
it. The most understanding of the Polonians themselves, who foresee the sad
consequences of this election, will be well contented, it prove abortive. These
who in all ages envyed the growth of the Austrian Family, will open their
purses to hinder this addition to its greatness. And in a word, all Europe will
take arms either for the Emperor, or against him: So that it is uncertain, if
this election will go on to the content of the pretenders, and if they be not
very well assured, that it will have that success they propose to themselves,
they should in prudence seem not to desire it. For my part, I believe the
Emperor makes it rather his work to guard himself from the storm that menaceth
him on the other side, by opposing himself to any choice may be made of one of
those who envy his family, then to procure his own election. Certainly Pole
has need of a King, who can repare its losses, and put it again in that
flowrishing condition, which made our fathers look upon it with admiration. But
the jealousy the Polonians would give to their neighbors by the election of a
Potentate already considerably eminent by the power of other Kingdoms, should
lead them to the choice of a Prince, who would give no cause of suspicion to
any. I know some, whose high virtues and qualifications speak them worthy of
Crowns, whom the Houses of Austria and France, would be content to see sit on
the Throne of Pole, whom Sweden and Muscovia will respect without fear, whom
the Ottoman Port would suffer without displeasure, and whom the Polonians would
not reject, if they have not entirely forgot the true interest of their
Republic. It is to such that all Europe wishes the Polonian Scepter: It is
such who can accept it, without troubling the quiet of Christendom. It is to
such that Pole may give it, without fear to sow the bitter seed of discord in
its own bowels. Not knowing then whether the Emperor be desirous to have the
Crown of Pole, or not, I shall not doubt but his Counsel will reflect seriously
on these difficulties that will rencounter him, and upon these horrid wars
which will accompany an honor which all his neighbors will envy him, and which
none of his friends should wish to him.

As to what they say, that the Emperor knew that the Venetians were in treaty
with the Turk, to obtain a Peace from him for themselves, and let the whole
burden of the war fall on his Majesty alone: I profess freely, I do not know
what to believe of that intrigue; but if we shall narrowly examine the
circumstances of affairs, and of the time, we may make a conclusion of the
contrare: for though we need not doubt but the Venetians with all their hearts
wish to have Peace, and that they would willingly empty their treasure to
recover what they have lost in their last war with that enemy; yet I suppose
there be none who thinks they would do it at that time when the Peace of
Hungary was concluded. It is more then ten years since the Senate of that
Republic could have spared all the expense they have bestowed on the
maintenance of the war since that time, if they would have given over their
right of the Kingdom of Candia to the Grand Seigneur: And the Peace they could
have expected at this time, would have been no more favorable then before: And
the Venetians having then a repugnancy from so disadvantageous a Peace, when
they alone sustained the whole Turkish forces, there is little or no appearance
at all they would consent to it, when Germany made so considerable a diversion
of the Ottoman power; and that they might persuade themselves, that time would
give them an opportunity to repair the breaches of their Estate, and force the
Turk to an accommodation less hurtful to them. I shall rather believe, that his
Imperial Majesty inclined to bring the common enemy of Christians to an accord
profitable to all Christendom. But that the unhappy conjuncture of affairs took
from him the means to bring his heroic designs to so glorious an end, he was
forced to be contented to do all he could, and leave the accomplishment of the
rest to Divine Providence. It is that will care for the Venetians, and will
prepare friends for them, able to deliver them from these evils that now
presses and threatens to oppress them. All Christendom wishes and prays for
this to them, and I as much as any, because I know that the piety and valor of
the illustrious Venetians, deserves that both heaven and earth should favor
them.

I suppose what I have said will satisfy these who are governed by reason, and
not by a capricious humor: and that all those who shall read this paper, will
acknowledge with me, that his Majesty was not carried with any violent thoughts
to conclude this Peace. I know, honest men will confess the Emperor has reason
to love and honor the Most Christian King, and that prudence and reason of
State, will oblige him to dissemble the displeasure which the Confederate
Princes have given him occasion to conceive against their proceedings; that his
interest will oblige him to defer and delay the Reformation of the Protestants.
That he has no other concern in the business of Pole, but to hinder any person
of whom he may have just cause of jealousy, to receive the Scepter of that
Kingdom. That he has no intention to pay the Venetians in their own coin: And
that the Sweds shall have him for their friend, so long as they keep themselves
within their bounds, and live as good neighbors, and true and faithful members
of the Empire.

I do now only imagine, that it will be told me, that the Hungarians have some
reason to complain: And that it would seem the Emperor behaveth himself to
them, rather as a stepfather, then a father, in regard to spare his men and his
money, he has made a Peace disadvantageous for them. But they will alter their
opinion who say so, when they understand that (which none should be ignorant
of) this people did so often threaten the Emperor to lay down arms, and make
their own agreement with the Vizier, that they imposed a pure necessity on his
Majesty to prevent them. The Christian sojors received as much, yea more hurt
from them, then from the Turks. And none were assured of their lives, where
they were strongest. Our horses, yea our men starved for hunger, in regard none
could go abroad to fetch either proviant or fodderage, without whole Regiments
to guard them. I have seen letters writ by the Officers of our armies, wherein
they complained, that the throats of most of their servants were cut by those
for whose safety they were generously exposing their lives. Many French in
their return from this expedition, have told me, that these of them who went
never so little astray, or who straggled, were presently sacrificed to the fury
of that merciless people. And that amongst them, it was accounted a crime to be
well clothed, or to look like men that had money. It will be answered, that
sojors, though friends are insupportable to the inhabitants of any Country
which is the seat of the war, that they take with strong hand, not only what is
necessare for their subsistence, but much more, and so robs the people of that
wherewith they should maintain themselves and their children, and consequently
drives them to despair, from whence proceeds these excesses whereof I have
spoken. Let us grant all this to be true, and let us add to it, that the orders
of his Imperial Majesty have been ill observed; and that the Officers of his
armies wanting bread to give their sojors, were constrained to slack the reins
of discipline, and to permit them to do that which is discharged by the
Military Laws of the most licencious war. Let it be granted, that the disorders
were as high as they can be imagined to be, and that it was impossible for the
sojors to do worse then they did; it cannot be denied, that the greater
mischiefs the war drew upon that misfortunate Country, the less reason the
Emperor had to continue it: And the more hurt the Hungarians suffered by the
war, the less reason they have to complain of the Peace. This Peace has taken
a thorn out of their foot, and has freed his Majesty from the misfortune to
see his friends and his subjects made the objects of their despair. Some will
say, that by this Peace this people have lost a part of that they had in
Hungary, whereas they hoped to have recovered by the war what they had lost,
and this sad consideration has put tears in their eyes, and mournful
complaints in their mouths. I confess, they have reason to bewail their
losses, and that all Christians should pity the wretched Hungarians, and be
sorry they are no more the Bulwark of Christendom, and the terror of Infidels.
He must have a heart of Marble, who will not be grieved for the losses Jesus
Christ suffers, and the advantages Mahomet gains. He must be a brute, who has
not a kindness for the warlike people of Hungary. The Hungarians are volage and
unconstant; but they are Christians. They have often contributed to their own
misery, both by their malice, and their inadvertency; but they are Christians.
They have often called in the Mahometans to assist them against their lawful
Kings; but they are Christians. And though they had done worse then all that, I
should still bewail their misfortunes, because they are Christians. And I do
believe, though we be in a better condition then the Hungarians, yet we are not
better men. But the time of their deliverance is not yet comd: and we do but
yet expect the ruin of the Turks Empire. We hope notwithstanding that so great
a deliverance is not far of. And we know assuredly, that our hopes shall not
prove vain. The Turkish Monarchy has no more privileges, then these who have
been before it. And the Hungarians will be unhappy in no higher measure, then
others who have called upon the Name of JESUS. God grant it be soon that this
afflicted Nation, and we who are pertakers of their affliction, may have
occasion to wipe the tears from our eyes, and to rejoice when we see the
Almighty has a care of his own people, and delivers them from the oppression
of their enemies. To him alone belongs honor and glory for evermore.


P. I have attentively red and perused your papers, and having nothing to
oppose to what you have said, I return you them, with many thanks. I can assure
you, I will never forget the good instructions you have given me. You may
therefore go and repose your self a little: after which, I shall entreat you to
entertain me with a Discourse of foreign affairs: And running over with me the
best places of Europe* to speak of them, as you have done of our own Germany.


FINIS.

