England's Alarm: BEING. An ACCOUNT of GOD'S most Considerable Dispensations
of Mercy and Judgment toward these Kingdoms for Fourteen Years last past.

AND ALSO, Of the several sorts of Sins and Sinners therein; ESPECIALLY The
Murmurers against the Present GOVERNMENT.

WITH AN Earnest CALL to speedy Humiliation, Supplication and Reformation, as
the Chief Means of Prospering Their MAJESTY'S Counsels and Preparations.

Dedicated to the KING and QUEEN.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheap Side, near Mercers-Chappel. 1693.

TO THE King and Queen's MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY'S.
IT is not many Years since England stood in need of Two Great Salvations, one
was from our professed Enemies in the Land, and the other, and far greater, the
open Wickedness and Ungodliness abounding therein. Your Majesty's have not only
been the Glorious Instruments of the first, but have made several Pious
Attempts and Endeavors toward a Deliverance of us from the last; not only by
your own virtuous Examples, but also by commanding the Laws against Vice and
Immorality to be effectually put in Execution: Whereby your Majesty's have
given a Public Testimony against that which you know is so hateful to God, and
destructive to Government; and that Achan which has so troubled our Israel, and
interrupted our Joshua in his laudable Enterprises against the Canaanites and
the Philistines. And if inferior Magistrates or Officers have, or do neglect
to prosecute your Majesty's pious Orders, they have a great deal to answer for
to your Majesty's, and more to God they will bring the Guilt of others Sins
upon themselves. The Design of this Paper, is an humble Attempt of the like
tendency with your Majesty's, and entirely subordinate thereunto, and therefore
is humbly prostrated at your Royal Feet, both for Acceptance and Protection, by
one who can in Sincerity subscribe himself,

Your MAJESTY'S, Most Obedient Subject, and Daily Orator, J. D.

To All the People of England, ESPECIALLY The Professed FRIENDS OF THE
Protestant Religion, AND THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT.
YOU are now, by your Representatives, consulting and endeavoring to raise
Armies and Navies against the Enemies of our Government and Religion, and all
that is dear to us. I need not tell you how great a Burden those Taxes are,
which are necessary to defend the Government: And I cannot but think, every
honest Man does earnestly wish the present Wars may speedily issue in a happy
Peace for England, and for Christendom. But give me leave to tell you, when you
have done all you can of this nature, you have done but one half of your Work,
and not the best half neither; there must be other Armies and Militia raised,
beside those of Flesh, and which must animate and succeed all the rest, or else
I doubt we shall scarce reach our Expectations The great design of this Paper
is to raise immediately the Militia, or Posse of Heaven, an Army of Prayers and
Tears, which seldom, if ever failed of success. Whereas, all other sorts of
Warlike Preparations, without these, have often done so. Give me leave to tell
you, it is the Work of us all, and a great Work too, earnestly to besiege, why
may I not (with reverence) say, to storm Heaven itself with our penitent
Supplications, before we can comfortably hope to prevail against the great
Senacherib of Europe, the Staff in whose hand has so long been God's
Indignation. If ever we would hope successfully to contend with Men, we must
first wrestle with God himself by Prayer, as Jacob did, and in the Courage of a
holy Faith, say with him, We will not let thee go, except thou bless us: And
then we need not fear all those Esau 's at home or abroad, who either wish or
contrive our Ruin; though they come never so well armed against us, God can
either change their Minds, or break their Arms. I would fain raise up a Spirit
of Prayer and Supplication, which seems in the generality to be laid asleep for
many Months past; and I doubt not, but the serious Reader will here find
sufficient Motives thereunto, and all sorts of Sinners, especially the Enemies
to the present Government, will find Arguments enough to convince them of their
folly. God Almighty give his Blessing, and grant, that Thousands; yea, the
whole Nation may have cause shortly to bless God for these Remembrances.

England's Alarm: OR, AN ACCOUNT Of GOD's most Considerable DISPENSATIONS IN
Way of Mercy and Judgment toward this Nation, for Fourteen Years last past,
etc.
I Might here speak something of the Great Judgments of God upon this Land in
the late Civil Wars, and the Desolation thereby for many Years, when Englishmen
fought against English men, and Protestants against Protestants, to the Ruin
of one another, and at last of the Government itself, and to the great
Dishonor of God, and Scandal of the very Enemies of our Religion: And then I
might consider, what Effects it has wrought upon the Inhabitants of this Land.
Also, That Flood of Impiety that broke into the Land, when God was pleased to
restore the Government upon its old Foundation; together, with a general hatred
and aversion to serious Godliness; which, I wish I could say, has not continued
among the generality of People ever since. Also, I might speak of the dreadful
Pestilence and Fire in London, in the Year 1665, and 1666; and the Wars at the
same time, and after, with our Protestant Neighbors, the Dutch. For all which,
I doubt, England has not been rightly humbled to this day. And when God comes
to us again in way of Judgment, we have reason to expect he will visit for
these, as well as our latter Provocations; but because many of these are grown
out of Memory, and fresh Judgments and Mercies are most apt to affect us, I
shall begin with such as are of a latter Date, and not above Fourteen Years old.

1. That great Alarm we had in Discovery of the Popish Plot in 1678, where in
manifold ways it appeared, that King and People, Religion and Property, were by
a great Confederacy of the Papists undermined and ready to be subverted.

2. When many People were ready to think, either there was no extraordinary
Plot, or none of any dangerous consequence, the then King was suddenly taken
away, and he that we have reason to believe was the great Motive, if not
Promoter of that Plot, came to be advanced to the Head of the Government; I
need not tell you, it is fresh in the Memory and Minds of all serious and
considering Persons: How great were their fears and perplexities upon his
advancement to the Throne! And it was not long before we were all too sensible
of the Reasons they had to be so.

3. How were we all alarmed at the late great and wonderful Revolution! Were
not we afraid our Land would then have become an Aceldema, a Field of Blood^!
Instead of that, how did God turn again our Captivity, and we became like them
that dream? And how did God tie up their hands, who were making all the have
they could, to put an Iron Yoke upon our Necks? How great and seasonable to the
whole Body of Dissenting Protestants, was the taking off, or suspending those
Penal Laws that had been made against them, whereby they might quietly enjoy
their Liberty in worshipping God according to their Consciences. I wish this
Mercy be not too much forgotten, and too little improved.

4. The next great and dreadful Providence was relating to Ireland: Did not
Ireland cause many sad Thoughts of Heart, when our Enemies had almost the whole
Country in their Possession, except one poor City (Londonderry) and yet God in
his Infinite Power and Wisdom ordered matters so, that although in all Humane
Appearance that City, and so the whole Country must be irrecoverably lost; yet
for all the Hardships and Famine it endured so many Months, it pleased God at
last to send Relief, and to repulse the Enemy from before it.

5. Had we not (I mean all sensible Lovers of our Religion and Liberties) sad
akings of Heart when there was no other Remedy, but our gracious King (whom God
in mercy long preserve) must go over in Person, and venture his Life for what
is so dear to us.

6. Were we not in great Perplexities, when about the same time the great
French Fleet appeared on our Coasts, and ours in so great an unreadiness to
oppose them, that had it not been for a sudden turn of the Wind, when they
were just at us (a wonderful merciful Providence) it is possible they might
have taken our whole Fleet, but God prevented it.

7. At the same time when we were in the midst of our Fears, and the Canaanites
in the Land began to rejoice, yea, and to insult too, thinking the Day was now
their own, then did God give us the most ^easonable and welcome News of the
great Victory obtained at the Boyn in Ireland by our Forces under His Majesty's
Command, and the wonderful Preservation of the King's Person at the same time
when he was so near being slain by a Shot.

8. And the Year next after, what Hazards did we run in conquering and subduing
that part of Ireland that was yet in our Enemy's Hands? What a great Army had
they got, and several strong, and as they thought, invincible Forts and
Garrisons, such as Ballymore, Athlone, Galloway, Limerick, etc. What a
dangerous Siege was that of Athlone? And what a bloody and dangerous Battle was
the Battle of Aghrim? And how doubtful was the Siege of Limerick? Yet after the
loss of a great number of Men by Sickness and War, it pleased God to give us
the entire Possession of that Island, while at the same time it pleased him to
deny us any Success by Sea, or in Flanders, against the Common Enemy that
Summer.

9. What a great Mercy was the Discovery and Defeat of the Plot contrived by
the Lord Preston and his Accomplices, which should never be forgotten?

10. How great and surprising, as well as seasonable, was our Victory at Sea in
May this present Year 1692. over the French Fleet! And how did God wonderfully
order the Winds to serve us in this matter! And how was the intended Descent of
the Enemy upon England hereby prevented? These were two Mercies of the greatest
Magnitude.

11. The Discovery and defeating of the Plot against his Majesty's Person by
French Assassinates, and the Preservation of the King's Person in the late
Bloody Skirmish with the Enemy in Flanders, and his safe Return to England.

12. The great Sickness and Mortality that lately happened in some of our
Plantations in the West Indies that has carried away Thousands.

13. The late unseasonable Rains both here and in all the Countries round about
us, threatening to break the whole Staff of Bread, and to destroy the greatest
part of the Fruits of the Earth, which began to fill us with fear of a Famine.
But how wonderfully did God appear in the very nick of time, and has turned our
feared Scarcity (comparatively) into an unexpected Plenty.

14. The late great and terrible Earthquake in Jamaica, which in few Moments
made such a dreadful Destruction of Houses, Goods and Persons, that if our
Hearts were not obdurate, had been enough to fill us with a Holy Awe of that
God, who can make his Plagues wonderful; and though we are not so nearly
concerned, yet the two dreadful Earthquakes that happened not many Years since,
one in the City of Naples, and the other at Smyrna, together with a third we
hear lately to have happened in the Territories of Venice: These, though remote,
yet should be looked upon as loud Calls to us, whose Sins cry up to Heaven for
Vengeance as well as theirs.

15. But because these Judgments upon others, remote from us, have not affected
us as they ought, therefore God is now bringing them home to our own Doors, and
has already given us a dreadful Memento, to assure us, that Sin will find us
out as it has done others, and that as his Hand is not shortened that he cannot
save, so his Arm is not wearied and tired that he cannot lift it up any more in
a way of Wrath and Indignation. He has now done what is sufficient to convince
us, that We, and all we have lie at his mercy every moment, by the late
Earthquake that happened the 8th of September last, in and about London, and in
many other distant places in England, as well as beyond the Seas; which though
through Infinite Mercy it did not come to Extremity, yet it did for the time
cause a general Fear and Consternation: And tho Persons that are hardened in
their Sins, and fearless of Judgment, may now perhaps cry out as Agag did just
before he was cut in pieces by Samuel, Surely the bitterness of Death is past.
Yet those who have a due dread of God upon their Spirits cannot but tremble,
lest all we have yet felt is only a Prologue to a more dreadful Tragedy, if a
very speedy as well as general Repentance do not prevent. There are many
curious, and I think unprofitable Questions started, what may be the natural
Causes of Earthquakes? O how much better should we spend our Time and Thoughts
seriously to consider that God is the Efficient, and Sin the Procuring Cause of
this and all other Judgments and Calamities! And that true Repentance and
turning to God is the only infallible way prescribed by God himself to prevent
or remove them. All God's Judgments are terrible, but now so amazing and
destructive, as a general Earthquake when it comes to be extreme, there is more
than a possibility of escaping Fire, Sword, Pestilence and Famine; and if a Man
cannot avoid these Evils, yet they give the generality time beforehand to
bethink themselves, and prepare for another World; but a general and desolating
Earthquake comes on a sudden, astonishes the Soul, takes away the Succors of
Reason, and gives neither time to prepare for another World, nor hopes to
escape Ruin in this; carries away a Man, his House, Goods and Posterity at
once in a moment. O what a cursed Evil must Sin be, that brings forth such a
Plague as this! Among those variety of Judgments that God threatened Israel with
by Moses in case of their Disobedience, of which he gives us a large Catalogue,
Deuteronomy. 28. we do not find any mention of an Earthquake. But Christ tells us
there should be Earthquakes, and great Earthquakes in diverse places; as if this
greatest Judgment of all should be reserved for the greatest Sin of all,
namely, the Neglect and Contempt of Christ and the Gospel.

O did Men but believe that Word and Gospel they profess to believe, I need not
here urge Arguments taken from Temporal Judgments to persuade them to repent
and turn to God! For if the Word of God be true, and if Christ himself be true,
all Impenitent Unbelievers shall as certainly be damned, and go away into
everlasting Punishment, as that they shall die. God will Cast Body and Soul
into Hell; which is worse than the greatest Shock of an Earthquake. But because
poor wretched Sinners will not give Credit to God's Word, he will make them
feel his Rod; and seeing they will believe nothing but their carnal Senses, to
convince them of their Atheism, God will make them feel his Plagues even in
this World, as well as in the next. Was not this late shaking of the Earth a
gracious, as well as tremendous Warning of God to rouse us out of that deep
Security into which we are fallen? But what will become of us, if we do not
take it as a Warning? It is a very dreadful Reflection to consider how little,
or at least to how little purpose the generality of People were affected with
that alarming Providence, and how quickly the Impression of it was worn off
their Spirits, when it did not last so long as Six days, namely, to the next
Publik Fast Day, as appeared too plainly by these sad Proofs, in that Ministers
took so little, and some no notice at all of it in their Prayers or Sermons
that Day; and most People, as at other like times, either followed their
Callings, or their Recreations upon that very Fast Day; and many that then
attended the Public Assemblies, came with the Pride of all their Ornaments
about them, and looked as unconcerned as if they came rather to a Feast than a
Fast. O horrid Stupidity and Security! more to be dreaded of all that fear God
than the Earthquake it self; nor can there be a worse Sign or Prognostic of a
far worse Earthquake, or other great Judgment yet to come; for let us not
flatter our selves into a Fools Paradise: If lesser and more gentler Methods
will not do, God will visit with severer strokes. If Rods will not amend us,
Scorpions may quickly ruin us. And this will appear, no doubt, more than
probable, when we consider this City and Land is full of all those Sins and
Aggravations of Sin which have brought down fearful Judgments in all Ages and
Countries of the World. Let us but look over the Black Catalogue of Sins in
Scripture, against which God has denounced and executed fearful Judgments; and
if we will be true to our own Consciences, we must acknowledge they are all
found amongst us, and that perhaps in the highest Degree; and must confess that
our Land is full of Sin against the Holy One of Israel. But you may ask, What
are the Sins for which London and England are now threatened? To which I answer,
All the People of England may be considered under Four Ranks; and so there are
Sins both common to all, and peculiar to each of them.

First, Such as are openly Profane, and have not so much as a Form or show of
Religion, though they bear the Name of Christians.

Secondly, Such as have only a Form, and no more.

Thirdly, Such as in the main are sincere Believers and true Christians.

Fourthly, Such as not acknowledging the beforementioned merciful Warnings and
Providence of God toward us, nor our present undeserved Mercies; are
unthankful Murmurers against God, because he has not ordered matters in their
way; namely, to establish the Protestant Religion by Popish Governors and
Councils, and who are also secret Enemies to the Government it self, that has
been, and still is so much a Friend even to such evil and unthankful ones.

First, Such as are openly profane, and have not so much as a form or show of
Religion, though they bear the Name of Christians. What are peculiarly the Sins
of such People that cry aloud or Vengeance? I answer,

1. Their horrid Atheism and Contempt of Christ and the Gospel, which sure was
never more than in this Age. Are there not many that have out-gone David's
Fool, and not only say in their Hearts, but also with their Mouths, There is no
God. Others that speak very loosely and contemptuously of the Holy Scriptures,
and of the great Principles of Religion therein contained: No wonder such
wander in Darkness, when they reject that which should be a Lanthorn to their
Feet, and a Light to their Path: And do not such deserve to die in their Folly
that reject the Holy Scriptures, that should make them wise unto Salvation? And
will not this their wilful and affected Ignorance justify that severe Sentence
of God by the Prophet, They are a People without understanding, therefore he
that made them will not have mercy on them.

2. The horrid Murders that are committed almost every Week in one place or
other, so that it may truly be said, Blood touches Blood.

3. The frequent open Robberies, and that which I think is as bad, the Fraud
and Injustice that is daily practiced by such (I wish I could say only such) in
matters of Trade and Dealing. How many have not more served an Apprentiship to
a Trade, than to the Art or Mystery of Lying and Deceiving? Insomuch that they
who can lie most smoothly, are counted the most hopeful Traders, and like to
thrive in the World; yea, there are not a few, that to cheat more easily, will
confirm their Lies with horrid Oaths and Imprecations.

4. Was ever Perjuries, vain swearing, horrid Imprecations and Execrations more
common in London and in England than at this time; the Streets and Public
Houses, and which is worse, Private Houses, daily ring of them. Who can number
their Names, that almost at every Word can call God to damn them and confound
them, and the Devil to take them, whose Prayers are too like to be granted? Was
ever false Swearing and False Witness bearing more common in public Courts of
Justice and Equity than at this day?

5. That odious Sin of Drunkenness. How are all Degrees and Sexes Guilty of
this sin, which converts Men into Bruits, and consumes Health, Estate, Time,
Soul and Body all together; and perhaps this one sin consumes as much Money in
a year, as is given for that time to support the Government: And how many
Families as well as Persons are undone by it.

6. The sin of Uncleanness, Adultery and Fornication, which are not only
commonly, but openly committed, yea, and boasted of; insomuch that Civil
Persons can scarce go quietly along the Streets without being enticed and
importuned by ungodly Wretches.

7. Excess and Pride in Apparel, and vain Fashions and Dresses, not only
unbecoming Christians, but reasonable Creatures, and which occasion a vast
Consumption both of Time and Estate. And to all these sins I might add, the
frequenting of Lascivious and wanton Stage Plays, than which perhaps nothing
more tends to Corruption and Debauchery of Manners, as daily Experience too
sadly witnesses.

8. The common, but horrid Profanation of the Lord's Day, in which I think it
may truly be said, more Wickedness is committed than in all the days of the
Week beside. How many Masters, provided their Servants serve them duly all the
Weekdays, suffer them to serve the Devil on God's Day if they please. I might
add to all these, and which looks very black upon us, that notwithstanding all
our late Endeavors as well as Expectations of Reformation, yet little or
nothing has been effected, so strongly and deeply rooted are these Vices in the
Nation: Nay, is not Reformation generally hated and contemned? And would not
any inferior Magistrate, that should in good earnest make it his business to
put the Laws in Execution against these Vices, be esteemed a Busie-body, and a
Disturber of the Public Peace? And are not there abundance of People, who set
themselves with all their Power to keep out of the Government such Magistrates
as would be diligent and zealous in a Reformation of Manners, and would
bespatter such with odious Terms and Names, and cry them up as Enemies to the
Government; yea, to the Church too, and all because they must not have their
Lusts and Vices controlled, though never so notorious and scandalous both to
Religion and Humanity it self.

Secondly, I come to speak of such as have got out of open Profaneness into a
Form of Godliness, and no more; they have like the Pharisees washed (some more,
some less) the outside of the Cup and Platter, but they leave the Inside as
impure as ever. The Church was never without a Generation of those that were
pure in their own Eyes, and yet not washed from their Filthiness. And it were
well if the greatest part of visible Professors, who would seem to outvie
others in Holiness, are not sound in this number. I speak not here of one
Church or Party, but of all Churches, Opinions and Parties of Professed
Christians; and these Persons, though they may be free from open Profaneness, yet
are and may be guilty of, and live in the habits of many damnable sins, which
are equally, if not more hateful to God, than gross sins. It is more easy to
condemn a Pharisaical Formalist and Hypocrite, than to detect and discover him,
or to convince him of his Sin. The Lord in Mercy help us all; yea, such as
would seem to out-go others in Religion, to examine what we are, and whether
the Characters given of Hypocrites and wicked Pharisees in the Gospel, will not
too well agree with many of us that hope confidently for Heaven. Hypocrites may
be known, or rather may know themselves by these Tokens.

1. A Hypocrite, though seemingly never so strict in Religion, was yet never
deeply sensible of, and thoroughly humbled for the Curruption of his Nature, or
saw his need of Christ; and though he professes his Name, yet he rests upon
himself and his own Performances more than on him for Salvation: So did the
Pharisees of old, they rejected Christ, and the way of Salvation by him.

2. A Pharisee or formal Professor, as I said before, is for washing the
Outside, not the Inside; he had rather seem and appear holy, than really be so:
This also did the Pharisees of old.

3. A formal Hypocrite seeks more to get the good Thoughts and Opinion of Men,
than of God as our Savior, does particularly instance in Almsgiving, Prayer
and Fasting; Ye do all to be seen of Men.

4. A Formalist uses Religious Exercises for wordly Advantages: Many Prayers,
and long Prayers, may be a Pretense that they may devour Widows Houses. Many
make a fair show in Religion, merely to advance a Name and a Trade.

5. A Formal Professor for the most part is Covetous, and the very Alms he
sometimes gives may be a Cloak for his Covetousness. It is said, The Pharisees
who were Covetous derided Christ, when he exhorted them to Charity. And indeed
this is a notable Proof of Hypocrisy in many great Professors, who are
apparently swallowed up of this detestabe Vice, which yet they cloak with good
Names, such as Frugality, and good Husbandry; so that it is a Miracle if ever
this Root of all Evil, the Love of Money be rooted out of their Hearts. O how
many Thousands does the Love of the World destroy as effectually as open
Profaneness! He that is a Friend to the World, is an Enemy to God, says St.
James, and calls such Adulterers. A Heart secretly covering, and prevailingly
cleaving to the World, kills Souls without a noise, like White Gunpowder. This
is a sin many Professors are eternally ruined by in a time of public Liberty
and Prosperity: When the World smiles upon them, they are not able to resist
her false Charms, but fall into her Embraces, and so are at last hugged to
Death by this Harlot.

6. A Formal Hypocrite is one that is a greater Stickler for Ceremonies and
Traditions of Men in the Worship of God than for the express Commandments of
God: So were the Scribes and Pharisees, to whom our Savior answered, In vain
do you worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men. I know
several persons who are free from scandalous sins themselves, and yet would not
be half so much troubled to see their Friends Drunkards, Swearers, etc. (which
are express sins against the Law of God) as to hear them speak a Word against
some Ceremonies and Traditions appointed by Men, and which themselves grant to
have no Intrinsic Moral Good in them, and to be things purely indifferent in
their own Nature: And these ignorant persons will liberally censure and condemn
all others for Schismatics that do not conform to their blind Notions. Others
there are who lay a great stress on being of such a Party, Church or Sect,
whereby they are distinguished from other Christians, while in the mean time
they take little care of their Conversations, nor to walk according to the
Obligations they profess to be under: And many such, (God knows) that under
such a Profession will not stick to defraud and overreach others in dealing,
and without Reason to judge and censure others that are not of their Party: So
that there are Hypocrites both on the Right Hand and on the Left.

Thirdly, I come to speak of the Sins of those that are sincere Believers, and
truly pious as to the main. Scripture and Experience tells us, that even such
may sin, and have sometimes and in some things sinned, and that greatly as to
some particular sins, though they have not made a trade of sin, as impenitent
Unbelievers do; nay, it is possible such persons may be guilty of some sins
that a wicked Man cannot commit, as Spiritual Pride, Luke-warmness, sensible
Decays of Grace, partial and temporary Backslidings, and the like; and for
want of Holy Watchfulness and Diligence in a course of Holiness one Believer
may commit more sins than another, and may bring many Spiritual and Temporal
Judgments upon himself in this World; such as Spiritual Desertions or Hidings
of God's Face, Terrors of Conscience, outward Losses and Crosses wherewith God
will humble him, and bring him to Repentance: Yea, (which is more to my purpose
at this time) these sins may and will help to hasten and pull down public
Judgments upon a Christian Nation, such as the taking away the Gospel in it is
outward Dispensation by a Public Ministry and outward Liberties and
Properties. Israel of old, and the Churches of France of late, have been sad
Instances of this Truth: Nay, I will add, that in some sense the sins of
Believers admit of greater Aggravations than the sins of Unbelievers. As,

First, They sin against more Light and Knowledge than others.

Secondly, They sin against greater Love and Kindness than others do or can;
and the sensible Experience and Manifestation of that Love.

Thirdly, Against (...) Grace and Power to resist Sin that others are wholly
destitute of. Fourthly, Against those solemn Engagements, Promises and
Resolutions against Sin, whereby they had tied and bound themselves to God.

Upon these Accounts the Sins of Believers are and may be more provoking to God
than the Sins of others, and more hasten public Judgments: And therefore this
should be an Argument to such to look to themselves, and to humble themselves
greatly before God for these provoking Sins of theirs, that do not only bring
down particular Temporal Judgments upon themselves, but upon the whole Nation.
God has a principal regard to the Demeanor and Carriage of his own Children;
and none have so great an Influence upon Public Judgments or Mercies as they.
If they are watchful, zealous, devout, and give themselves to Prayer, and other
good Duties, they may and do often procure Public Mercies, and the continuance
of them, and keep off Public Judgments: Yea, we have Instances of a very few
of such as these that have done wonderful things this way: Had there been but
Ten such Persons in Sodom, as wicked as it was, it had been spared longer, as
for the sake of one righteous Lot it had been spared so long. O the signal
great Blessings that a single Moses, a Joshua, a Samuel have procured to a
sinful People! and the dreadful Judgments they have staved off by their earnest
Supplications! These are the Chariots of Israel and the Horsemen thereof; that
is, their Piety and Prayers are as much or more successful against the Churches
Enemies than Armies. On the contrary, if Professors grow loose, let down their
Watch, and begin to conform to the World, then these cease to be successful
Intercessors for an ungodly Nation, (being under the provoking Guilt of Sin
themselves.) And so God brings Judgments upon the Circumcised and
Uncircumcised; they sin together, and shall suffer together. How is this
verefied in France at this day, and it is one of the worst Prognostics of
England's further Calamities. Never was there a greater Conformity to the World
in Professors both Ministers and People, in them and their Families than at
this day. Surely we have more cause than Paul had to say, All seek their own,
and not the things of Jesus Christ. Look upon those that profess Piety and
Impiety, and among the generality it will be a hard matter to find any
difference, except a bare Profession; That Faith, Love, Charity, exact Justice,
Sobriety, Self-denial and Temperance in Meat, Drink, Apparel; that
Heavenly-mindedness, that Contempt of the World that was so eminent in the
Primitive Christians, yea, I may say in the Primitive Protestants, is scarce
now to be found: There is indeed abundance of Profession, great Contentions for
Opinions and Parties, but the Power of Godliness is lost or dwindled away into
an empty lifeless Form. This is the great Original Cause and Ground of all
God's Controversies with us and our Neighbor Churches, which has not been
rightly considered and laid to Heart by us or them to this day: Had it been so
indeed, sure we should have been at least as diligent in reforming Vice as in
raising Armies. The long expected Work of Reformation would have gone on at
another rate than it has done. O that God would help us to see the things that
belong to our Peace, before we come to feel what it is to lose our Peace!

I come now under the Fourth and Last Head, to speak of those Persons, who not
acknowledging the beforementioned wonderful Providence of God toward this
Nation, especially in the late great Revolution, are unthankful Murmerers
against God, and Enemies not only to those whom he has been pleased to make the
Instruments thereof, but to their own Country: They dislike the Mercies of God
because he has not ordered matters in their way, namely, to preserve Protestant
Religion and Property by Popish Governors and Councils.

I shall in speaking to this, show what sort of People these are, the pretended
Reasons of their Discontents, and Unreasonableness of them, with the true
Reasons for their Enmity to the present Government.

1. What sort of People these generally are. And here it may reasonably be
demanded, Why I rank this sort of Sinners by themselves? Will they not come in
under some of those Heads of Sins and Sinners I have mentioned before, namely,
such as are openly Profane, or pretendedly Religious? Yes, doubtless; for it
has, and may be truly observed, that the generality of these Murmurers are not
only weak in their Intellectuals, but wicked in their Morals; and more than a
good many of them do not so much as pretend Conscience in any other Points,
except that relating to the Government, and a mistaken Notion of Passive
Obedience. Therefore as to the generality of these, I think I may affirm of
them without being guilty of Uncharitableness, they may be found and included
under the Rank of the Profane or Hypocritical; for they who pretend a mighty
tenderness of Conscience for a mistaken Duty toward one single Person, who was
and is an Enemy to their Country and Religion, and can dispense with all other
Obligations both to God, Religion, and their Country, may very rightly be
termed profane Persons and Hypocrites too. The Reason therefore why I mention
these Murmurers in a Head by themselves, is not because they are not included
already under the kinds of Sin beforementioned, but because they are double
Enemies to the Government, and to the Happiness of the Nation. But some may
object, Do you not believe there are some pious conscientious Dissenters from
the present Establishment, who act out of pure Dictares of Conscience
abstracted from all sinister Interests, and that after the best Information
they have, or may have to satisfy themselves. I answer, If there are any such
as these, they ought to be pitied; but for my own part, I must say, I am not
acquainted with one Person that now denying Allegiance to the present
Government, I can reckon of this number; though I will not deny but some few such
there may be, and who are also regular in their Morals as to other matters; and
these are they who may properly be termed Bigots, and who are to be dealt with
in their Notions as we do with the Conscientious Papists as to their Religion,
who having by Education or otherwise imbibed false Notions and Doctrines, and
so misinformed their Consciences, believe they ought to hold and contend for
the Mass and Transubstantiation, as others know in their Consciences they ought
not: And such Bigots either to Popery or mistaken Notions of Government, are
indulged by it so long, as they live peaceably, and do not by plotting or
caballing seek to disturb it; for if they do, I know no reason why the
Government should be prejudiced to gratify such troublesome Consciences as
these are.

All our Murmurers may be ranked under these Six Heads.

1. Such as in the late Revolution sat still, and had indeed no hand either
toward putting down the late King, (unless by their Non-assistance) or in
setting up their present Majesty's.

2. There are others of them, and those not a few, who gave their Assistance by
Word and Deed in the late Revolution, and countenanced the then Prince of
Orange's coming, but designed all this, (as they say) only to obtain a Free
Parliament; and so (according to a new Notion of Passive Obedience which they
took up for that turn) to bring their King James to some good Terms, and to tie
up his Hands a little; but poor Men, it was never in their Thoughts (so dark
were their Intellectuals) that the Representative Body of the Nation should
make the Prince of Orange King. Now the first of these sorts, notwithstanding
their Boasting of Loyalty, have shown themselves no Friends to the late King;
and the other have manifested themselves to be Enemies to the late King, as
well as they now declare they are Enemies to this: For by their own Maxims and
Principles, it is as truly Treason to assist others in pulling down a King, as
to pull him down with their own Hands: And this is also repugnant to their own
Notion of Passive Obedience. And therefore this sort of People or wretched
Pretenders to Loyalty, are true to no King or Government, and are plainly
Hypocritical Persons, and inconsistent with themselves. But,

3. There are another sort of People, that as much as in them lay were Enemies,
and did oppose the then Expedition of the Prince of Orange, and were mightily
troubled when he was proclaimed King; but yet did afterward (for Reasons best
(tho not only) known to themselves) Swear Allegiance to their present
Majesty's, and yet for all this are Murmerers and Repiners, and will consort
and cabal with professed Enemies to the Government. These Men are apparently
Men of no good Consciences, but jest with Oaths, and (Janus like) carry two
Faces under a Cover, and will have two Strings to their Bow, that if one fail
the other may hold.

4. There is another sort of Murmerers that were Instruments of Arbitrary
Government in the late Reigns, and in some Office or other, and now cashiered,
because they are not fit to be trusted, or cannot so easily get into such
Beneficial Offices again; or such, who being quite out at Heels and Beggars,
look for another Revolution in hopes to ketch something by fishing in troubled
Waters; and these pretend a great deal of Conscience for the late King, but
with what Sincerity I leave the considering Reader to judge.

5. Some others also there may be, who formerly owned and contended for an
absolute and unlimited Passive Obedience, which they are now convinced were
inconsistent with our Legal and Limited Monarchy, but yet think it more for
their Reputation to continue in their Errors, than publicly to acknowledge
their Mistakes.

6. Others there are that think the present Taxes the Wars occasion to be great
Burdens, and fancy if the late King had continued, there had been none of
these, or much less, and therefore they murmur, and are discontented at the
present Government, which yet they would never do, if they seriously considered
these following things:

1. Nothing is more apparent than that our present Taxes and Burdens were
occasioned by the Misgovernment of the last Reigns, wherein if matters had been
taken in time, there might have been such Measures laid, as to have kept France
to her just Bounds and Limits, and thereby have wholly prevented the present
Wars, or at least made them more easy, and less chargeable and dangerous.
Therefore our present Burdens are not to be imputed to this last Revolution.

2. Suppose the late King had been now Reigning, he must either have sided with
France against the Confederates, or stood Neuter, or joined with the
Consederates, as now we do. If the first of these, there must have been
considerable Taxes given to help France to conquer our Neighbors, and then our
selves at last: For it may easily be seen there are no Leagues can bound or
limit the French King's Ambition. If we had stood Neuter, our Fate would have
been the same, and Flanders had doubtless long before been swallowed up by the
French Leviathan. If the last, then our Case had been just as now it is, and we
must have had the same Taxes.

The plain Case of the last great Revolution in short was this, The late King
had begun, and was further contriving and endeavoring to subvert the
established Religion, Laws and Properties of the English Nation, and to
introduce Popery and Slavery; and was confederated with a Prince, who was not
only an Enemy to them, but to the Protestant Religion in general; yea, a
public Enemy to all his Neighbors round about; and thereupon a Foreign State
and Prince who is the Head of it (that owed no Subjection to the late King)
knowing that their Ruin, as well as the Ruin of the whole Protestant
Interest, was projected by these two Princes, and this Foreign Prince by his
Princess being next in Succession to this Crown, and being credibly informed
that unlawful Arts were used to deprive them both thereof; he (as well to
assert his own Rights and the Rights of all England, as for the Interest of the
States over whom he presided, and as the chief Head of the Protestant Interest;
yea, I may add, and for the Civil Interest of many other oppressed parts of
Christendom) did generously venture his All to make an Expedition into this
Kingdom, and prevailing therein, the late King thought fit to withdraw his
Person, having lost his Power, whereby the Throne became vacant, and so another
Power came in his room, and such as was freely chosen by the Representatives of
the whole Nation, who are the only Persons fit to judge and determine so great
and important an Affair, as was and is to the good liking and Approbation of
the Majority of the People, (for no Nation can be well a Day without a Supreme
Head or Power.) And these are now the Powers in being, to which the Subjects
owe Allegiance. So that upon the whole, it is plain that the late King's
Misgovernment was the Original Cause or Occasion of his Abdication, and all his
Misfortunes; and it was not the fault of the People, they not being obliged by
any Law of God or Man to give him any Assistance in that Work and Business he
was going about: For it is not lawful for any Man at the Command of the
greatest King on Earth, to assist him in destroying the Religion, Laws and
Liberties of his Native Country. And the late King believed this, for which
cause he raised a standing Army to assist him in his Work, but that failed him
too. So that the whole Revolution was a gracious as well as wise and powerful
Work of Divine Providence, who has, and ever will have a Prerogative of pulling
down one, and setting up another, when and how he pleases. And the Present
Government being to the good liking of the Representatives and Generality of
the People, and solemnly engaged to conserve their Religion, Laws and
Liberties, and actually do so, it is a Lawful Government, and calls for a Legal
Subjection.

And therefore what Reason have any now to plead the Obligation of former Oaths
of Allegiance, which are rendered impracticable to any but such who think it is
their Duty to embroll and enslave their Native Country.

Thus much have I written, which I hope will be satisfactory to all
dis-interessed, sincere and unbigotted Readers, and is sufficient to convince
all our present Murmerers, if they will but open their Eyes, and make use of
their Reason, and lay aside all Prejudice, Passion, and Self-conceitedness.

Having now given a brief Account of those sorts of Sins and Sinners which the
Nation is full of, and which threaten us with all sorts of Judgments, as Wars,
Earthquakes, Famine, Pestilence, etc. some of which we have already felt in
part, and do still feel. Methinks a general Exhortation will not here be
improper to press them earnestly to a general Repentance and Reformation, as
ever they would prevent a general Destruction. And I would urge this Advice by
two great and weighty Motives.

I. From a Consideration of their Souls. II. Their outward Estate and
Prosperity in the World.
1. The Soul, which is the best part of Man, [the Man of the Man] if the Word
of God be true, and Christ no Liar: Except ye repent, ye shall all perish No
Repentance, no Salvation.

2. But if Men are so sensual, they do not, will not regard the Eternal
Concerns of their Souls, yet there is none but wish themselves long Life, Peace
and Prosperity in the World; but now Sin ruins all these too: Sin brings Wars,
and all other outward Calamities, and it is in vain to hope to divide Sin and
Punishment. Your Iniquities will find you out, tho Sentence against evil
workers be not speedily executed; yet it will certainly be executed, if speedy
Repentance prevent not. Though God suffers long yet he will not suffer always.

But more particularly I would here apply my self to all those that profess
themselves to be Friends of the present Government, of what Opinions, Churches
or Parties soever. You that profess you would have the Protestant Religion
secured and flourish, and would keep your invaluable Properties and Liberties,
what a shame, yea, a double Crime will it be in you to destroy with your own
Hands that which you pretend so to value; to pull down with your Sins, what you
so highly exalt with your Tongues. What is this, but to be pretended Friends,
and real Enemies? Is not England as well as other Consederate Princes now in
Consultation to provide for this ensuing Year against the Common Enemy? Are not
great Taxes necessary in order thereunto, to provide Armies and Navies? Do we
not yet feel the Weight of them, and would we not gladly be eased of them? And
will not our Successes or Miscarriages be of the greatest Importance? Do we not
need new Salvations and Deliverances? And would you have all future
Miscarriages laid at your Door, and be imputed to your Impenitency, Wickedness
and Carelessness, Security and Luke-warmness? Shall it be read in Chronicles by
our Posterity, That the Friends of the Government were the cause of it is Ruin?
Or do you think you have done all your Duty toward it is Preservation, when you
have given your Taxes, and raised Armies and Navies? No, no; give me leave to
tell you, you have done but the least part; it is True Faith, Repentance,
Humiliation, Prayers and Tears that must do the Work when all is done. There is
an admirable Passage in Exodus 17. When Joshua fought against Amalek, Moses
went up into the top of the Hill; and it came to pass when Moses held up his
Hands Israel prevailed, but when he let down his Hand Amalek prevailed. And
Aaron and Hur held up his Hands, till Amalek was thereupon subdued. If we would
have the Amalakites conquered by our Joshua, the hand of Prayer must be listed
up, supported and continued. A Spirit of Prayer and Supplication poured out
upon a People, is a more certain Sign of Success than the greatest Confederacy
and Armies without it. It Is Prayer that moves and acts these Instruments
successfully, whatever there is else. O that this one thing were once soundly
and thoroughly believed and practiced. God would soon turn his hands against our
Enemies, and the haters of the Lord should be found Liars. When we want success
in our Attempts, then there is great enquiring into the Causes; this was the
Cause, and the other thing was the Cause; here was a cross Accident, and there
was an unlucky Circumstance sell out, and so Joshua is blamed, when it may be
the fault was, that Moses's hand of Prayer was let down. And give me leave to
speak freely, I think our want of Success by Land last Year must be laid at
this door. There was Counsels sufficient, and Power and Instruments enough to
have obtained what was projected; but the hand of Prayer began to fall and
slacken: We were grown so secure and confident upon our Success at Sea, that we
thought to obtain Victories at Land with little difficulty, as if of necessity
they would even be forced upon us; and so we began to boast of, and rest in an
Arm of Flesh, and have since reaped the Fruits of it. But how few lay it to
heart! Is not there a deep Sleep and Security fallen upon the generality of the
Nation, Ministers and People; and if a Spirit of Prayer and Supplication be not
stirred up and awakened, I dread to think of the Consequences, notwithstanding
all our other Preparations.

No doubt but shortly the Piety of the Govnrnment will prescribe and enjoin
Days of Public Humiliation as formerly, which probably will be altogether
slighted and neglected by the Enemies of the Government. But shall any of the
prosessed Friends of the Government do so too, or at least, that which is as
bad, be careless, formal and remiss in the Observations of them as heretofore
the generality of them have been? Will God accept of Mock-Fasts and
Humiliations? Will they not rather bring down Cursings than Blessings? What if
our Joshua, when he is going forth with the Host, should put out his
Proclamation, directed to his professed Subjects and Friends to the Government,
and should say after this manner, I am now going forth against the Common
Enemy, and the Lord saves not by many or by few; I expect no certain Success,
but according as you my Subjects shall be serious, and constant, and fervent in
your Hearty Prayers at the Throne of Grace for me and my Undertakings: And if I
can but hear that you are all diligent in this Work at all times, but
especially on public Days of Humiliation, I shall not doubt of Success: And as
you love me, or the Prosperity of our Arms, as you would approve your selves my
true Subjects, and true Friends to the Nation, I charge you to be very serious
in this Work. I say, should his Majesty thus address himself to his People (as
indeed in effect he does) whenever he appoints such Days of Humiliation, would
you think your selves Friends to him or the Nation, if on such days you should
be so much unconcerned, as not to appear at the Public Congregation, or follow
your Trades and Callings on such Days; or which is as bad, without any due
Concernment of Spirit, give your bare formal Attendance at Church, and no more,
and be as little affected as the Seats you sit on, as has been the manner of
most People in the late Public Days? Will you come into the Congregation in
the Pride of your Countenances, and in the Pride of your Ornaments, as many
have done, (I wish I could say the most have not done so, and that without any
Reproof or Correction from their Ministers.) Is not this a sad Consideration,
that the generality have not yet reached to the Fasting and Humiliation of the
Hypocrite? The Prophet Isaiah tells us, as a Man may afflict his Soul, bow down
his Head like a Bull rush, and spread Sackcloth and Ashes under him, and yet
keep no acceptable Fast. But alas! how few have attained even to this, discover
neither inward nor outward Tokens of Humiliation? When Israel had sinned in the
matter of the Golden Calf, Exodus 23. God tells them by Moses, Ye are a
stiff-necked People; I will come up into the midst of thee in a moment, and
consume thee; therefore put off thy Ornaments from thee, that I may know what
to do to thee. And the Children of Israel stripped themselves of their Ornaments.
And we see what was the Consequence of it, God threatened to destroy them in a
moment; but yet upon stripping themselves of Ornaments in token of inward
Sorrow and Repentance, God did forbear to execute his Threatened Vengeance.
Truly God may justly say of most Professors in England, that he does not know
what to do with them; for notwithstanding all Judgments both felt and
threatened, they will not strip themselves of their Ornaments, but in stead of
that, are rather enlarging and multiplying their Ensigns of Pride and Vanity,
unsuitable for Christians at all times, and much more upon public Days of
Fasting. That for my part I must own, that in stead of having no more Success
in our public Concerns, I have wondered that we have had so much, or indeed any
at all: And I think we have but little reason to ascribe it (even
Instrumentally) to such pitiful sorts of Fastings and Humiliations as have been
observed by the most. If a near Relation die, most (if they can) will put on
Mourning Apparel, and continue it for a long time, in token of their inward
Sorrow for the loss of a Friend: Yea, many will lock themselves up in a Chamber
to weep and mourn in secret upon such an occasion. Now is not this palpable
Hypocrisy, that these very persons, when God shall threaten their own Souls
and Estates, and is ready to pour down his Judgments on a whole Nation, (which
is Ten times greater cause of mourning than the Death of a particular Relation)
shall make no difference between a Fast Day and a Feast Day as to their Attire
or Habit, or Concernedness of Spirit. O that God would awaken Ministers, that
they by preparitory Sermons and fervent Exhortations would awaken their drowsy
Hearers beforehand, that they may be stirred up to more due Observations of
such Days of public Humiliation, and not think it enough to give them a bare
Warning that such a day is approaching. If they would show more Zeal in this
matter, it would have a greater Influence on People. A lively serious Ministry
is absolutefy necessary to this Work in a special manner, and Ministers are and
may be guilty of the Coldness and Formality of their People by their own
Coldness and Indifferency in their Work: And if I cannot prevail for a general
Reformation, yet methinks I might for a general Humiliation, upon Fasting-days
especially, from all the professed Friends of the Government now God is
threatening us so severely. And I must tell you, that a Humiliation that will
not save your Souls, may yet move God to prolong Mercies, and defer Judgments.
Will it not be a sad Reflection for any that call themselves Friends to the
Government and Protestant Religion, if their Humiliation will not reach that of
one of the most wicked Men and greatest Hypocrites that are recorded in
Scripture? And yet I should not think my Labor lost, if I could prevail with
the generality to bring up themselves to such a Humiliation. We have a
wonderful Instance in Ahab, 1 Kings 21. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. But there was none
like unto Ahab, that did sell himself to work Wickedness in the sight of the
Lord. And he did very abominably in following Idols -- And it came to pass when
he heard those words, that he rent his Clothes, and did put Sackcloth upon his
Flesh, and fasted, and lay in Sackcloth, and went softly. And the Word of the
Lord came unto Elijah the Tishbite, saying, See thou how Ahab humbles
himself before me, I will not bring the Evil in his days. Here was one of the
vilest Sinners that ever was in the World; and God by his Prophet had threatened
to bring Evil upon him and his House; and thereupon he falls to a very formal
outward Humiliation, (for it was no more;) and yet even for this God was so
well pleased, that he deferred the threatened Judgment during Ahab's Life. Would
to God I could prevail with you to do as much in the work of Humiliation as one
of the vilest Sinners has done. Would to God the generality would but come up
to the outward Fast of the Hypocrite, we might have then some Hopes that
desolating Judgments and Evils may at lest be put off during our Days. And
would not this be wonderful mercy, and not dear bought, though we lay in
Sackcloth and Ashes not only once a Month, but once a Week for half a year
together.

But if I should not prevail with the Generality to be serious and diligent in
this Work, sure I may hope to do so with all the truly Pious and Religious: And
I hope (notwithstanding the general Corruption and Wickedness in the Land)
there is such a number of these, that if they would but diligently and
constantly in public and private Cry mightily to God under a due Sense of
their own and the public Sins and Dangers, we might yet have hopes of the
lengthening out of our Tranquillity, and diverting feared Judgments. If they
will, (Moses like) constantly hold up the hand of Prayer, and furnish
themselves with such Considerations and Arguments, which (like Aaron and Hur)
may help and support them in this Work, we may hope that our Joshua shall yet
prevail further against the Amalekites. God forbid that you should to your
other Sins add this Sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray, or in growing but
cold and formal in this Work. Many good People are apt to complain when
Judgments are threatened or inflicted. Alas! how can we expect better, when
there is so much Wickedness and Debauchery in the Nation? Whereas they little
consider that it may be as truly laid at another Door, namely, The neglect of
that fervent Prayer in themselves, which might at least have staved off
Judgments longer.

There are two sorts of People that are more peculiarly concerned in this Work.
1. All pious Ministers: It is their proper professed Office to pray, and to be
Examples and Encouragements to others. 2. All pious and devout Women; both
which are by the Law exempted from giving personal Assistance to the Wars, and
for the most part have more time and leisure for set and solemn times of
Prayer, both public and private, than others; and herein they may do as much,
nay more Service in their Closets, than others do in the Field. I remember one
of the Powder Traitors in his Letter to the Lord Mounteagle, (by which the Plot
was defeated) has this Expression, They shall receive a great Blow this
Parliament, and not know from whom. Blessed be God this Prophet was proved a
Liar. But I wish at the latter end of this present Year it may be said in Truth
concerning our Enemies, They have received a great Blow, and know not who has
done it; namely, by the Prayers of devout Christians, which may rightly be
termed White Gunpowder, which, they say, kills without making a Noise or
Report. Therefore I conclude, as ever you would groundedly hope for Mercies for
your self or the Nation. Ply this Oar of Prayer mightily, especially at this
time, when the Success of all our Public Councils and Determinations does so
much depend upon it.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for, and Sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three
Crowns at the Lower End of Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel.
SYnodicon in Gallia Reformata: Or, the Acts, Decisions, Decrees and Canons of
those Famous National Councils of the Reformed Churches in France, being a most
Faithful and Impartial History of the Rise, Growth, Perfection, Decay of the
Reformation in that Kingdom, with it is fatal Catastrophe upon the Revocation of
the Edict at Nants in the Year 1685. also the Confession of Faith and
Discipline of those Churches, their Speeches, Sacred Politics, Cases of
Conscience, and Controversies in Divinity, etc. their Government, Laws, etc.
Collected out of the Original-Manuscript Acts of those Renowned Synods. In two
Vol. Fol. By John Quick.

A Body of Practical Divinity, consisting of above 176 Sermons on the lesser
Catechism, Composed by the Reverend Assembly of Divines at Westminster, with a
Supplement of some Sermons on several Texts of Scripture. By Thomas Watson,
formerly Minister of St. Stephen's Walbrook, London. Recommended by several
Ministers to Masters of Families and others. In Folio.

Theological Discourses and Sermons on several occasions. In two Parts. By John
Wallis, D. D. Professor of Geometry in Oxford. Quarto.

A Brief Tract on the Fourth Commandment, wherein is shown the Cause of all our
Controversies about the Sabbath Day, and the means of reconciling them.
Recommended by the Reverend Dr. Bates and Mr. John How.

A Sermon Preached before the King and Queen at Whitehall, Nov. 5. 1692. By
Richard Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells.

Death Improved, and Immoderate Sorrow for Deceased Friends and Relations
Reproved. By Edward Bury, formerly Minister at Great Bolas in Shropshire.
Octavo.

A Discourse of Earthquakes, as they are Supernatural and Premonitory Signs to
a Nation, with a respect to what has occurred in this Year 1692. and some
special Reflections thereon, etc. These two last by R. Fleming, Minister at
Rotterdam, Author of The Fulfilling of Scripture. Octavo.

A Paraphrase on the Psalms of David, in Mitre. By the late Reverend Mr.
Richard Baxter.


