DECLARATORY CONSIDERATIONS Upon the Present State OF THE AFFAIRS OF ENGLAND.

By Way of SUPPLEMENT.

London, Printed, Anno 1679.

DECLARATORY CONSIDERATIONS Upon the Present State of the Affairs of ENGLAND.
OUR first Conversation and Discourse having produced what you see, it happened
that the diversity of Judgments, which was past upon it, has been the subject
Matter of this second, in which I said, that the Censors of my writing were
divided into two Classes, viz. into those who condemned the Matter and the
Publication of it, and into them, who highly approved of both, but they would
rather I had more enlarged my self upon some Considerations to bring the
Parliament to the re-uniting of Conformists and Non-Conformists, without which
we must neither hope, nor expect that the Papists should leave off the design
that they have had in hand for these so many years, of bringing Popery into
England, by such ways, as it even gives one a horror but to mention. The
Result of our second Conversation was, that we fell upon some Propositions,
which might give much satisfaction to the Censors of the latter Class, who find
no other fault in my Writing, but that I was not more prolix in those things I
have told you of. It Is a Subject, upon which, you, who have frequent
Conversations with Parliament Men, of greatest merit and eminency, ought
especially to insist upon: Tell them then, that in truth both you and I have
found the last, and, I hope, shall find these succeeding Members to be filled
with these two good designs, whereof the one is to oppose themselves to that
which the Papists have long been projecting. Viz. To bring Popery into England,
whatsoever it costs them, and rather than fail or miss of their project* to
make use of Sword, Fire, and Poison, and to Massacre those that stand in their
way to hinder them; and not so much as to spare the sacred Person of the KING,
(who is the Lords anointed, and whom he has hitherto preserved as the Apple of
his Eye, and whom, I hope and pray he will long continue among us) and those of
the Royal Family, if they are any obstacle to their designs: You and I, I say,
shall find them strongly engaged in the said design and resolution of bringing
it to a happy success, by the establishment of the Protestant Religion in such
a manner, as may perpetuate it, and transmit it to Posterity, without any
further disturbance or perplexity, and which may be inviolably fastened to the
crown of both this, and all our other Kings, that shall come after him. The
other design is to procure in the Civil State, Peace, Liberty, and Riches to
the People, in putting bounds to Monarchical Government, which although it be the
most excellent in the World, has a natural inclination to that which is
Arbitrary.

BUT neither you nor I have as yet found, that those Parliament Men have
thought upon putting the Protestant Religion on its true and solid foundations,
whilst we saw them resolved to make it descend to Posterity, in the same
constitution and posture in which they find it at this day, without any Change
or Alteration, and in that perpetual variance and discord between the
Conformists and Non-Conformists, and with all the Corruptions and Abuses, which
are known to be in the Church of England, tho the confirmation and conservation
of this Posture of the Church be incompatible with the design of vigorously
opposing the bringing in of Popery into England, and this Truth, that I have
delivered is indisputable: to wit, that the Papists will be always in the
attempt, hope, and expectation of getting in, and making to be predominant the
Roman Catholic Religion in the Kingdom, whilst that such division of Parties
shall continue, with as much, if not more, distance, animosity, and hostility
from the Conformists to the Non-Conformists, as is found between Rome, and one
of these two Parties: And whilst there shall be retained in the Church of
England so great a nearness and affinity with her as to Ceremonies, and
exterior Government.

THEREFORE to remove these obstacles, which hinder the reunion of these two
Parties so heated one against another, and which makes, ut dum singuli pugnant,
omnes vincantur, and will make that the Oppositions to the designs of Rome,
shall never be vigorous, there must be some means of Reunion found out, by
representing to the Parliament some Considerations, and afterward by proposing
to them some Overtures grounded upon those Considerations, and which tend to
the Reunion and Satisfaction of both Parties.

The first consideration is, that, as in the time of King Edward the sixth, the
Reformation, or the transferring the Roman Catholic Religion to that of the
Protestant, was to be made in a Kingdom, where of ten persons, nine of them
had strong Inclinations and good Affection to Popery, the first Reformers, who
were all of them sincere persons, and had the fear of God before their eyes, I
say, they were necessarily obliged to manage the spirits and tempers of men
with all the prudent caution they could; and though their work was absolutely
to change the doctrine of the Church of Rome, as they did, and not to retain
the least Nail, or seed of it that may any ways grow again; but to banish out
of England all the Romish Heresies and Damnable Idolatries; because that was a
thing might be done imperceptibly and without noise; so as that the people, who
are most commonly ignorant in these matters, might not be shockt at it: Yet on
the other hand they were forced to retain almost all the Government and
exterior service of Rome, and the practice of their Ceremonies, whereof a
great alteration would have caused no doubt great commotions in England. And in
truth the people, who penetrate the least into matters of belief, took no
notice that they had taken away Transubstantiation, so long as they kept up
kneeling at the Table of the Lord, and retained the outward face of Hierarchy,
of Ceremonies, observation of Festival days, of Fasts, and of Lent, which are
things that most affect the people, which they easily swallow, and wherein they
make their greatest part, if not their whole of Religion to consist: So that
the Transition of Rome to the Protestant Religion was made without noise, or so
much as the peoples being alarmed at the loss of their old Religion, which they
did only reform, (as they said) taking away some of the Abuses that had stolen
into it: This was apparent in the Insurrection that broke out in Cornwall in the
time of King Edward, against the attempt to banish the Mass; but which was
presently appeased, after they had informed the Malcontents that they had
made no other Alteration in the divine service, than only the translating of
the Mass into English.

THEN we are next to observe, that though these holy persons, who first set
their hands to the work of Reformation, retained several of the practices and
Ceremonies of Rome, for the reasons aforesaid, yet it was a thing far from
their thoughts to be willing to have the Infallibility of Rome be according to
their first resolutions accounted unalterable, as if what had been once
Established, should not need to be touched over again, since they only designed
to give the first draught (as it were) of the Reformation, adjusted to the
posture of England in their time, not to what they could have wished, but to
what they were able to do: for as we learn by some Letters of Calvin and Peter
Martyr, the first Reformers did promise themselves much, that their Successors
would go from those first Rudiments of Reformation, to that which should be a
more perfect and exact work when the people should be more illuminated, and the
number of Protestants should be greater: Et sic a talibus Rudimentis (says
Calvin in his Epistle to the English men, where he calls those Rudiments
tolerabiles ineptias) incipere licuit, ut doctos tamen probosque and graves
Christi Ministros; ultra eniti, and aliquid limatius and purius quaerere
consentaneum foret. The first Reformers acted in that manner as persons carry
themselves in the first Establishments of States and Kingdoms, wherein the
Legislators do not propose to make a perfect Model of Government, which neither
can, nor ought to suffer a change from good to better: And so it is in the
first Invention of Arts, as of Paper, Printing, concerning Navigation,
Painting, or any other curious work, etc. in which it is never to be expected,
that one should attain the height of perfection at one dash or Essay, and where
oftentimes, what the first Inventors have projected, is not practicable by
those that come after them.

BUT those who have succeeded the first Reformers, have not trod in their good
steps, nor have they been influenced by the Interests of Heaven, but by those
of this World: As five, or six hundred persons of the Clergy, the Bishops,
Deans, and Canons, have got into the possession of two thirds of the
Ecclesiastical Revenues, they are now become Zealous Opposers of the work of a
more perfect Reformation, and block up all the Avenues to all attempts of
dividing the Benefices more equally than they are, and which are enjoyed by a
very small inconsiderable number of persons. They labor to persuade those that
have the rule over them, that what the Non-conformists call but a breaking
forth, or rude Essay of Reformation, in the time of Cranmer, and Ridley, was a
perfect work and Masterpiece, which ought not to be meddled with any more,
unless by a greater affinity with Rome: Above all they labor to infuse into
the minds of these Crowned heads, that the KING at the head of the Convocation,
and even by his sole Power and Authority can give Laws to the Church
independantly on His Parliament, and so by that means to continue an
Ecclesiastical Empire separate from the Civil, and to make it rest upon that
small number of the Clergy which possesses the two thirds of Ecclesiastical
Revenues.

TO be short, as the Successors of Cranmer and Ridley saw, that the design of
those glorious Martyrs could not take its effect, but by depriving them of
their Empire, and of all their fat Benefices, they have acted just quite
contrary to what they had in their Eye to be brought to pass: for instead of
getting further and further from the Doctrine and practices of Rome, they have
been always advancing more and more to them; whereas the first Reformers, in
retaining some of the Ceremonies of Rome, did principally intend by that
nearness of affinity with it, to draw over those of that Communion to their
own; and not to impose them with rigor on the Protestants; those who have come
after them, have turned a means of Peace and Reconciliation, into an Apple of
discord, division, and Schism: Whereas the first Reformers had pulled down the
Altars, these have set them up again: Whereas those above all things aimed to
respect the Churches beyond Sea, and to keep a strict Union and Friendship with
them, their Successors have banished them both from their Society and
Communion, and have turned Calvin into redicule, and fanaticisme. Their
Animosity is so far carried out against the Churches of France, that Henry
Dodwell has maintained to Dr. Tillotson, that the Reformed Churches in France
had better by much have kept in the Communion of the Church of Rome, than be
governed as they are without Episcopal ordinations.

AS to the Overtures to a Reunion, it is to be expected from the Wisdom of the
Parliament, that they will do all, that their first Reformers would have done,
if they were alive at this day, for a perfect establishment of the Protestant
Religion, against the attempts of Rome, and that they will act the Reverse to
what the Successors of the first Reformers have practiced, which has been
continually to oppose, and bring obstacles to the good designs of both KING and
Parliament, who would have made, no doubt, before this time a Reformation of
the Abuses of the Church of England: As when the House of Commons has made
(what they have often attempted) preparatory Acts, to give bounds to the
immeasurable Jurisdiction of the Bishops, to give them Assistants, to take away
the plurality of Benefices, and to reduce Chapters to a better pass and usage
than they are at this day, which nourishes only idleness and sloth. And when
in the 13. year of Q. Eliz. there was a Statute made, which obliged Ministers
only to subscribe to the Articles concerning Doctrine; the corrupt party of
the Church of England always rendered fruitless and insignificant, all these
fair Overtures of Union, and even have trampled upon the Models proposed by the
good Bishops Usher and Hall, and with heat and transport opposed the
Establishment of that excellent Model, which our gracious KING CHARLES the II.
proposed at the time of his Restoration to the Crown, and which it could be
wished, that the Parliament would again take into their serious Consideration,
as the only remedy to reunite both Parties, and to settle the Protestant
Religion upon its firm and natural Basis, and render it impenetrable to all the
designs and attempts of the Papists.

THIS Model is so much the more excellent, as it is formed upon that of the
People of God, among whom the Church and Republique were Synonimous terms: and
the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was not distinct from the Civil: for the
Sacrificers, as such, were not invested with any Jurisdiction. Naturaliter
Sacerdotibus, (says Grotius de Imperio summarum Potestatum, cap. 9. sect. 3.)
nulla jurisdictio competit, quare etsi Sacerdotes habuerunt jurisdictionem, non
habuerunt ut Sacerdotes, sed ut Magistratus.

AND it is therefore to be hoped and expected from the Wisdom of the
Parliament, whose designs have been of late vigorously seen to oppose Popery,
that they would banish this Maxim of a Collaterality of Jurisdictions, which
establishes it mightily in the world. Methinks it is so much the more
Erroneous, as it was disputed against in the year; 1641. By the Author of an
Excellent book, the title whereof is, The Heritage of Bishops (and who it is
thought was a Bishop) for he there expressly denies their right of Suffrage and
voting in the house of Peers: as you may see by his words, page 22. Dogma est
pontificium, quod regimen Ecclesiasticum est distinctum a civili, etc. That
opinion which distinguishes the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction from the civil is a
pure piece of Popery: It is affirmed by Bellarmine (libr. de Pontifice cap. 5.)
with an accent of so much the more assurance, as it is not contested, neither
by the Protestant Doctors, nor by those of Rome, this is what that Cardinal
affirms from a pure motive of interest, that so he might exalt the power of the
Pope above that of KINGS and Princes, and that so he might exempt the Clergy
from their submission to the Secular Authority.

Calvin agrees with Bellarmine, Instit. lib. 4. cap. 11. Sect 1. etc. But let
it not displease them, though this opinion be the Idol of all the world, and it
has run through all places; and though not only in England, but elsewhere the
Ecclesiastical Courts are distinct from the Civil; yet I do boldly maintain,
that this opinion and this Practice is not approved of by God, and is contrary
to the ancient practice under the legal Economy, and is the cause of the
introduction of Popery into the world, and of the disorders that have since
come by it.

AGAIN this Model of Government made by the KING, or by his Parliament, is so
much the more considerable as it has an harmonious concurrence with that of
the first Reformers in England, and elsewhere, when they made but one body of
the Church and of the Republic, and did put Ecclesiastical power into a mere
mockery and illusion, and excommunication they made of it a fantasme, unless
both were subordinate to the Civil power: Such were Zuinglius, Cranmer, Ridley,
Hooper, Martyr, Bullinger, Musculus, Gualterus, and those who succeeded them,
the two Bishops Wilson and Andrew, Richard Hooker, Dr. Stillingfleet, Cameron,
Tilenus, Rivet, Vedel, Maccerius, Des-Marets, Mastrezat, Mr. Gaches in his
Sermon at the ordination of Mr. Sarrau, Mr. Mussard, and a hundred others.

AS to the other overtures for the establishing of good Religion and good order
in the Church, it is not necessary to speak of them in particular and retaile,
so long as those who set at the helm of affairs know that the Reformation
must begin by that of the Universities, banishing out of those Schools all the
Doctrines and persons infected with the Heresies of Rome, Pelagius, and
Socinus; and putting into their places such as were in them about twenty years
ago, or the very Individual persons if they are yet living.

IT is to be wished also that these Sages of the Parliament would well consider.

1. THAT the first Legislators never made Laws to the people until they had
before hand thoroughly weighed, whither their dispositions were likely to
receive them, and the number of the persons, either who would in all
probability submit voluntarily to them, or who possibly might be extreme averse
to those laws.

2. THAT as it is altogether unreasonable, nay impossible, to impose upon the
Scotch people the Ecclesiastical Government, the Liturgy, and the Ceremonies of
England, for which fourscore and nineteen of a hundred have an Aversion, the
honorable Members of Parliament, would do well to take the same measures in
their debates and practices as to Reformation, that they have a design to do in
matters of Religion; and since of ten persons in England that have a love and
kindness for the Protestant Religion, there are two thirds of them that cannot
away with the Episcopal Government, in that manner as it is at this day
established, at least the Liturgy and the Ceremonies, it would be to act
contrary to Reason, and to continue division, disorder, and animosities, if
they did continue the imposition of them.

3. THAT this was the thought of Mounsieur de Thou in his Preface to Henry the
fourth, that it was to sin against Reason, and the Peace of the Kingdom, to
think of being able to bring those of the Reformed Religion to the Communion of
Rome; and that the only consideration of their great number ought to persuade
the KING to give them as much Religious, as Civil, liberty.

4. THAT as to England, it ought also to be the Opinion of its Legislators: For
it has it has been that of all the great men both within, and out of England;
of a Burleigh, a Walsingham, a Bacon Lord Verulam, a Shaftsbury, and a Hollis.
It has been likewise the Opinion of the Papists themselves, and of Strangers
that have come over into England, and have made an exact search and inquiry
into the humors, the genius, and number of those people that adhere to the
reigning Religion, and of those that are contrary to it: My Lord Castlemaine
against Dr. Floyd, speaks of the Prelates as of persons that have lost their
Senses, to set upon the Persecuting of those that are much more numerous than
themselves. They would be punishing for Conscience, where above half of the
Nation is openly of a persuasion contrary to theirs; and three fourths of the
remaining parts, care not a Fiddle-stick for them.

SORBIERE in his Voyage into England says, the Churches are built after the
Protestant way, and are only great Auditories, with Galleries particularly for
the use of preaching, and some small Cantle of the Liturgy; For the people have
an aversion for it; and the Religion which is at this day received from the
State is the least followed. in page 58. he says; indeed the Presbyterians are
those that have re-established the KING upon his Throne; and it is that for
which they now reproach him, being so persecuted as they are.

ABOVE all the Italian Historian Siri is express in his History di Currenti
tempi; La puritana cice che professando il Calvinismo, nella sua rigida and
para forma, constituisie la part l'altre; and che con odio sempre implacabile
alla Religione Catholica. The meaning is, that the Puritans are that part of
the people, both the most holy, and the most numerous, as also the most
powerful, and most rich, and that have the greatest aversion to the Roman
Catholic Religion: All these considerations, and all these testimonies, are
they not sufficient to persuade our Legislators to make a Reformation adjusted
to the great number of the Puritanical people of England, and who exceed the
others not only in number* but also in purity of Doctrine, and exactness of
Life and Manners?

BUT the incongruity of making the Essay of Reformation in the time of KING
Edward the sixth, to pass for a full and complete Masterpiece, that ought not
to be touched again, is no less, than when the tenth part of the people of
England, and the thousandth part of the Protestants, would fain pass for the
Church of England, and for the only true Protestants in Europe, which ought to
be acknowledged for the holy, pure, Orthodox, and visible Church of Jesus
Christ upon the Earth, at least, which ought to have the right hand of
excellency before all the Churches Reformed from Popery, to which belong the
Succession of Pulpits since the Apostles, the purity of Doctrine, and holiness
of life, only for this reason, because it possesses the Episcopal Ordination:
for it is much after this manner that the Doctors, Stillingfleet, Tillotson,
Floyd, and Mr. Durel, speak of it: When they invest five or six hundred of the
Beneficed Ministers with the name of the Church of England: This is indeed no
better than a piece of refined fashionable No-sence, to affirm, that the first
draught of Reformation ought to pass for a perfect work, that must admit of no
hand to come over it again, and give it the last live touches; and that a
handful of persons in a Corner of the world, moved and actuated by such
Interests, as I am unwilling to name, must needs be, above all others in
Christendom, the little flock of Jesus Christ.

ALSO this opinionative humor of rejecting since the time of KING Edward the
sixth, all the overtures of going over the reformation again, is not an effect,
neither of the wisdom of Heaven, nor even of that of this world, and of
persons that have but the least reason and common sense, who know that it has
been the practice of all ages, and of all the successors of the first
Legislators, who being sensible that those have not been able to foresee in the
first Establishing of Laws, the inconveniences which may arise from them, are
forced many times to repeal some of the first laws, or at least to make some
change and alteration of them. This is what the Parliaments of England have
always done; but this is what the Church of England has never been willing to
do.

YOU expect it may be, that I should pass from those that approve of my writing
to them that condemn it, but it would be labor lost to attempt the Cure of
their prejudices, or the giving them any satisfaction, unless they do convince
me of a lie, or that I have mak'd or disguised, by some sinister
interpretation, the opinions of those great men whom I allege: Unless we can
do that, I shall remain constant in that opinion, that those who condemn my
writing are as much under the Tyranny of prejudices, as those who speak against
my Iugulum causae, and my Fasciculus; as if they were pernicious pieces that
tend to the ruin of the Church of God, to the subversion of all good order,
and which are the production of a person that is moved by an evil spirit, or at
least, that is a seer of contentions, and an Enthusiast: For these are the
Ideas of my person, and of my writings, quite contrary to those that one of the
great men in the Protestant party has conceived both of me and them: He has not
indeed forbad me to name him, but he has not likewise given me the permission
to do it, so that it will be a very Innocent Action to produce here a fragment
of the Letter he wrote to me, which is dated from Paris the 28 of March, 1679.

SIR,
IT was my happiness to have a little Book written by you, and entitled
fasciculus, etc. fall into my hands some weeks ago; I read it, and when I had
done, went through it again with an extreme pleasure, and great advantage: I
discovered in it important truths, which I was, I must confess, ignorant of
until then. To do you justice, I must acknowledge that it is you, who have put
the last hand to the Reformation, which remained imperfect and unfinished
without your generous Successor, and which being destitute of your
illuminations, has not made any progress for this hundred years. You are the
first that has discovered the Mystery of Iniquity at the root and bottom, and
who show to all that will not be longer blinded by interests and prejudices,
the infallible means to ruin Antichrist, and to downfall the Beast. Before you
had taken the hoodwink from my Eyes, I thought Excommunication was as solidly
grounded upon the holy Scripture, as any of our Articles of Faith, especially
when I heard our Ministers, say with so much assurance; in the name and
Authority of Jesus Christ, I excommunicate, etc. But I see by the solid and
unanswerable refutation, that you make from the principal passage upon which
they pretend it is strengthened and supported, nothing to be more vain than
what they allege to establish that fantasme, as you call it truly well. I
thought, Sir, it was my duty to testify my acknowledgements to you, and to
thank you most heartily for the good Office you have done me: Ingenui est
pudoris fateri per quos profeceris. Assure your self, Sir, that I will not hide
this Talent, I have received from you in a Napkin: But I will endeavor to the
utmost of my power and interest to make known these truths that you have
discovered, and to gain you Proselites: May you always keep firm against the
Persecutions, etc.

BUT thought it to be an Action very Innocent to Print the Letter of this great
man, whilst I do not name him, and he is not known by any of my Friends: Yet I
had not made it public, if my Age of Seventy four years did not convince me,
that if I should stifle during my Life this clear evidence of my good cause, by
so eminent an Authority, it might in all probability remain in the Grave of
silence with me to the Resurrection: And my new thoughts by way of an Essay
toward an Ecclesiastical History might also run the same risque. This
consideration has carried me to add to his Letter the Arguments of all the
Chapters of my Book, rather for the satisfaction of him, whom I find so
agreeing with my Sentiments, than for that of any other person: That so if God
gives me any longer time to live, he may have farther profit, and draw from me
those pieces that go to the making up of my History, to which he may give a run
in the World with greater facility.


FINIS.
A NEW ESSAY Toward a TRUE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY Which may serve as A KEY TO
THE ANNALS OF BARONIUS
The Preface.
Or, An IDEA of the BOOK.
Chap. 1. OF the Origin of Church Power from the time of Jesus Christ, and of
Saint Paul: and of its progress even to the time of the Decretals; that it is
the true Mystery of Iniquity.

Chap. 2. A Continuation of the same matter a little more exact, even to the
Council of Calcedony.

Chap. 3. A farther History of the Ecclesiastical Power from the Council of
Calcedony down to the time of the Introduction of the Decretals.

Chap. 4. Another Discourse about the same matter: that the Decretals have made
the Pope the Head of the Ecclesiastical Power, and have given him an Empire
over Kings and Nations, and do yet continue the possession thereof to him; and
though the falsity and cheat is discovered even by the Romanists themselves,
yet it is not in the Power of that to shake it.

Chap. 5. A Continuation of the same subject in somewhat a more exact manner.
That the Decretals have established the Pope to be Governor in Chief of the
Catholic Church.

Chap. 6. Tho the Pope be an earthly Prince, not only in his own Territory, but
also in the states of others, and he may by a just title keep an Empire over
them, and have the priority of them; yet it is not by the possession of that
earthly Empire, either over them, or in his own Territory, that he makes
himself considerable in the World, but it is by this deceit and illusion of
Words Ecclesiastical and Spiritual; under the mantle of which he conceals his
earthly Empire.

Chap. 7. A Resolution of that Question, Why the Popes do prefer the possession
of their Empire by frauds, tricks and impostures, under the disguise of those
words Ecclesiastical and Spiritual power, to the possession which they might
lawfully have under its true name of earthly Empire, in the same manner as
Princes possess theirs?

Chap. 8. Of Religious and Civil Adorations: Of those which the Popes did
formerly give to Emperors; and of that which Emperors and Kings give to him
now at this day. Of the sin that is in it: that the presence of the
Ecclesiastical power, does make those Adorations and kissings of the Foot to be
criminal, but its absence makes them Innocent.

Chap. 9. Of the Agreement and difference of the Pope's Empire with that of the
Roman Emperors: That he is the true, and also, in some manner, the legitimate
Successor of those, and possesses the same Empire.

Chap. 10. Of the Artifices preparatory to the Introduction of the Decretals,
which the Popes have made great use of to dispose the people to submit
themselves to their Empire, or power Ecclesiastical.

Chap. 11. Of the Artifice of the Popes to prevent the discovery of the
Decretals Imposture, in securing to themselves the fidelity of the secular
Clergy, and in creating another Clergy far more numerous.

Chap. 12. Of the Artifices and reasonings of Baronius, who, confessing the
Popes, immediately after the Introduction of the Decretals, to be infamous and
Abominable persons, draws from thence an Argument to exalt so much the more the
Authority of the Church of Rome, and to inhaunce the Valuation of its Truth,
its Holiness, Infallibility, and Perpetuity.

Chap. 13. A touch of some considerable Legends and Impostures in the Annnals
of Baronius, to raise the Jurisdiction Ecclesiastic above the Civil; and to
justify the Power of the Popes to dispose of Empires and Kingdoms, and to
depose Emperors and Kings: By which a judgment may be made of the entire
piece of the Annals, and of the sincerity of the Author in all his work. In a
word, as the Annals of Baronius are nothing else th^n the History of the power
Ecclesiastic, and of its Establishment in the world; so likewise the
overthrowing of that power is the refutation of all Baronius.

Chap. 14. That the presence of the Ecclesiastical power in the world submits
to the Pope, reasonably and naturally the Civil power, and justifies the
Excommunication and deposition of Kings and Emperors.

Chap. 15. That the Hypothesis of an Ecclesiastical power is more reasonable
according to the practices of Rome, than the manner in which the Protestants
have used it.

Chap. 16. That the Religion of Rome is nothing else but the people's adhearing
to the Pope; with an examen of that Maxim, that there is no Salvation for those
who are separated from the Pope; and have no Communion with him.

Chap. 17. Continuation of that abusive Maxim, that there is no Salvation out
of Communion with the Pope.

Chap. 18. Continuation of the same matter, by a method that is more powerfully
destructive of that abusive Maxim of Rome, and by Arguments that come near to a
demonstration.

Chap. 19. A clear demonstration that before the Refusal that Gregory the first
made to the title of Universal Bishop, and before the Introduction of the
Decretals, the Pope was not acknowledged Governor in chief of the Catholic
Church: But that the Power Ecclesiastic which reigned then, was partaged, and
possessed in Common by the Bishops of great Seas.

Chap. 20. Of the Artifices of the Popes to dispose the people to submit
themselves to their jurisdiction, at the time of the dissolution of the Roman
Empire, and the Expulsion of the Lumbards by the French.

Chap. 21. Of the Impostures and Cruelties which the Popes have exercised in
the prosecution of the Holy-War, to submit King and people to their Empire, or
power Ecclesiastic.

Chap. 22. That the greatest men of the Communion of the Church of Rome, who
pass, in the esteem of Protestants and Popish Doctors, for persons of Learning,
integrity, and piety, and who also have not dissembled the corruption of the
Popes, and the Roman Church; have yet notwithstanding contributed more to the
exaltation of the Ecclesiastical power, and to the building up the Empire of
the Pope in the Territories and States of others, than those who have been sold
to the Interests of Rome, or, who have imitated the Popes in the Impurity and
filthiness of their Lives.

Chap. 23. Of the Vanity and Nullity of the eminent Authority of the Church,
and Councils, in that manner that the Doctors of both Communions spoke of it.

Chap. 24. Of the Irriparable faults committed by the first Reformers.

Chap. 25. An Examen of that received Maxim by the Doctors of both Communions;
that Excommunication is an Ordinance of Jesus Christ, altogether as necessary
to Salvation, as the Word and Sacraments: And that it is retained by virtue of
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the power of binding and loosing.

FINIS.

