THE GREAT EFFICACY and NECESSITY OF GOOD EXAMPLE Especially in the CLERGY:
Recommended in a Visitation Sermon Preached at GUILFORD.

By THO. DVNCVMB, Master of Arts, Sometimes Fellow of Corpus Christi College
in Oxford, and now Rector of Shere in Surrey.

2 Tit. 7, 8. In all things showing thy self a pattern of good Works in
Doctrine showing uncorruptness, gravity, sincerity; sound speech, that cannot
be condemned; that he, that is of the contrary part, may be ashamed, having no
evil thing to say of you. S. Hieronymus. Vehementer Ecclesiam Dei destruit,
meliores Laicos esse quam Clericos. LONDON, Printed by John Winter, for William
Cad^an, at the Pope's Head in the New-Exchange in the Strand. 1671.

TO THE Right Honorable and Reverend Father in God, GEORGE, Lord Bishop of
WINCHESTER, AND Prelate of the most Noble Order of the GARTER.
My Lord,
THis Discourse which I have presumed, more at large, to venture in the world
under your Lordships Patronage, I must freely acknowledge I first fetched it,
more compendiously, from your self, under your Lordships own Roof; where ^is
well as in the Pulpit, and in Publ^ck it cannot easily escape the Notice of any
(who will not wilful, shut their eyes) how much your vigorous Discourses, your
important Counsels, your active Endeavors, and constant Encouragements, all
concur to make and keep an Exemplary Clergy; such, I mean; as may be a more
visible grace to the Gospel, a greater Credit to the Church, a Blessing to the
King and Kingdom, and a more lively Representation of the life of Christ (the
foundation of all.)

And indeed, the present Age we live in, seems to outdo all before it, in its
louder Calls for such a Clergy, whose L^ves may be observed to keep some
better pace with their Doctrines; and not so much to fail and lurch the but
just and reasonable expectations of the People; whilst they discover some
amongst us, whose Lives, too too often prove (as it were) the death of that,
they seem to press, with more than ordinary zeal, and concernedness, upon
others.

My Lord; Its now become no hard matter to find many of our Hearers, as it
were, dead under the weight of our numerous Sermons; and there being nothing so
probably effectual, to fetch them back to life again, as the more kindly
quickening influence, they may all fe^l from our own walking more, as burning
and shining lights amongst them; I soon concluded this subject, very answerable
to so important a design; a Subject, indeed, which gave me the greater pleasure
and satisfaction in my own reflection upon it, because, whilst it but Teaches
and Instructs [many of us, the meaner Servants of the Altar] it seems only to
be a fairer Description of your Self. I know not what reception this plain
Sermon may meet withal from some in the world; but, if any shall please
themselves, in making me an example of their Contempt and Derision, for being
so dull in my Endeavors, for the awakening others, to their being better
examples in their Lives; I shall take the same liberty again, to please my self
in my own private sense and Reflections, with what sober and sincere ends, I
first gave this Discourse (such as it is) from the Pulpit; and now, have, (not
without your Lordships own signal approbation) given it to the Press, which,
indeed, I have done (next to the honor of God, and the hopes, at least, of
some small additions to the public good) from no greater motive, or
inclination, than to profess and acknowledge my self, not only within the
sphere of your Lordships own Diocese, but, to the whole world, how much I
really am,

Your Lordships most humbly devoted Servant, in all Dutiful Observance, Tho.
Duncumb.
October 14th. 1670.
1 TIMOTHY 4.12. Let no man despise thy youth, but be thou an example of the
Believers in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity.
SAint Paul having in his earlier years proved a most severe and cruel
Adversary to Christianity, of a bloody Persecutor, afterward becomes a blessed
Promoter of its opposed Interest and Reputation in the World.

He had not been, of old, so zealous in his alarms and repeated animations of
the Jews against Christ and his Cross, but afterward he is as indefatigably
sollicitous to calm and allay all those Storms and Tempests, all those Popular
Furies and Estuations he had formerly raised against them.

Hence (over and above all his own public, personal, and most painful
preaching) he dispatches, so many pious Epistles, and endeavors the
Disciplining of so many selected Persons (as we find he has done) that so
what service he could not do, immediately in his own person, for Christ, and
the Christian profession, that might be done by such Proxies and Epistolary
preparations, as he thought most expedient and conducing to so excellent an end
and purpose.

The Epistle and Person wherein my Text is concerned, are both the designed
Instruments of this great Christian Convert, St. Paul, for the more effectual
carrying on and accomplishing of this so great and important an Enterprise.

Now that he may not lose his Labor, nor have his Expectations fail him in an
Affair of so great a Value and Consideration; like a wise Agent, he first
solidly consults the true and timely Adaptation of his Medium, for the more
sure and successful accomplishment of this his propounded End: And therefore in
this Epistle, (as well as in that other to Timothy, at that time Bishop of
Ephesus) he gives him many solid and sound Instructions, relating both to the
Doctrine and Discipline of this his greater Charge and Diocese. But now,
because neither the one, nor the other; neither the choicest Doctrine, nor yet
the strictest Discipline, were like to benefit or advantage others, Effice
probis moribus and incu^p^ta vita, ut ne quis Te, contemplationem tuae
adolescentiae contemnat, says Clarius. Fac ut morum gravitate, tan tum
reverentia tibi concilies, ne quid at as tua jnvenilis, qua alioqui contemptui
obnoxia ess^ solet, tua authoritate minuat. Calv.
unless Timothy (who was to actuate and enforce them) were a good Example
himself; St. Paul in the first place, sees himself concerned to counsel and
advise Timothy, to such an exemplary Carriage and Comportment, in this his
Place and more sacred Employment, as that, the World's Reflection upon him, in
that, otherwise, undervalued circumstance of youth, may give the greater cause
to look upon him as worthy of double Honor, and to esteem him too, very highly
for his Works sake, 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.13.

Some Vegetables, the younger and tenderer they are, the greater sweetness and
fragrancy they commonly breathe forth and transmit into all the respective
parts of that place, where they are (...) which then smells sweetest, when
(...) And thus it seems St. Paul, would have his young (...) (like a Rose of
Sharon by him planted in the Ephesian soil) to have so great a flavor in the
bud, at that he may, even then appear and approve himself to be unto God (...)
savor of Christ, 2 Cor. 2.15. and unto men of Christianity in its greatest
Power and Purity. Let no man ^^spise thy Youth. -- But be thou an Example of
the Believers:

That is, It Is not enough for thee to content thy self with being a bare
Example of merely moral civilized men, (though this be very valuable in it
self) but rather raise thy Soul to some higher pitch of Piety and Profession,
and look upon thy self (especially in the place where thou art) as highly
concerned to be, no less than a lively Pattern too, of the nobler and more
excellent Persons, even of the Believers, those Heaven-born Souls, those bright
and sparkling Jewels of Heavens Bosom^ of whom the World is not worthy, Heb.
11.38. and who keep themselves unspotted from the World, Jam. 1.29. These these
are the Darlings of Heaven whom thou art carefully to teach, and to build up
more and more in their most holy faith, by thy own more holy and exemplary
Lift: Thou art to (...) them all such an exact Copy and Transcript of an
heavenly Nature and Disposition, as that thou may not ^^em to lack any part
or particular appertaining to it, but rather whatsoever it really is, in Word,
whatsoever in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, and in Purity, than especially thou
ar^ bound to show, and to confirm Believers in by way of Eminency.

It seems, by all this, St. Paul would have his Timothy (and so all others too
in his Place and Heavenly Employment) not to be like the dry and sapless stumps
of the grove, always at a stand; but like the more juicy, thriving Plants of
the Garden; keeping not only their a^ore spriteful verdure, but shooting forth
too into some higher measures of exemplary improvement and perfection: He would
have all such as are called to serve at the Altar, not only barely to keep
their sacred fire from going out, but to be exemplary too, in blowing it up
into some higher, and hotter flames, than ever yet it had before; Indeed, like
his most excellent self, when he tells the Philippians, 3. Philip 13.1. I count
not my self to have apprehended, but this one thing I do, forgetting those
things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before.

The Text then, you see (My Reverend Brethren) seems to be nothing more than
our Lure, or rather Alarm, calling us all to a greater measure and degree of
Sacerdotal exemplariness and perfection; awakening us too, out of all that
scandalous torpor and oscitancy, out of all those empty professions and
formalities, we are too too apt to allow our selves in, and to put our people
off withal, in all our respective Duties and Services; for, you plainly see,
St. Paul thinks it not enough for Timothy to be a merely speculative, notional
Divine, a great Casuist, and Critic, 2 Timothy 3.15. an excellent Textuary (or
one mighty in the Scriptures, for so Timothy was) unless he prove a good
Expositor too upon them, in his life: All these accomplishments, indeed, he
looks upon as very laudable and illustrious in their kind and place; but,
unless this Gold be well graced with the Enamel, the Rubies, and precious
Pearls of an excellent Spirit, a visible Charity, Faith and Purity, 'twill
never have that countenance, or acceptance that becomes an Ambassador of the
most high God, nor yet that sparkling taking beauty that becomes a Jewel fixed
in the sacred bosom of the Church: Wherefore St. Paul advises Timothy (and in
him all of us) above all, to approve and present our selves upon the open stage
of the world, as Examples of Believers in word, in conversation in charity, in
spirit, in faith, and in purity.

The Text then; seems to exact and call for our stricter thoughts and
reflections upon these four following Particulars, it presents us withal.

The first is, the very great (but greatly neglected) Duty of Sacerdotal
Exemplariness, indispensably incumbent upon all such of us, especially, who are
prime Rulers, or yet, but inferior Officers of the Church, in these words, --
But be; thou an example -- Thou, especially, O Timothy, who art in a place of
special trust, and Ecclesiastical Authority.

Secondly, We have a just Enumeration of all those more choice and singular
instances and particulars, wherein Timothy (and so, all others too, in his
Sacerdotal sacred circumstances) ought, especially, thus to appear and present
themselves, as eminent patterns and examples, and they are no more or less than
six, but such, as are ready to make us all bright, and victorious in the eyes
of all our severest Adversaries, viz. We must be examples of Believers in word,
in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, and in purity.

Thirdly, We have the specification of those particular persons, to whom
Timothy is thus obliged to be an example, and lively pattern, in all these
heavenly perfections, and they are Believers; such, it seems, as walk so
steadfastly by faith, 1 Cor. 4.8. that they look not at the things which are
seen, 11 Heb. 13. but confess rather that they are Pilgrims and Strangers on
earth, 2 Cor. 8.5. Such, as have so given themselves to the Lord, as that, 1
Phil. 21. to them, to live is Christ: These are the persons, before whom, St.
Paul would have his Timothy, to walk, as such a burning and shining light, in
all places, and in all his practices, as that they may, from thence, derive
fresh strength and encouragement to sight the good fight, and to run the race
that is set before them with joy, and faithfulness.

Fourthly, We have a special motive impli'd, enforcing this so great a Duty of
Sacerdotal Exemplariness, imposed in these words -- Let no man despise thy
youth; -- importing nothing more than this, That, if Timothy made not himself
thus an example of Believers ^n word, in conversation and charity, in spirit,
in faith, and in purity, he went the ready way [especially, being but a young
man] to be made, himself, by others, an example of public scorn, reproach, and
infamy. And now, having presumed to give you this plain account of the words,
and as plainly paraphrased them too, for the better advantage of the more
narrow vulgar capacities under me, I doubt not, but you all see your graver
selves, not a little concerned in them; and my self too unavoidably obliged, to
stir up all your purer minds, by way of remembrance, of the

First, Remarkable in in the Text; and that is, The great Duty of Sacerdotal
Exemplariness; Indeed a Duty never more needful from the creation, than in this
our present age and generation; an age, that flies at all Learning; an age,
matchless and incomparable for knowledge; an age, that seems to be even
surfeited with our Sermons, and now inquires and looks into nothing more, than
the lives, the faults and defects of the Clergy.

In my prosecution then, of this so important a point, I hope 'twill not appear
either unseasonable or unprofitable if I endeavor an humble suggestion of what
(I know) your more acute and piercing judgmnets, and better experience, has
already taught and told you all, concerning,

First, The great Influence and Efficacy, and then,

Secondly, The great Obligation and Necessity of Exemplariness (on our parts,
espicially) who are, 2 Cor. 5. the pro^^st Ambassadors of the most high God.

Suffer me then, a little, first to give you my present meditations (such,
possibly, as may, at least awaken your own exacter conceptions) touching the
too too much unobserved influence and efficacy of Example; for, I am apt to
fear, it is a great truth, many of us oftener mind others of, from our Pulpits,
than mind seriously our selves, as we should, when we are out of them, viz.
That Exampl's more prevailing than Precept: But, he that will be at the pains
seriously to consider, how really lifeless the most persuasive language is,
unless backed with a behavior corresponding with it:

He that will find but so much leisure, as attentively to observe, how commonly
succesless, the most unwearied, importunities, [ Si vis me slere, etc.] for
tears from others eyes are, unless our own be first Examples, themselves, in
such like dolorous effusions, will soon conclude the victorious, and triumphant
power of Example over that of the most flourisht and Rhetoricated Precept: And,
indeed, there is a natural inclination and propensness in all men, to learn the
Theory best, of such, as they know, are best at the Practick; and the reason
may be that of Seneca, in his sixth Epistle to Ludilius, where he tells him,
Homines plus oculis, quam auribus credant, That men give greater credit to
their eyes, than their ears, to what they see in us, than what they hear from
us.

Valerius Corvinus therefore, set out with advantage, when, marching against
his prepared enemy, he thus bespeaks his own Army; Facta mea, non dicta vos
Milltes, sequi volo, etc. Noble Sirs, let my Deeds be your conduct: words may
prove but wind. Let then, Tertullus his tongue be never so well tipped with his
silver persuasions, yet, if his practice give not life to his splendid
expressions, and strength to his ^eater style, he goes the ready way, to make
himself, not only derided, but ridiculous too, to all his more wary and
watchful observers. Indeed, like them, Quis de virtute locuti, etc. the Poet
points at, so approbriously, for being scarce men, for manners and
conversation, whilst they are virtues greatest Patrons, in pretense and
expression; in St. Paul's language, 1 Titus, 16. Such who profess they know God,
but in their works deny him. Weak therefore, in comparison, very feeble and
ineffectual must needs be the persuasions of a flourishing Pharisee, who says,
but does not; who makes others loaded Porters, whilst himself's but a lazy
Preacher, and imposer of the burden: This seemed so great an absurdity in the
eyes of that Holy Father St. Bernard, that we read him, in one of his Epistles,
checking it for a most praeposterous practice; Pulcherrimus hic or do est, and
saluberrimus, ut onus, quod portandum imponis, tu ports prior: Sermo quidem
vivus and efficax, Exemplar est operis; facile faciens suadibile quod dicitur,
dum monstras factibile quod suadetur. This is (says he) the soundest, and most
seemly Order and Method for men (especially for the Ministers of Christ) that
they first bear Christ's yoke themselves, which they call upon others to bear;
and then he adds, That, that Sermon is most likely to prove most quick and
lively, that is fairly copied out, and transcribed in the Teachers life: And the
truth is, there is nothing in the world makes our numerous hearers so much to
shrink, as commonly they do, under all our preceptive Doctrines, as our own
giving them too much reason to conclude them all impracticable, and impossible
too (as it were) by the looseness, and grand delinquencies, they often observe,
in some of our lives.

So great an Empire has Example!

Indeed, it must be a barren brain; a very cold and frozen invention, that is
incapable of being thawed into a flow of affectionate expressions against sin
and Sinners (especially, when the warm beams of some pleasure, interest and
reputation, beat upon it) I say, it must be an unpardonably dull soul; a very
phlegmatic Levite, that cannot make a shift (as the manner of some, is)
sometimes, pathetically and vehemently to harangue, to speech the common
people, and amuse them with an heap of Greek and Latin sentences, and notions
out of the Fathers and Schoolmen: A very Thief may discourse excellently
against that very rapine and robbery, he makes the constant trade and task of
his life; But now, that which renders a Paul, a Peter, a Timothy, and the like
Ambassadors of the most high God, to be entertained with Trophy and Triumph,
with the sincerest love and complacency in the hearts of their more wise and
wary hearers, is, their making their lives fairly parallel with their language,
and their own Exemplary diligence, in doing themselves, what; with diligence,
they incite and call upon others to do.

We are then, as truly, as commonly told, That Superiors are the reputed
Looking-glasses, by which the vulgar dress themselves; and what they see in
them, for the most part they will quickly have as visible in themselves, not
caring much, if they perish, so it be on such credit, and with such company.

It was once thought a Question, able to silence our Saviors greatest
Votaries, John, 7.48. Have any of the Rulers, and of the Pharisees believed in
him? Implying nothing more, than the great command of Exemplary greatness: for
had these Rulers, and assuming Pharisees (on whom the Jewish Nation, did then,
so fondly dote) but really done more, and talked less; had these blazing stars
but had a more friendly aspect upon the Bethlehem-Babe, he had been,
undoubtedly, embraced in those very arms, we afterward, find so deeply died
in his most sacred blood.

So great a power has exemplary greatness!

It Is not for nothing then, that our Histories inform us, how Augustus, being a
learned Prince, himself, filled Rome with Scholars; hollow Tiberius with
Dissemblers; pious Constantine, with Christians, and ungodly Julian, with
Atheists, and Apostates. Such great lights, it seems, as these, like the
glorious Sun, shed their influence irresistably, either to the impairing, or
better improving all their respective bodies, lying under them; if they be
fixed Stars, Saints eminent and conspicuous for strength and stedfastness in
the faith, and the other heavenly perfections of the Text, such glorious
examples will have the like glorious issues and effects following them; they
being like the pillar of cloud, Moses speaks of, when that went, Israel went
too.

Thus, whilst pious Joshua lives, all this people look like so many lesser
lights, kindled at that more ^lashing Lamp of Israel: Such a burning and
shining light was John Baptist, that, it even sunk the towering pride of Herod
into a confessed Reverence, both for his person and Doctrine; and whilst
Theodosius (the Emperor) will be exemplary in serving his God, his whole Court
becomes the more Religious for it: whilst they beheld their own sullied faces
in so true and clear a glass; their faults must needs be reflected with the
greater shame and regret upon them themselves: Others brighter virtues, shining
forcibly upon our own faces, naturally colors our cheeks with the sanguinary
tincture of shame, or else they quicken our souls to an emulation of the same:
It was therefore a commendable practice of that great Duke, who always, before
he went to his diet, had a basin of water brought him, with the lively picture
of Cato Major, stamped in gold, at the bottom of it; it seems, the better to
awaken his duller soul to the imitation of all those illustrious virtues, that
great example of the age he lived in was owner of: But now, on the contrary; if
these Superiors prove but blazing Comets, we may then observe they do not so
much presage, as actually procure most dismal and disasterous effects, upon
most of those inferior bodies they directly face and influence: Witness, that
great instance of the Comic, when he brings in a timorous Vitioso, encouraging
himself to an unusual villainy, Haec ego non faciam, quae Jupiter facit, says
he,

Shall I flinch to act that, that I see even Jupiter, act before my face: It
seems, that very sin he sweats, (as 'twere) to think on, at first, now, grows
more kindly and familiar, by the countenance he saw it had from his Superior:
Great men's sins, prove contagious to more than themselves. And indeed, my
little reading tells me, that the unstable vulgar, in all the Regions of the
world, have been ever carried away with the Religion of Authority: Thus, let
Aaron, the Priest, make a molten Calf, in the sight of the people, and he shall
have them Calves, themselves, or very children, in their ready compliance with
Idolatry: Let but Corah first kindle the fire (though a strange one) and two
hundred and fifty Captains will quickly bring sticks to it, and all Israel too,
will warm themselves at it. If Peter once play the dissembler, he shall quickly
have a whole troop, as good at paint and palliation as himself, with a Barnabas
to boot: We read, Gala. 2.14. St. Paul taxing this Peter, for being thus a bad
pattern. -- Why compellest thou the Gentiles, to live as do the Jews; but, how,
did Peter compel the Gentiles to Judaize: ^ Non docentis imperi^ sed
conversantis Exempl^ Hier. Ep. 11.
Not by any thing he preached to them (says a Father) but by his Example; It
seems, Peter's Example, proves the peoples compulsion; for, indeed, there is a
kind of Compulsion in Example, though not violent, yet alluring, and
attractive: Thus, let Eli's Sons appear smutty in the view of the people, and
they shall not stay long for as black a train, as themselves, to follow them;
Indeed, like Jacob's sheep; whilst they fondly pore upon the speckled Rods of
Poplar, they soon multiply into a numerous issue, as strangely speckled, as
their patterns.

And now, my Brethren! must we all grant Example to be indu'd, (as we we have
heard at large) with such an attractive assimulating virtue? Must we ascribe
such a boundless Empire and command to example, as that it makes the mightiest
Monarch, as well as the meanest Subject, to stoop to it is Scepter? And shall
not we, even we, who are God's professed Ambassadors, see our selves highly
concerned to embrace it? especially our Example being so sure a subordinate
means to make effectual that Embassy, which, otherwise, I fear, will seem (at
least, to some) but little more, than fabulous and nugatory? Suffer me then, to
pass from the great influence and efficacy, and humbly present you all with an
account of the second concern of the Text, being the great obligation and
necessity of a Religious Exemplariness, on our parts especially, who are all
made so much a spectacle to Men and Angels, as indeed, we are, during all our
continuance upon the open stage of this world.

In the general then; may not we, I say, especially, of the Clergy, all
confess, in this case of exemplary practicing (as St. Paul did, of preaching
the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16. A necessity is laid upon us, and woe be to us, if we
preach not the Gospel in a laudable life, as well, as in an intelligible
language; Woe be to us (above all others) 2 Tit. 20. if we adorn not the Gospel
of God, our Savior, in all things! especially, since I fear, that many of our
lives are, and have been such, as, were Luther now alive, he might well repeat
his old complaint, viz. Profecto aut hoc non est Evangelium, aut nos non fumus
Evangelici: That, truly, either it is not the Gospel, which we preach, or else
that we disclaim the same Gospel from being the copy, or conduct of our
practice. But this Necessity, of our being thus exemplary, above others, will
the more convincingly appear to us all, if we shall but go aside, and sometimes
consider with our selves, That there is, 1. The voice of Christ, our Master. 2.
The voice of the Gospel our Rule. 3. The voice of the Church, our Mother. 4.
The voice of Conscience, our Controller, and then, Vox populi too, the voice of
the People (our most censurious observers) all very pressing and importunate
with us all, that we, even we, above all, would (especially in the present age
we live in) be more punctual and impartial Conformists to this great Canon,
confirmed by heaven's authority, viz. Be thou an Example of the Believers, etc.
Let us here, then attend a while to all these calls, and consider all the
respective urgencies imported in them all.

First, Then, there is the voice of Christ, our Master, very urgent in this
matter: For, if Christ's common sheep must hear his voice, how much more, ought
his Shepherds then, when he calls upon them, Math. 5. To do more then others
do? telling them too, Their righteousness must exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees: Again, if Christ's common sheep must hear his voice, how
much more his Shepherds then, when he proclaims them (in the same breath) the
lights of the world, and therefore looks, that their light should so shine
before men, that they may see their good works t^ their Charity, by way of
eminency: It seems by all this, and much more, that might be suggested out of
that fifth of Matthew, Christ expects the lights of the Sanctuary, should be,
above all others, conspicuous and exemplary: They must so shine, though others
do not so: The light of the Star will not please, where the light of the Sun's
expected: A rush candle's but a Toy, a very trifle and affront, where a flaming
torch is to be tendered: Far be it then from us ever to forget the no less
just, than tart reflection of our Savior upon the Priest and Levito. Luke,
10.31, 32. where, they are both taxt for being very shrubs for Charity, whilst
a meaner Samaritane seems a towering Cedar in the same.

Christ, no doubr, looked for more Love from the Levite, 3 for more Pity from
the Priest toward that distressed Traveller, than from any other Passenger* If
a Samaritane can bestow but a single sigh upon a poor bleeding Brother, he
expects the Tribute of Tears from the other: But suppose the Priests case be
really that of St Peter, 3 Acts 6. That silver and gold he has none, yet he is
bound to give an example of giving such as he has: If he cannot show he has
bags, yet he is bound to show he has bowels; yea, what he wants in the one,
he is obliged to double in the other: If Moses stoop so low, as to sit at the
table with the Father less and the Widow, methinks it will not ill become Aaron
to lie at their Feet, for their Good; We read, John 13. that our Lord Jesus
Christ, having first washed his Disciples feet, presently prescribes a law for
them to do the like, ver. 15. I have given you an example (says he) that you
should do as I have done to you. But,

Secondly, There is the voice of the Gospel, (our Rule) very pressing too, in
this particular: You know in the general, it calls upon all, (but especially
upon us, that preach it) 2 Titus 12. That we we live soberly, righteously, and
godly in this present world: Indeed, i^ lays a necessity upon all, (but upon
us, the dispensers of it) above all, 1 Peter 2.12. to have our conversation
honest, among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against us, as evildoers,
they may, by our good works, which they behold, glorify Gid in the day of
visitation.

The truth is, if we, who preach the Gospel, do not adorn and make it bright
and glorious in the eyes of the prophaner part of the world; by such an holy
conversation, as it especially calls for from us, and it, as really deserves
from all, this must needs be the black sequel of it, That we shall (to our own
greater infamy and confusion) be found such, who basely strangled that, we
pretended to strengthen; and appear very murderers of that friend, we once made
the world believe in our Pulpits, we all valued above our lives and dearest
possessions.

Thirdly, There is the voice of the Church (our Reverend Mother) very
importunate too, in this matter; Concluding it, indeed, as well she may, the
actual prostitution of her just honor and reputation, by so many of her
professed sons, as are not thus examples of Believers, in life and
conversation: It were to disparage so Learned an Assembly, as is here, for so
mean an Orator, as my self, to display before you the incomparable Excellencies
of this our aged Mother, the Church of England. This is done already,
especially of late, by so many and matchless Pens, that it makes it
unquestionably superfluous form, were I as able, as willing, to attempt it from
the Pulpit: But this, I may, and must say, --

That She remains to this day (not withstanding all the malicious imputations
and aspersions of the black mouthed Jesuit, and all his disguised agents) a
Mother, transcendent for an exemplary purity, and many other graceful
perfections: Her respective Laws and prescriptions (though it has pleased some
certain selfish, prejudicate, and vain Opiniators of the age, we live in, to
vilify and undervalue her and them) are yet, known to persons; if not more,
yet altogether as pious and learned as themselves, to be such, as drive at
nothing more, than to dispose all her sons (but especially, those that serve at
the altar) to a superlative degree of holiness toward God, and, 2 Tit. ^. in
all things to show themselves patterns of good works to men.

It must be confessed, indeed, her sons are not all alike: It Is possible, some
there are, to be found of St Bernard's black brood, whom he brands, for being
De honestamenta Cleri, and atatis atramentum.
blots of their profession, the very scorn, and scars of the age, they live in;
And it may be too, St. Augu^tin his complaint may not be altogether unjust,
viz. That Adhuc Arca Corvum and columba^^ Continet Ang. 145. Epist.
the clean and unclean birds, the Dove and the Raven, are, to this day, in the
Ark, and Church of God: Like the holy Families of the Patriarchs, so it is with
many Churches, they have their impurer mixtures; Thus, in Adams Family, there
was holy Abel, and wicked Cain, Noah's, Family, there was blessed Shem and
cursed Ham, In Abraham's Family, there was devout Isaac, and ungodly Ishmael;
in Isaac's Family, there was religious Jacob and profane Esau; yea, in
Christ's own Family there was a Judas, a son of perdition: And thus, if the
Church of England (our Mother) may complain of her mixtures; of some Reubens,
for being as unstable as water, of some Simeon's and Levi's too, for having the
instruments of cruelty in their habitations; yet, all these, and all such, she
carefully consignes to punishment, never approves of; These, I say, (with Jacob
there) she pathetically disclaims, Genesis 49.6. O my soul! come not thou into
their secret, unto their assembly, mine honor! be not thou united.

And is it not pity? yea, is it not a great shame for any of us (the professed
sons of such a Mother) by our inexemplary and unsuitable, lives, to scandalize
her purer Doctrine, and by a loose add licentious carriage, to bring an ill
report upon her discipline?

I would it were better considered by us all, how much it gratifies the many
Papal Spies crept into our Canaan, when they hear of the high animosities and
heart-burnings, the censorious language, and the bitter invectives of Brother
against Brother, even in the bosom of this their Mother!

I could heartily wish, I say, it were taken into all our most retired
thoughts, how much it hardens and confirms the factious and schismatical, when
they observe the soft and pacifique voice of this our Mother, so little minded
by her own Sons.

It was a tart reprehension therefore (but how true, and deservedly given, I
know not) which a Romanist, I am told, gave to one of us, as of old was said of
the Monk, Tu praeter amictum,
Nil aliud verae religionis habes.


I am loath to English it, for I come not hither to fling dirt, or play the
Satyrist; but I fear, too too many of us much more mind the formality of our
habits, than the real honesty of our hearts; thinking it enough to wear our
Mother the (Churches Livery) not concerning our selves whether we do her either
service or credit by our lives.

But let not, oh! let not this our Mother complain of us, as Zion once, Lament.
4.13, 14. How is the gold become dim! how is the most fine gold changed! For
the sins of my Prophets, and the iniquity of my Priests, the people have
wandered as blind men in the streets. But,

Fourthly, Methinks, I now hear St. Peter's Cock crowing; I mean the voice of
conscience (our impartial controller) calling on us too, in this concern, and
telling, even the best of us, were we all well weighed in the balance of the
sanctuary, we should be found too light in this great Duty of being thus
Exemplary, -- many of us, seeming to be very Angels in the Doctrine, whilst I
fear, scarce men, in the use and Application, we make our selves, of our
Sermons.

I have heard, some where, That Philip of Macedon displac't a Judge because he
colored his beard; he was jealous, it seems, he might color a Cause too: I
know not how true that was, but I think it an unquestionable assertion, that,
many, of our Coat, have their Consciences telling them, they deserve the same
censure and severity, not more for coloring their own Sermons, than others
sins, making thereby their sacred Calling more to serve themselves, than
endeavoring themselves, really to serve their Calling: I come not hither to
accuse or discourage any!

But tell me, My Brethren! think you not, that there are some amongst us
(though I hope none here) whose Consciences may be their doleful accusers, for
being their people's dangerous deluders? Tell me, I say, are there not those to
be found in the Nation, whose own Consciences ring them many a sad peal, out of
the hearing of the world, for making Aaron's bells to go so ill, insomuch, that
they have now lived to hear their own knells gone, for being (as I may say)
quite dead and gone in the hearts of the people.

Others, there are too, I doubt not, but you have heard of, who have made so
ill use of the keys of the Church, that it had been much better for both, had
they quietly laid them under the door, and then, withdrawn out of sight and
hearing: For, the open discovery, and detection of some of their ill and
unwarrantable practices has not only made the guilty to be almost
irrecoverably despised, but the innocent too, to be the more suspected.

Pardon, great God! these sins of thy servants!

But, My Brethren! since thus it is; and, it may be, much worse too, with many
of our weaker Brethren; since, I say, even the best of us, have not been so
good examples, as we might have been; and with Austin, have reason to bespeak
the Majesty of heaven, as he, Libera me Domine a peccatis meis alienis; From my
other men's sins; or, those, I have, by my ill example tempted others too, Good
Lord! deliver me! is not then, the voice of our Conscience within, the more
pressing and importunate, for our being the more lively examples of Believers
to those, that are without?

Oh then! Let us not turn the deaf ear to this Charmer, least the voice of it,
which would be our friendly Monitor, in time prove our fatal, fearful
Tormentor, when we are lanch't forth into the boundless ocean of Eternity!

Fifthly, I am come now to the voice or Monitor, being vox Populi, the voice of
the people; a voice, indeed, in many cases, not valuable, in this; I think,
very considerable.

Now, if we shall but sit down and listen a while to the declamatory language
of some (and those too, it may be, not so contemptible as we are apt to
conclude them) I cannot but think all those nails, drove in already, will be
the better clinch't in your spirits, e're we part.

Indeed, time was, when the world had a better opinion of us, than, I fear,
now, it has. Time has been, when the world has counted us worthy of double
Treasure, as well as double Honor.

Nay, we all read, that the very Heathen had an high esteem for their
Idol-priests: Plato tells us, (...); There was still a Reverence showed the
Priest, and that, not in this, or that particular Nation, but, in Gentibus
omnibus, etc. (says Figurius) There is no Nation under heaven (says he) where
their Priests are not had in honor: He tells us too, that neglect and
disrespect to the Priest, was a sin, Vitium Judaeis peculiare, peculiar to the
Jews only. I have been told the people of England once said of us, as I have
read the old Caldees did of their Priests, viz. Homo quidam ex Judaeis venit
Sacerdos, neutiquam decipiet nos. There Is a Priest come to Town, he, we are
sure, will not deceive us. But, alas! my Brethren! how many of us may complain
that this our honesty is turned into Gall: That this softer voice of our
people, is turned into dreadful claps of thunder, in many of our Parishes. For
indeed, he must needs be very thick of hearing, that cannot hear Rabshekah
railing against the Episcopal Robe; He must, I say, wink very hard, tha^ cannot
see Hymeneus and Philetus, Alexander and Demetrius, contriving mischief: You
cannot be ignorant, how these Iron-moles, daily deface our Lawns and Surplices;
you cannot but know, how these Mothes have fretted our Cassocks and Girdles,
with all the other decent garments of our Mothers appointing.

I need not tell you too, how, for the better impairing our interest in the
hearts of the people, many of our daring Adversaries have maliciously branded
us; sometimes, calling us, the Black Guard, The Leaches of the Land, Priests of
Belial, The useless Tribe, Lazy Levites, and the like; confirming us (who hear
and consider all this) in nothing more, than that they would quickly make us
objects of their merciless rage and vengeance, were it not for the lifeguard
of Royal prudence acted by a gracious and overruling Providence.

Now, My Brethren! if these sharp Razors shave Aaron's beard so close, what may
we (the meaner servants of the Altar) look for, but, that they would soon slip
into our Throats? Making us, as it were, miserable sacrifices at those very
Altars, where, we are devoted servants: And can we see all these acts of Enmity
and Hostility, and not conclude it high time for us all to put on the whole
armor of God, and resolve to live more piously and exemplarily in the eye and
observation of men.

Certainly, Sirs! it is high time for Sampson then, to look about him, when the
Philistines are upon him!

And thus; it is high time for Timothy too, to become an example of Believers in
word, in conversation and charity, when he is ready to be voted down by the
people for an example of their displeasure, scorn and fury.

And now, for the timely prevention of this so sore an evil, which I have seen
under the Sun, I shall humbly crave your further attention to one voice (more
importunate, if possible; than all the rest) with us all, and that is, in the,

Sixth, and Ult. place, The loud voice of our own most sacred calling and
profession, which, I fear, meets not with the half of that Reverence and regard
from us, we owe it, as men; but infinitely less more, as such, who have, with
so much seriousness and solemnity taken upon us, to discharge all the
respective duties of it.

I am not so vain as to think I can, nor dare I pretend to offer any thing
exactly answerable and commensurate, either to the heights of our callings
dignity, and deserts, or the parts and expectations of so judicious an
Audience, as is here, this day.

But, since your very great Charity has been already experienced by me, upon a
like occasion; and since the meanest Priest too, may bring without offense a
Cole to that very Altar, where, the Greater Aaron serves, himself; and since,
but a silly Cock, may be serviceable for the awakening of no less a Saint than
an inspired Peter, I shall presume the more, upon the suggestion of some few,
of the most important and weighty considerations, respecting this great Duty,
of an exemplary conversation, from the voice of that high and holy Calling of
our own, (you are all, I doubt not, so well skilled in, and so very great
Masters of, already.)

Suffer me then, to put you in remembrance, That, it is a Calling, of whose very
Essence and vital Constitution it is, to bind the Owners of it, not only to
their good behavior, but, to be eminent examples too, of Believers, in all
godliness and honesty: It obliges us, above all, that being Lights and Leaders
to others, we should all so walk in the world, that others may see our good
works, as well as hear our good words: Like St. Basil, of whom it was said,
That he looked upon himself as eminently bound by his Calling not more to (...)
speak what was to be done, than to do what he spoke; professing (it seems) his
bounden duty, not only to order his preaching aright in the ears, but his
conversation too, in the eyes of the people.

It Is a Notion of the Naturalist, Quanto purius and Coelo vicinius elementum,
tanto magis obsequitur motui Coeli. That the purer and nearer, any Element is
to the heavens above, the greater yieldableness, and compliance it always
manifests to all their respective motions. How heavenly then, should we be, who
are all the professed Ambassadors of heaven! whose proper sphere, whose special
office and employment, stands in so near a dependence and vicinity to this
place, of so pure and spotless a nature and society!

It Is an excellent pen, therefore, which tells us, That want of leisure and
breeding; want of knowledge and study; blind zeal; course company, secular
worldly affairs, and less obligation, may a tanto, and in part, excuse many
persons; but it is impossible (says my Author) for a Minister of the Gospel, to
be tolerably dishonest.

The case is our own; so much being given to us, the more's expected from us;
and hence (no doubt) it was, That the sin of the Priest, cost as much
sacrifice, as the sin of the whole people: 'Twas a meditation worthy the person
that first suggested it, when he tells us, That our calling, as it is most
Eminent, so it is most eyed, and worst censured: If an Apostle rub an ear of
Corn upon the Sabbath day, it is breaking the day: The people's motes, are
accounted the Priest's beams; and another indifferency, is my Evil; some
things being expedient, in respect of the man, which are really scandalous and
inexcusable, in respect of the Coat.

I am not ignorant, that many of us (impatient of the Sacerdotal Yoke) line it
with a silken invention, smoothing over the ma^ter, and excusing their own
inexcusable vanities; With the Rhetorical varnish, of telling their people,
That they are flesh and blood* men of like failings and infirmities with
others; whom they teach, when (God knows) many of them need not tell their
people so, since they know it but too well already: But then, others, there
are, who, that their poor scandalized prejudic't patients may swallow down all
their ill prepared prescriptions, the better; they smilingly tell them,
sometimes, That the Gold's never the worse for coming from a sullied hand: The
good Prophet Elijah refused not his breakfast, because brought to him by a
black Raven; What? (say they) if the Sacrificer be unclean, is the offering so
too? Was the Ark (the glory of Israel) e're the worse, for coming from the foul
fingers of the Philistines? Sampson made much of his honey, although it came
from a stenchy putrifi'd Lion: But alas! My Brethren! these Sirengers are too
foul themselves, to cleanse the mouths of the people, being furred and foul'd
so much, as they are, through all those gross conceptions and intemperate
expressions, they often breath forth against such sulli'd, and disobedient Sons
of the Church.

The people knew well enough, that all these pretenses and excuses, (with many
more, they have sometimes put upon them) though they will pass for colorable
Rhetoric, yet never for solid reason; especially, since our Hearers are, most
of them, sensible already, that they can as well tell such loose and scandalous
Teachers, from as good Scripture and Reason too, Exodus 37.23. That the very
snuffers of the Sanctuary (made to top others) were to be of pure Gold; And
they read, Levit. 21.17, 18. That no person, having any blemish, was to offer
the oblation of the Lord; and our Savior, himself, tells those, that are to
pull the mote out of their Brothers eye, they had need first to cast out the
beam that is in their own. I find it therefore, observed by a learned person,
out of Hippocrates, very aptly for this purpose, when he tells us (...). That a
Physician had need to be a person always in good plight, of a good color and
complexion himself; otherwise the Patient will be ready to bid the Physician
heal himself first; and having, through his ill looks, a prejudice against his
physic, his fancy will greatly hinder its efficacy: the applications easy. We
read, Math. 7. that Christ taught his Disciples, as one, having authority, and
not as the Scribes: And thus (no doubt) if ever we would preach to purpose, we
must be followers of him; Laboring after the same mind, and the same manners
too, which were so visible and conspicuous in his own most excellent person;
that we may, with a like ingenuous confidence, appeal to our conversation, as
did he, for his better reception, John 10.28. ((...)) the works which I do,
they testify of me.

This is that, which (above all our Comminations, Excommunications, and other
severer methods) will make us to exhort, and rebuke with authority, and success;

This is that, which will convey such a might, and swaying Majesty into all our
Prayers and Sermons, as must needs conquer our discomposed, and unruly people
into a better, and more kindly compliances; yea, this is that, which will give
life and spirits to our Liturgy; and make our Common Prayer, to come with an
extraordinary power upon the hearts of the people; making that truly amiable
and venerable, which (through the manifest impiety of some persons) appears to
some people, the more despicable: And, indeed, to hear a Priest upon the Lords
Day, reading the holy prayers of the Church punctually, and without partiality,
with a taking tone, with his eyes and hands lifted up with reverence to heaven,
and with all other postures and expressions of a devout Soul, in the eyes of
the people, and yet, for those very eyes to be undeniable weekly witnesses of
the Petitioners repeated Impieties, it must needs something lessen, if not
altogether stiffle and extinguish, as the devotion of the people; so too, the
power and efficacy of the prayers, themselves, upon them.

I leave it for all such vain Votaries to consider 'twixt God and their own
Consciences, whether they appear not (if I may so say) rather devoutly
impudent, than really pious and devout in the eyes of their more judicious and
considering Hearers: I shall leave it (I say) with such persons to consider
too, whether they are not a very great, (if not the only cause) why our Liturgy
(they pretend so much to love, and reverence) having now served England (as
Jacob did Laban) one seven years more, and upward, yet, at last, it is put off
but with blear-eyed Leah, few looking so right upon it, as otherwise, probably
they would do.

I have once met with an old anonymous Greek Author, who tells his Reader, That
if any one were to be chosen to pray for the people, he had need to be a very
pious virtuous person himself; because (says he) (...)
the God's would take more heed to such a man's prayers. But; it is the known
assertion of a far better man, than he (and I heartily wish it were more
seriously thought on) Psalm. 66.18. That if I regard iniquity in my heart, the
Lord will not hear me: And I think, this was the worm that lay at the root of
the Pharisees long prayers. Oh! (let it never lie at ours!) that they secretly
devoured widows houses; Though they had the prayers of Saints, yet, it seems,
they had the drifts and designs of devouring Devils. No wonder then, if such
supplicants have so little regard from God, and so much reproach and control
from men. Guilt, you know, is that which quells the courage of the bold, that
ties the tongue of the eloquent, and that makes greatness it self to sneak,
like Judas, and behave it self but poorly in the eyes of the people.

The sense therefore, and apprehension, which St Paul had of the ill
consequence to the people, of an ill conscience in the Preacher, seems to put
him into a holy passion against the guilty, 2 Romans 21. Thou that teach
another, teach thou not thy self? Thou that preachest a man should not
steal, do thou steal? You know too, 'twas the sense of the of a mere Ethnic,
-- Turpe est doctors, etc, And, indeed, who can (as a most ^xcellent Modern,
pen, has expressed it, ready to my hand) with patience hear an incestuous Herod,
preaching up Chastity? a Judas, zealously condemning covetousness; an
hollow-hearted Pharisee reproving hypocrisy; or a greedy-stuft Glutton (who
can make his belly his God) persuading his people affectionatly to fasting even
with the Quails in his mouth; Every word must needs recoil upon the Preacher
with disgrace and infamy, giving new Teeth, to that old taunt and sarcasme,
(...), Physician, heal thy self. That plain, but pithy passage therefore, of
the Father, seems to suit my purpose here. Non est speciosa laus, in ore
peccatoris; It ill becomes Leapers (says he) to hand the purer bread of life
to others: And this, possibly might be one reason, why Christ himself, Mark,
1.25. rebuked the unclean spirit, and commanded him to hold his peace, even
then, when he proclaimed him to be (...), the holy one of God: And I am told
one reason why St Paul (with his holy Companions) being vexed with the praise
of the Pythonist ( Acts 16,) crying out, (...) These men are the Servants of
the most high God, even then, commanded the spirit to come forth of her, --
Quasi nolens sanctus ab immundo ore commendari: As though (as Tertullian tells
us) he abhorred praise coming from so impure a person: And the truth is (as
Epictetus has it (...) Good things lose much of their grace, goodness, and
flavor, when they are not done by good men, as well as after a good manner:
Hence, Tacitus informs us of Tiberius and Galba, as being men, though well
spoken; persons, of excellent pretenses and expressions, yet, distasted by the
people; Non enim ad hanc for^am catera erant: Because their works, kept not
touch with their words.

It seems, they trod too much inward; looking secretly upon themselves, what
e're they pretended for the peoples profit, to others: You have all read (I
doubt not) as well as my meaner self; That it was Pythagoras his confirming his
excellent precepts with his own personal practice of them himself; it was, I
say, that (...) the agreement of his life, with his language, that made all
Italy become (...); all the Country his School, and all, that ever heard him,
his resolved Disciples.

Lactantius therefore, taught to purpose the preachers of his days, when he
tells them, Oportet Concionatorem non solum virtutis doctorem se praebere sed
and ducem: That, it is the high concern of all Preachers, not only to show
themselves good Teachers in the Pulpit, but they are as well to show themselves
as good Leaders too, out of it: Like the Star, which led the Wise men unto
Christ; and the Pillar of Fire, which led the Israelites unto Canaan; they did
not only shine, but go before them too.

It Is not enough then, for us, to fall in with the truth, (as the manner of
many is to do) and barely to hold the mystery of faith, but we must do it in a
pure Conscience:

The learned Aretius, therefore (glossing upon that, aptly suggests; Non solum
peritus in religione, sed and Gastus in moribus: That a Minister should not
only be skilful in his Profession, but very careful too, of his Conversation:
He is obliged (above all others) to grace his Calling and Profession, with a
gracious Life and Conversation; For, that, will never have the credit of being
pure and undefiled, till we, who dispense i^, keep our selves more pure and
unspotted from the world. If then, we do not this, We, above all, affront our
God, and dishonor our King, We, above all, stain our Calling* and strangle our
Consciences: and then too, We, above all, do crucify (as much as in us lies)
the Bishop of our Souls, as well as the Bishop of the Diocese; and after all,
whilst we preach to others, may well suspect to prove but cast awaies our
selves: Oh then! let not this be the (...), or infamous Character (...) our
sacred Order, That we are famous Preachers, but in famous Livers. That we are
in holy Orders, but still in the gall of bitterness, and in the bends of
iniquity: But, let us all rather often seriously consider with our selves, to
what circumspection; to what strictness and innocence of Conversation; to what
Sanctity, and (...) then worldly industry, our sacred Office and Profession
calls us all unto; bearing always steadily upon our hearts, what St. Paul has
set so punctually before our eyes, 1 Timothy 4.16. Take heed into thy self, and
unto thy Doctrine, continue in it, for in doing this, thou shall both save thy
self, and them that hear thee. But here, now, I would not all this while be
mistaken, by such as are not of my own Calling and Profession; as if my Masters
Commission were so confined to those of my own Coat, as that it reached not
others too, of another calling.

No, I am to charge your all, by all that is dear unto you, even as you are
Christians; that you also be examples of Believers, in Word, in Conversation,
in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity.

If we, who are your poor devoted Servants, preach up Charity and Purity to
you, in our Pulpits, and then, sincerely endeavor a more lively expression and
representation of them in our Practices, and you, in the mean time, let all get
no further then the eyes and ears, what, I pray, is this, but to make your own
Condemnation the greater? What our Savior then, said to some others, we may
say to you, John 17.22. If we had not come and spoken unto you, you had not had
sin; but now, you have no cloak for your sin. Think not then, that God fends
you such shining lights, for to sport and play withal, but rather to improve
them.

Think not, that God sends you such burning lights too, only to make you a
little luke warm; but rather, that your little spark of grace, that your
smoking Flax, may, by them; become an enlarged Flame. Think not, that the high
and holy God sends his Ambassadors for you to laugh at, but to make your mourn
penitently, for those very sins, which, otherwise, will send you mourning
perplexedly into infernal flames.

Think not then, That God sends his silver Trumpets (sounding daily in your
ears) only to lull and lay you asleep, but rather to rouse and awaken your
duller Souls from the sleep of sin, unto some higher measures and degrees of of
activeness for God, and the saving of your immortal Souls. Oh, Sirs! beware of
barrenness and sterility, after so much labor bestowed upon you. You know the
fate of the fruitless Figtree. Beware then, I say, after all our weeping over
you, like some Cloth, you shrink not in the wetting: Believe me, this will send
many of us away with Tears in our Eyes to our Graves, but your selves, I fear,
with stings in your Consciences: Oh then! let us all (but Officers especially
belonging to the Church) drive at that eminency of Holiness and Purity, that
becomes persons in such places of Ecclesiastical Authority: Let not your Courts
be called Spiritual, whilst their Officers appear but Carnal: Let not your
Consciences tell you at death, you had once an opportunity to make those more
exemplary by your power, whom, we, of the Clergy, could not make so, by our
preaching; yet, you either cowardly or corruptly connived at all their
obstinacies, and wilful affronts offered to the Church: The Jews, I have read,
had their Terriculamenta Corvorum; Certain ghastly formidable Pictures, or
Images, set by their Altars to fright away offensive birds; but the learned
Seldom tells us of a complaint of a later Rabbin, That when the birds saw these
Images or Pictures did them no harm, they would commonly steal flesh away from
the Altars, and sit upon their heads to eat, and dung on them, when they had
done, The moral is easy and familiar: How happy then were it for the Church,
and the whole Nation too, were all their respective Officers better Examples of
Believers themselves, in Word, Conversation and Charity; and in a discreet
execution of the Laws; without cowardice, or corrupt partiality* Then, I am apt
to think we should not have some of our Churchwardens so unmindful of their
Oaths, and others, so unfaithful to their promises, as, I fear, we have many,
in our Parishes: You are all, by your places and offices obliged to serve the
Church, either by the Oath, you have taken, or the promise, you have made;
Methinks then, you should see your selves the more obliged to execute your
authority, without the least wilsul connivance or partiality: But, alas! how
frequent, and familiar is it amongst many of you, to present only some poor
impotent cleeted Delver, but pass by the more responsible luxurious Dives! how
common, I say, is it, with many of you to present your poorer Neighbors, whilst
you suffer your brutish Betters to make their Chambers, their only Churches
upon the Lords day, and the Alehouse or Tavern, the chiefest places of resort
all the week after. Have not many of you a scandalous sort of Superiors (such
as they be) about you, who propagate Atheism, Irreligion, and open profaneness
in your Parishes, by their daring Oaths, Cursings and new coined execrations,
with many other unchristian practices?

Oh! then, wrong not the Church, the Nation, and your own Consciences, by being
such timorous respecters, of persons: Disgrace not your papers of Presentiments,
with wrapping up in them only the shreds and rags of your Parish, since you may
so easily find Silks and Sattins enough to supply them; and indeed, were the
spots and stains better rubbed out of these, I cannot but think, there would be
more of the beauty of holiness amongst the rest of your meaner Inhabitants;
Would you be so piously courageous, as to top the luxuriant branches of these
taller Cedars, you would quickly find the courser Shrubs, growing under them to
thrive the better. Would you weed these scarlet poppies out of your Parishes,
without partiality, you would hardly find so many scarlet sins reigning amongst
us: would you, I say but pull off this green and flourishing Ivy, which clings
and hangs about the body of the Church, as if it loved and supported it, when
indeed nothing less; I am sure, the Church would flourish the better for it: I
am far from the design of exasperation; but this one thing more I must venture
amongst you, Let scandalous Great ones know, you stand as much upon your
Consciences, as they upon their supposed Honor; and indeed, its a shame to see
them draw their Swords to justify their Credit (such as it is) and your
selves, such heartless Cowards in defense of your Consciences, to keep them
such as they should be: Remember, it is the notion of one greater than the
greatest of them all (no less a person then our late Royal Master, in his Icon.
Basil. where he tells us, It Is dangerous, very dangerous, gratifying any
faction (much less such a one as this) in a kingdom, to the violation of a
known law:

I have one errand more, and that is from the Dead, to you, the Churchwardens
of our Parishes; and indeed, could the Dead be as effectually summoned from
their silent graves, as you have been from your houses to attend this
Visitation, I doubt not, but that, many of them, would have met some of you
here this day, with their juster Presentiments and Complaints against you, not,
for that they envy you the privileges of the living, but, because, Ah lass!
you will scarce allow them, that of the Dead, I mean, of resting from all their
labors.

Such are the scandalous ruins of some Churches and Chancels, and such are the
intolerable neglects of the consecrated ground belonging to them; That the Dead
can scarce lie dry, or safe from either: Oh Sirs! give the Dead their due, your
Churches their just repairs, and your Churchyards, their decent Fences; Such
as may be a better guard to the Dead, a better credit to the Living, and a
greater comfort to your selves when dying: Remember, you all expect e're long,
the Church, or it is Ground, must hide your nakedness, when you are dead; be
then so just and good to them, as to hide their's, whilst you are living.

I shall now conclude with a short and humble address to all my Reverend
Brethren of the Clergy: and, oh that my words might live, when I am laid in my
grave! You have all now given me the honor, and undeserved patience of hearing
me plead, and display before your more knowing selves, the great influence and
efficacy; together, with the great obligation, and necessity of a religious
exemplariness, on our parts especially; And now, methinks, I see it in all your
faces, a thing resolved upon, viz. That this Auditory, and those, you are going
to; shall all see an happy and more particular enlargement upon the rest of the
Text, in the rest of your lives: Methinks, I say, I now see you all, going out
of this sanctuary, as so many flaming Lamps, to your own, a fresh blown up and
kindled by my weaker breath; Such, as may, by heavens benediction and
assistance, fire and inflame your peoples hearts, with a greater zeal for God,
and Religion in the life and efficacy of it;

Such, as may make your people say, after your preaching, as they, after Christ
speaking* Did not our hearts burn within us, whilst he spoke to us? Such, I
say, as may convince all your unreasonable and bitter adversaries, That God is
in and with you of a truth; and then, such too, as may make the world
(otherwise, prone enough to despise you) now really to love, and honor you
all, for your being not only learned Preachers, but living Paterns too, and
examples of Believers, in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in
Faith, and in Purity; which God, in his mercy, grant, that you may all be, from
this day of your Visitation, to the day of your approaching death and
Dissolution.

Amen.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2 in marg. read contemplatione, p. 7. Lucelius. Line 27. for quis, r.
qui, p. 9. l. Antepenult, for this, r. his, p. 14. l 28. for. form, r. for me.
Epist. Ded. l. 2. for. in r. into the world. p. 6. l. 11. dele. in. p. 9. l.
36. for This, r. his people. p. 10. l. 8. dele. Them. p. 17. l. 1. sor heard r.
read somewhere, p. 18. l. 10. put in I come now to the fifth voice, put in the
word fifth. p. 18. last line, for Honesty, read Honey. page 20. line. 9. dele
l^ss. page 21 l. 2. put in it, professing it. page 22. line. 15. for Sirengers,
read Syringes. p. 22. l. 21. for knew, read know. p. 22. l. 36. read (...), p.
23 l. 13 for John 10.28. read, John 5.36: And read (...), p. 25. first line,
dele Of the. page 25. line 17. read Mark 1 14. page 25. line 19 read (...).
page 25. line 22. read (...) page 25. line 29. read (...), page 27. line 1.
read (...), page 27. line 26. for the eyes, read your eyes. page 29. line. 25.
read Timorous for Timorous. page 29. line 33. read lop. for top the luxuriant
branches. p. 30. read in, for, from either.


