THE LAST WORDS OF Lewis du Moulin:

BEING HIS RETRACTATION Of all the PERSONAL REFLECTIONS

He had made on the DIVINES OF THE CHURCH of ENGLAND,

(In several Books of his) Signed by himself on the 5th and the 17th of
October, 1680.

LONDON, Printed for Rich. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred MAJESTY. An.
Dom. MDCLXXX.

THE LAST WORDS OF LEWIS du MOULIN:
BEING His Retractation of all the Personal Reflections he had made on the
Divines of the Church of England, etc.
AMong all the News that is daily published, and cried about the Streets, none
can be so welcome to truly good men, as to hear of any sinner that repents:
For that is the thing, which alone can mend all that is amiss among us.

And though it be but a late repentance, and not so complete and entire, as it
might have been; yet it is of great use, and does much service: because it
gives glory to God, does honor to Religion, checks those that go on fearlesly
in their evil ways: and admonishes them-to persist in that course, which, if
they have any conscience, they will condemn at last; but to take up betime,
amend their lives, and make their repentance as notorious, as their Crimes.

That still adds much to the sincerity, and the usefulness of it; when he that
gives a public offense, takes away the scandal, as much as in him lies; by
making a public acknowledgement of his fault, and declaring openly he will
offend so no more.

Such, in part, was the penitent Confession of this person: the true relation
whereof follows.

LEWIS du MOULIN Dr. of Physic (a person so well known by his writings, that
it is needless to give any other character of him, than is publicly read
there) was taken very ill in the end of last September: and being in the
Seventy seventh year of his Age, did not expect he should recover; but set
himself seriously to prepare for the account he thought he was shortly to give
to God.

On the fourth of October, he desired a visit from Dr. Burnet: who very kindly
came to visit him, and was as kindly received by him. After the discourses fit
to be used to a dying man, the Doctor spoke to him of his Books: And told him
though he would not trouble him (in the condition wherein he then was) with any
discourse about his Opinions, yet he must admonish him of his falling foul in
those Books, upon so many worthy men, viz. Dr. Stilling fleet Dean of S. Paul's,
Dr. Durell Dean of Windsor, Dr. Patrick Dean of Peterburgh, and several others:
of whom he ought to ask forgiveness, and to make them all the reparation, that
was in his power to do.

He was soon convinced, that he had been carried too much from his duty, by the
heat of his temper and passion: and therefore desired Dr. Burnet to ask their
pardon in his Name. And when he spoke of the Dean of S. Paul's, he expressed
much sorrow and shed some tears.

After Dr. Burnet had prayed with him (in which he joined with great devotion)
he left him, and went and acquainted the Dean of S. Paul's herewith: who very
freely sent by him, a very kind remembrance; with assurance that the said Dr.
du Moulin should have both his Forgiveness and his Prayers. The Dean of
Peterburgh also was acquainted by the same person, (but the Dean of Windsor was
not in Town) that Dr. du Moulin desired a visit from him, being in his Parish,
and having a mind to ask his pardon, for what he had wrote against him. Who
going to him immediately, the Evening of the same day (October. 4.) was
entertained with many expressions of great affection to him, and such high
esteem of him, upon several accounts, that the Dean does not think fit to have
them here set down particularly; lest they should be thought to be as
extravagantly said on the other side, as those things were which he wrote to
defame him.

But he confessed he had been much disgusted at some passages about Faith, in a
Book of the Dean's, called the Parable of the Pilgrim: which he could not read
without indignation.

To which the Dean replied, that it should not have transported him, so far,
and so hastily, as it did. But he ought, before he had so much as written
against him, to have gone to his house, (as he had done upon some other
occasions) and made his exceptions, and given him leave to explain himself:
which if he had done, he was confident, the Doctor would not have thought his
Notion to be Popish; much less have put him down among the Corrupt party, which
he fansied was advancing toward Rome. For he would have shown him, in the best
Reformed Divines, as zealous expressions, as he uses, against an Idle, Naked
Faith: and besides would have turned him to a Chapter in that very Book (the
last but one) where he would have found that he was far from taking men off
from depending on Christ, and upon Christ alone for Salvation: for he directs
them there how to do it safely; and only told them, they must do something
else, before they can come to this high act of Faith, to trust that by Christ's
merits and God's mercy, they shall be justified.

This he told him he should have read; and not thrown away the Book, when he
met with one passage which offended him. To which Dr. du Moulin assented; and
earnestly begged his pardon, praying him also to beg of God pardon for him,
which the Dean promised he would do; but said that he must first put him in
mind, that this offense against him (which he easily forgave, because he knew
his choleric temper, disposed him to be incensed upon small occasions) was
very inconsiderable; in comparison with that against the Church of England in
general; which he had wronged intolerably, to the great gratification of its
Enemies, at such a time when all sober men should be its Friends; and that
without any real cause for such imputations, as he had endeavored to fasten on
it.

Here Dr. du Moulin labored to make some defense for himself; and said, that
he thought there was a cause, and that greater men than he had thought so too:
from whom he had long ago imbibed this opinion, of a corrupt party in the
Church (as he expresses it in his Writings) leaning toward Popery, nay making
several advances toward Rome. And then mentioned the Names of some of them,
Sir Benjamin Rudyer, the then Lord Digby, etc. who in the beginning of the long
Parliament laid the same things to the charge of the great Churchmen, that he
did now.

To this the Dean of Peterburgh replying, that as some of those persons lived
to see how they were abused; so he could not but have observed how effectually
this calumny had been confuted by those whom he called Bishop Laud's faction;
who remained constant to our Religion in the late confusions, and could not be
moved to turn Papists, when they were turned out of all they had by pretended
Protestants, and had no hope of seeing the Church restored; and therefore that
he ought not to have renewed this ungrounded charge against so manifest a
demonstration of its falsity: Dr. du Moulin made no answer at all, but yielded
thus far, as to say, Well Doctor, pray to God to pardon me all my sins,
especially my want of charity.

Accordingly the Dean, kneeling down by his Bedside, began with the Lord's
Prayer, and so proceeded to the other Prayers, which are appointed by the Order
in the Common Prayer Book for the Visitation of the Sick. In all which the Sick
man joined with lifting up his hands often, and other expressions of devotion:
especially at that passage (in the Prayer, when there appears small hopes of
recovery) give him unfeigned repentance for all the errors of his life past,
etc. he gave more then ordinary signs of his fervent desire. And when the Dean
had done, gave him most hearty thanks, and renewed his expressions of
extraordinary affection to him, and esteem of him.

The next day Dr. Burnet made him another visit; and having given him an
account what the Dean of S. Paul's said concerning him (which he received with
great sense of his kindness, and return of thanks to him for it) told him it
was fit he should do something for the repairing the injuries he had done, in
as public a manner as they were committed. To which he readily assented; and
as he promised never to be guilty of the like again if he should recover, so he
said he would subscribe a Paper that should give public satisfaction to all he
had offended, and desired Dr. Burnet to put him in mind of it. Who wrote a
Paper, and left it with Dr. du Moulin's Wife: who carrying it to her Husband,
he said before Witnesses, after he had considered the Contents, that he was
ready to sign it with his Blood; and presently subscribed the same. A true Copy
whereof follows.

As for my Books, in which I mixed many Personal Reflections, I am now sensible
I vented too much of my own Passion and Bitterness, and therefore I disclaim
all that is Personal in them, and am heartily sorry for every thing I have
written to the defaming of any person. I humbly beg God, and all those whom I
have so wronged, pardon for Jesus Christ his sake; and am resolved, if God
shall spare my life, never to meddle more with such personal things: and do
earnestly exhort all people as a dying man, that they will study more love and
mutual forbearance in their differences; and will avoid all bitter and
uncharitable reflections on one another Persons. And as I earnestly pray those
worthy men of the Church of England to have charity and tenderness for the
dissenters from them; so I beg of the Dissenters that they would have a due
regard and respect to those of the Church of England: Of many of whom I say
now, let my Soul be with theirs. And that all true Protestants among us may
heartily unite and concur in the defense and preservation of the Holy Reformed
Religion, now by the mercy of God settled among us. And that men of all sides
may according to S. Paul's rule, cease to bite and devour one another, lest we
be destroyed one of another: and that whereunto we have already attained, we
may walk by the same Rule; hoping that if any man is otherwise minded, in some
lesser things, God shall either reveal that to them, or mercifully forgive it,
through Jesus Christ, Into whose hands I commend my Spirit, and desire to
appear before God, in and through Him: who gave himself for me; and therefore
do now study to learn of him, to be meek, and lowly in heart, and to love all
the Brethren, as He has loved me.

This in sincerity of heart I Sign Lewis du Moulin.
October. 5. 1680.
After he had Signed this Writing, he continued very seriously to prepare for
his death; and told Dr. Burnet (next time he came to visit him) that he had
signed the Paper with Ink, but if it had been needful, he would have done it
with his Blood. And said, he would have some Copies written out fair, and sign
some more: that these his Last Words might be published to the world after his
death. And professed also, that he felt great joy and quiet in his mind, from
his being thus reconciled with those whom he had offended.

And accordingly, the Dean of Peterburgh coming a little while after, to see
him again, he was so affected with his kindness in giving him a new visit, that
he said, Are you come again Sir? O how charitable are you! This is indeed to
return me good for evil. And after some discourse with him, desired him to pray
with him again; for your Prayers, said he, were very comfortable to me the last
time. And accordingly he did, in the same form of words he had used before:
with which he was so much affected, that when the Dean had solemnly commended
him to God's blessing, in that excellent form; unto God's gracious Mercy and
Protection we commit thee. The Lord bless thee and keep thee, etc. he laid hold
upon his hand (which he held up over him) and kissed it with an unusual passion.

At the same time, having repeated his thanks to him, he told him of the Paper
before mentioned, and desired his Wife to show it him, promising a Copy of it
should be sent him, signed with his own hand. It must be confessed that when
the Dean had read it, he wished it had been more full; and so ordered as to
have given satisfaction to the whole Church, as well as to particular persons:
But this being the form he had already signed, it was not easy to alter it.

And he often called upon his Wife to get three or four Copies of it
transcribed, for him to sign according to the first draught: which when she had
done, and brought them to him, and asked him whether he had well considered it,
and was well satisfied to sign these: he answered, he was ready to do it, with
all his heart, if they were the same with that he had already signed. Then he
heard them examined, and corrected with his own hand, where there was a fault;
signing three Copies with his own hand, in these words. viz.

To all these things above set down, I heartily assent and consent.

October. 17. 1680. Lewis du Moulin.

If any one doubt of this, they may be fully satisfied by Dr. Patrick, the Dean
of Peterburgh: to whom, according to his promise, and by his order, a Copy was
sent, so signed, in his own handwriting. And he gave a charge the same should
be published after his Death, which followed on the twentieth day of the same
Month: and on the twenty second of the same Month, the said Dean of Peterburgh,
expressed his charity to him, in performing the Funeral Rites himself.

I have perused this Relation, and, as far as I am concerned in it, do hereby
attest the truth of it.

S. Patrick, D. P.

I have perused this Relation, and, as far as I am concerned in it, do hereby
attest the truth of it.

G. Burnet.

Would to God that they who still persist in their Invectives, and have since
this Doctour's death published under his name an additional account of the
Church of England's advances toward Popery, without the knowledge of his Wife
and other Relations, would be pleased to consider this Narrative, and lay it to
heart, before they be arrested by Death; that grave, that wise and faithful
Counselor, which deceives no man, but sets a Glass before their eyes which
flatters not; and represents the truth so plainly and sincerely to their minds,
that did they but take frequent advice of this Counselor, and before they
venture upon any action, would but consider how it would appear, were they
going to answer for it to God Almighty, they would find themselves irresistably
restrained in the pursuit of their fiercest passions and desires.

For even they, who can be wrought upon no other way, are moved by the approach
of death to alter their resolutions. The obstinately inflexible, who could not
be turned out of their way (in which they ran with a violent heat) by any
obstacle, have in a moment been cooled, and made to yield, when they saw death
coming to call them before the Judgment Seat of God. Upon which account there
cannot be more profitable counsel then that of the Son of Sirach, which was
read in the Church afew days after the Doctor was buried. Ecclus. 7. 36.
Whatsoever thou take in hand, remember the end, and thou shall never do amiss.

Therefore if Dr. du Moulin has left in any bodies hand, and they intend to
publish an Ecclesiastical History, the design of which he has already
published; I beseech those persons, whosoever they are, before they begin to
put it to the Press, to consider whether it be such as he would have approved
of upon his Deathbed, or they will be willing to answer for unto Almighty God:
and to weigh well those words, wherewith the famous Sir Walter Raleigh
concludes his History of the World. Where, inquiring after the reason of the
boundless ambition which still continues to reign in the breasts of mortal men,
notwithstanding the sad fates of those that have gone before them, gives an
answer, which may serve for a reason of all other passions wherewith men are
madly transported; which is this, that they lay before them the actions, but
not the ends of those that preceded them. And then follow these memorable words.

They are always transported with the glory of the one, but they never mind
the misery of the other, till they find the experience in themselves. They
neglect the advice of God, while they enjoy life, or hope of it; but they
follow the counsel of death, upon the first approach. IT IS HE THAT PUTS INTO
MAN ALL THE WISDOM OF THE WORLD, WITHOUT SPEAKING A WORD, etc. Death which
hates and destroys man, is believed; God, which has made him, and loves
him, is always deferred. I have considered (says Solomon, all the works that
are under the Sun, and behold all is vanity and vexation of spirit: but who
believes it till Death tells it us? It was Death which opening the Conscience
of Charles the V. made him enjoin his Son Philip to restore Navarre; and King
Francis the First of France, to command that justice should be done upon the
murderers of the Protestants, in Merindol and Cabrieres, which till then he
neglected. It is therefore Death alone that can suddenly make man to know
himself. He tells the proud and insolent, that they are but abjects, and
humbles them at the instant; makes them cry, complain, and repent; yea, even to
hate their forepast happiness. He takes account of the rich, and proves him a
Beggar, a naked Beggar, which has interest in nothing, but in the gravel that
fills his mouth. He holds a Glass before the eyes of the most beautiful, and
makes them see therein their deformity and rottenness, and they acknowledge it.

O Eloquent, just and mighty Death! whom none could advise, thou have
persuaded; what none dared, thou have done; and whom all the world has
flattered, thou only have cast out of the world and despised. Thou have drawn
together all the far stretched greatness, all the pride, cruelty, and ambition
of man, and covered it all over with these two narrow words,

THE END.

