DVM SPIRO SPERO.

An Humble Representation OF THE STATE OF OUR WOOLLEN MANUFACTURES.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1700.

1. It Is evident to most Thinking People, That the utmost Endeavors are still
used by the French King, to obtain that in a Peace, which he could not procure
by a WAR, By Supplanting us in our Woollen Manufactures.

And if some Extraordinary Care be not taken, he is in a likelier way to
succeed, having the chiefest of our Allies as hearty on his side, in carrying
on this Design, as they were on ours, in carrying on the War.

The Advantages obtained by a French Interest in the beginning of the Reign of
King Charles the Second, in invading the Right of the Ancient and
long-establisht Company of Merchant-Adventurers of England, and putting the
French Merchant upon an Equal Foot in Trade with the English, by taking off
Aliens-Duties, the Ancient Revenue of the Crown; being corroborated by a Law
made in the beginning of the Reign of His Present Majesty King William, which
in the Heat of Friendship, gave away our Merchandise to gratify our
Neighbors, has prevailed to an alteration of the Guardianship and Care of our
Woollen Manufactures for Flanders, Germany, Holland, and the East-Country, in
point of Inspection, Merchandise and Navigation; to which Parts Two Thirds of
our Woollen Manufactures are Exported.

The Good Genius of this Present Time, the beginning of the New Century,
tending to a Consideration of this Notable Commodity of ours, the which there
is not the like in any Foreign Parts, as is expressed in the Statute of Edward
the Sixth of Blessed Memory -- I will endeavor (to the best of my Judgment) to
represent the true State of our Woollen Manufactures, as they now stand, and
the Discouragements they labor under, by which the good or bad effect of this
alteration to the Public, may somewhat appear -- And instead of Improvement
under this Foreign Guardianship, I find the case of our Woollen Manufactures to
be much alike to the Man in the Parable, that went down from Jerusalem to
Jericho, and fell among Thieves, that robbed him of his raiment, wounded him,
and left him half dead, etc.

II. It is manifest, That as these Merchant-Aliens increase in England, the
Woollen Manufactures increast in a like proportion in Foreign Parts, and the
French became considerable Merchants with our Woollen Manufactures, in Spain,
Turkey and other parts.

Good Proof was made before a Committee of Parliament, by the Inspection of two
Frenchmens Books, That the Exportation of our Wool was carried on by these men
-- Printed Tickets were given out in Holland to give notice of the Sale of
considerable quantities of English Wool, and reported by some, that the Dutch
Men-of-War that came out to fight the French, were assisting in carrying over
Fullers-Earth, and returned home not empty-handed of; a little resemblance, if
so, to the Woman in the Fable, that was afflicted with a Dimness in her Sight,
and agreed with a famous Occulist that anointed her Eyes with a certain
Material that took away her sight wholly, for a time, and then robbed her of a
good piece of Household Stuff -- This Practice comes up to the Letter of my
Simile -- To ascertain the loss to our Poor in this particular, I will here set
down a Calculation made by the Honorable Sir Matthew Hale, of the distinct
value of the Wool, and the Workmanship:

In a Course Medley Cloth, containing 32 Yards long; to the making this Cloth
90 pound of Wool, 54 of ab, 34 of warp, 2 of mixture, at one Shilling per
pound. l. s. d. 4 10 1. Parting and Picking -- 00 03 00 2. Coloring -- 00 16
00 3. Breaking and Spinning the Ab, -- 01 07 09 4. Breaking and Spinning the
Warp 00 18 06 5. Cards and Oil -- 01 00 00 6. Weaving, Spooling and Warping 01
01 03 7. Milling and Burling -- 00 12 00 8. Shearing and Dressing -- 00 18 00
9. Drawing -- 00 01 06 10. Carriage and Factorage -- 00 07 00 11 15 00 Out of
which deducting the Materials of Wool, Cards and Oil, -- 05 10 00 There
remains for Expense of Workmanship 06 05 00

In our Finest Manufactures a Calculation is thus made, viz.

One Pack of our finest Kemb'd Wool, containing twelve Score, I compute to be
worth at this time -- l. s. d. 30 00 00 The Spinning of this into the Finest
Worsted, cost 5 s. per Pound -- 60 00 00 Four Ounces thus spun, will make a
pair of Hose worth 5 s. the Knitting -- 240 00 00 This Pack so knit, will make
80 dozen of Hose, which pay Custom, 7 per dozen 02 10 00 302 10 00

The Medium in our Woollen-Manufactures I take to be one Third Wool, two
Thirds Workmanship.

III. Since this alteration of the Merchandise of our Woollen Manufactures,
greater quantities have been Exported White, and not fully manufactured, which
has sunk the employment of many Occupations, and hindered the consumption of
many of our Native Materials which are used in Dying, etc.

IV. The Reputation of our English Manufactures (which in former time was
famous at all Foreign Markets) has been wounded by these Foreign Interlopers --
When extraordinary care has been taken in France of late years to improve their
own. The Price has been always beat down, and extraordinary Measure required,
which has forced the Maker upon slight making, and extraordinary straining.
Cloth of an ordinary quality has been marked by these Foreign Buyers with Marks
of our best Makers of Cloth, and sent over as Cloth made by them, and the most
fallacious ways used to ruin the Reputation of our Goods, and supplant the
English Merchants. Seals, Tillets, Coats of Arms, Numbers, all counterfeited by
a foreign Interloper, as was proved in Westminster Hall by Mr. Banks -- and
hereby an Odium has bin brought upon English Goods, when no consumer of Cloth,
either at home or abroad, when he finds himself abused and cheated, but does
resent the fact.

The Hudsons-Bay Company (as is credibly told) sold a parcel of Strained Cloth
to the Indians, with whom they Traffic for the Skins of Wild Beasts, and the
next time they came, the Indians told them they had sold them thieving-Cloth,
and stole it from them again, and would never permit the like abuse; we read of
Christians in the Primitive times in the Skins of wild beasts; lo! wild Beasts
here in the Skins of Christians, cheating of Indians. A Burgher-woman at
Hamburg bought some of this Strained Cloth to make her Children Garments, which
shrunk so abominably, that her Children appeared in a New Fashion, and she
brought them for a Sight to the Shop where she bought the Cloth, the Man that
sold it, perceiving the matter, broke out into the highest admiration, and
blessed himself at the miraculous growth of the Children, and hereby took off the
edge of the Woman's Passion.

A Welsh Woman bought of a Clothier in Hereford Fair as much Broad-Cloth as
would make her a Wastcoat, and it was applied to that use, and all well; but
afterward meeting with some wet, the Wastcoat shrunk so much, that she was
forced upon an Ingraffment, and which added to her Misfortune, she could not
procure any thing near to the Color. The next Fair, with her Wastcoat on, she
met her Chapman, and treated him in Welsh very roughly, which being not
understood by the Clothier, she began to salute him with Stones; and the Abuse
appearing so visible by the different Color of the Cloth, all her Neighbors
flocked in to her Assistance, and the Clothier was forced upon a Resumption;
and he often told me he was glad he came off so well. Were all the shrinking
Contracts that has been made with the Government since the Revolution, in a
just Proportion made good, it would enable His Majesty to pay back part of our
Taxes, according to the Example of Queen Elizabeth, who hereby won the Hearts
of her Subjects, that all the Freeholders (in whom is the chiefest Strength of
this Kingdom) were turned into a Standing-Army, and put up Beacons upon the
highest Hills, that one County might give notice to each other, if any Invasion
happened: And hereby she humbled the proud Spaniard, who was then putting up
for Universal Monarch, and furnished the distressed States with her friendly
Assistance, part of which Money is said to be owing us at this time, or a Free
Right of Traffic at Dort, for English Merchants, in lieu thereof.

A Merchant in Amsterdam advanced Ten thousand Pounds to pay our Army in
Flanders, by way of Exchange, for England, at Twenty five Shillings six Pence
Flemish, for a Pound Sterling in England; which gained him Twenty seven Pounds
two Shillings ten Pence per Cent. according to the allowed Par of Exchange, of
Thirty five Shillings Flemish for a Pound Sterling in England, and invested
this Ten thousand Pounds in England, in Tallies, at Forty five per Cent. which
made in Tallies Twenty two thousand two hundrrd twenty two Pounds four
Shillings and five Pence. These Tallies being ingrafted into the Bank, produce
now the Annual Revenue (at Ten per Cent. which the Bank affords) of Two
thousand two hundred twenty two Pounds four Shillings five Pence per Annum, for
Seven thousand two hundred eighty five Pounds sixteen Shillings eight Pence, at
first advanced.

The King, by his Officer at Exon, delivered One thousand Pounds in milled
Money, which paid for Serges bought for a Dutch Merchant there, and took Bills
for the like Value, payable One Month after Date, to his Officers of Excise in
London, by a Dutch Merchant, who with his Money bought Exchequer-Notes at Eight
per Cent. profit, and paid his Bills; which made our English Treasure shrink,
as did the Welsh Woman's Wastcoat.

And as this Extraordinary Effluction of our Treasure tends to a Consumption in
England, it will certainly make a Pleurisy in Holland; both dangerous
Distempers. It was never known in Holland (before our late Wars) that Merchants
bred their Sons above their own Employment, who are now become the Sparks of
Christendom; Hats and Coats so daubed with Gold Lace, that they pass for Dutch
Counts, Harpalus a Como Eques ab aure rupe, though in their Behavior a little
beneath a true-bred Gentleman: Astonished at nothing more in England, than our
Leaden Hall Market, having been chiefly conversant in their Minority with
Herring-Barrels. Had the Merchant-Adventurers been preserved in their T^^de,
this Inconveniency could have never come upon us, (...) in all likelihood the
Exchange had never been brought so low: I am sure there is no President for it;
but if so, what had been lost in the Shire had been got in the Hundred.

V. During such time that our Woollen-Manufactures were exported by English
Merchants, a good Correspondence was held between Merchants and Clothiers; most
Cloth bought in Custom; and if any Complaint came from the Pack-house abroad,
the Clothier was sure to hear of it from the Merchant; Marks wove into the
Cloth, which continued from Father to Son; some Cloth-Marks a good Legacy; and
a constant Course of Trade carried on. Sir Matthew Hale well observes, That
nothing does oppress our Poor so much as Stops in Trade; which is now in the
Power of these Foreign Buyers to transact as they please. Since a Foreign
Factory has been settled in London, the Management of the Cloth Trade has
fallen into the Hands of Factors; most Foreign Buyers of Cloth being disabled
to buy of the Clothiers in the City of London: And these Buyers of Cloth
serving Shopkeepers abroad with small Parcels, as they send their Patterns, a
Quantity of Cloth is always left at Market, at the Maker's Charge, and the
Clothier a Stranger to whom his Cloth is sold; no Certainty in the Marks of
Cloth, which formerly denoted the true sorts; the same Man's Cloth in one
Factor's hand a Stark-Mark, and in another some other Figure in Silk;
Quantities of Cloth sent into Packers Houses from the Public Market, in the
present Course of Trade, and returned into the Market again; which occasions a
great Expense to the Clothier. These Factors, to procure a clandestine Profit
to themselves, have given great Encouragement to Wool-Broggers, who are now
become very numerous, and a great Oppression to the Clothing-Trade; and hereby
our Woollen Manufactures are loaded with an unnecessary Charge. These Factors,
to promote their own Interest, have brought on a long Credit in the Sale of
Cloth, which has been freely given by them to French Merchants and others; and
hereby many Foreigners have wound themselves into the Trading Stock of this
Kingdom, and then took Sanctuary in some Privileged Places in this Kingdom, or
withdrawn themselves into Foreign Parts; by which means the Trading Stock of
this Kingdom is almost destroyed, and looks like a Contrivance of State.

Above Two hundred thousand Pounds of the Clothing Stock have been lost by
Foreigners in few Years. Twenty thousand Pounds was stopped in Trade by one
Interloper that served Dutch Merchants the last Year; Twenty thousand Pounds
more is stopped this Year by a French Merchant. Should an English Man in France
cheat the King of France's Subjects of Twenty thousand Pounds, it would soon be
taken notice of by the Government, and such Abuses redressed. This Credit is
extremely prejudicial in several other Respects to the Clothing Trade.

VI. The next Inconveniency that our Woollen Manufactures labors under, is the
high Duties upon Oil, Soap, and Dye-stuff, which said Commodities are observed
to be much dearer in England, since the Imposition of those Duties, the free
Importation being hereby hindered, and does make a considerable Odds in the
Value of our Manufactures and those made in France and Holland. Logwood pays
Five Pounds per Tonn Custom, and draws back, upon Exportation, Four Pounds.
Copperas and Alum, Commodities peculiar to England, are delivered cheaper to
the French and Dutch than to our own Manufacturers; which Commodities would
bear a Duty upon Exportation. Alum sold at Fourteen Pounds per Tonn, for
Exportation, at Fifteen Pounds Ten Shillings per Tonn to several Dyers London,
and at Twenty Pounds per Tonn to the Clothiers, and to have but one Seller of
Alum, which is the present Case, savours very much of Monopoly. Rape-Oil is at
this time advanced to double the usual Price, by the Engrossing of Rape-Seed,
when to every Six Pound of We I one Pound of Oil is required to the working.
Madder, the Growth of Holland, is rendered to us at three times the usual Price:
Which looks as a Conspiracy to supplant our Clothing Trade.

VII. The Scarcity of Money, occasioned by our vast Exportation to the
East Indies, does very much discourage our Clothing-Trade. Above Five hundred
thousand Pounds in Treasure have been exported in less than twelve Months time,
as appears by their Entries; and as large a Sum supposed to be taken in at
Cales; Silver worth Five Shillings eight Pence per Ounce. This being brought
home chiefly in Muslins and Calico's, it hinders the Consumption of the Flaxen
Linens of Flanders, Germany, and Holland; which has lessened the Consumption
of above Twenty thousand Cloths per Annum in those Parts, and the Wear of
considerable of our Norwich Stuffs at home, and forced the Linen Looms in those
Parts upon Woollen, to our further Prejudice.

The Spanish Netherlands finding that the Consumption of their Linens were so
much lessened in England, were thereby induced, in their own Defense, to
prohibit our Woollen Manufactures; and hereby the whole Trade of Christendom is
rendered un^asie.

The Case of Thousands of Manufacturers in England, by this Foreign Management,
is exactly the same with this Man that went down from Jerusalem to Jerico, and
fell among Thieves that robbed him of his Raiment, wounded him, and left him
half dead, (I wish I had no Occasion to add farther, quite starved,) and by
chance there came down a certain Priest that way, and when he saw him, he
passed by on the other side: (Doubtless of the Romish Persuasion, who possibly,
as some Men do now, might very much exclaim in his Thoughts against the
villainous Practices of those Robbers who had thus barbarously abused this poor
Man; but was so far from lending a hand to his Assistance, that the Text tells
us, he went on the other side.) And likewise a Levite, when he was at the
Place, came and looked on him, and passed by on the other side: (One, in great
probability, that might come from Geneva, who seemingly took a little more
Consideration of the Matter, he came and looked on him, and then passed by on
the other side, and to satisfy himself, in not relieving of him, after he had,
as it were, made a Judgment of his Circumstances, in all likelihood he might
attribute his Misfortunes to his own Idleness or Intemperance that brought him
to this helpless Condition, and wish that better Care was taken in England to
provide Workhouses and Houses of Correction for such idle People, after the
Example of Holland, etc.) But a certain Samaritane, as he journied, came where
he was, and when he saw him, he had Compassion on him, and went to him, and
bound up his Wounds, pouring in Oil and Wine, and set him on his own Beast,
etc. True Friend this!

The Circumstances of our Woollen Manufactures, and the Man that fell among
Thieves, being so much alike, it makes a little Resemblance between this Priest
and Levite, and our Commissioners of Trade; but I correct my self, for it no
way appears that these Men were under any other Obligation to his Relief, than
common Kindness and good Neighborhood.

Our Woollen Manufactures are perfectly unfortunate in the Age we live in; the
Aulnage, which was designed by our Ancestors to secure her Reputation, is now
turned into the greatest Oppression; a formal Court kept up by Commissioners,
Officers sent out to lay a formal Arrest upon Goods, if the Nib of the Seal be
not well stamped, and Judgment given amongst themselves: Of a little
Resemblance to Aesop's Court, where the Wolf sat Judge, and summoned the Lamb
to appear. I hope this will fall under Consideration with the rest of the
Grants, being carried on in England according to an Irish Understanding.

Trade being at a low ebb in England, and a great Scarcity of Money, during the
Reign of Richard II. Henry IV. Henry V. and Henry VI. as appears by strict Laws
made in those Reigns to force Merchant-Aliens to employ their Money which they
received for their Foreign Commodities upon the native Commodities of this
Realm. In the 3d. and 4th. Year of Henry IV. the Woollen Manufactures of this
Kingdom came under the Consideration of this good Samaritane, and effectual
Means were used for its Encouragement and Preservation, which soon increased
our Treasure. Anno Tertio Edw. IV. Cap. 1
A Law was first made to encourage our English Navigation, and in that Law a
Clause was added to prevent any Deceit which should be wound up in Wool, upon a
Forfeiture of 6 d. a Fleece, in which any Deceit should be found. In the next
place, a Law was made to prevent the Importation of wrought Silks: And then
another Law was made Cap. 3
to prevent the Importation of Woollen Cloths, Woollen Caps, Silk, in any wise
imbroider'd, and many other Commodities expressed in the said Law, Cap. 4
which were prejudicial to the Artificers of sundry manual Occupations. To
encourage the Wear of our Woollen Manufactures, a sumptuary Law was Cap. 5
next made: And the next Year a Law was made for the true making of our Woollen
Manufactures, expressing in the Preamble the Inconveniences which had ensued
to the Realm by the deceitful making of Cloth; and good Care was taken in this
Law, Anno Quarto Edw. IV. Cap. 1
that Work-People should do their Part faithfully; that the Master should
deliver just Weight, and pay them for their Labor in Money, and not
Commodities.

A Law was next made, Cap. 4
That no Person, during Three Years, should buy or take any Promise of Bargain
for any Wool then not shorn, of the Growth of Berks, etc amounting to twenty
eight Counties, before the same be shorn, and until Bartholomew's Day
following, but they which shall make Cloth or Yarn of them, upon pain of
Forfeiture of double the Value thereof.

And the Duke of Burgundy having at this time prohibited our Woollen
Manufactures in Flanders, Cap. 5
a Law was made to prohibit all Merchandise of the Growth and Workmanship of
the said Duke's Dominions, until he revoke his Proclamation, prohibiting our
Manufactures.

The Charter of the Merchant-Adventurers of England was confirmed by this King;
and at this time he called in question the Charter of the Merchants of the
Stilliard, who had obtained Privileges in England, for some extraordinary
Services done, in assisting Henry III. in his Wars abroad, and they were
permitted to Trade under these Terms, viz. To pay Aliens Duties, and to color
no Strangers Goods. Upon this just Foundation Trade was carried on until the
End of the Reign of Henry VII. strengthened only with this farther Addition in
the last-recited Reign, Anno Primo Hen. VII. Cap. 5
That no Person that was not a natural born Subject of England, should be
excused the Payment of Aliens Duties, if naturalized by Act of Parliament.

During this time, the Affairs of England were in a flourishing Condition, a
plentiful Employment to the Poor; which was one great Occasion of the
Reconciliation of the Houses of York and Lancaster. During such time that there
is full Employment for the Poor, the Designs of Great Persons are no way to be
executed; which is a Matter of Moment to be considered at this time: And the
Stop of the Exportation of our Wool will thoroughly effect the Matter. The good
Effect of this Settlement of Trade fully appeared at the Death of this King,
who left in the Treasury One million eight hundred thousand Pounds, which made
above Three Millions of our Money.

In the last Year of this King's Reign there was a Change of Affairs, and the
Merchants of the Stilliard obtained footing again, as appears by two Laws then
made in their Favor. The two last Laws, except one that passed in this Reign.
Calice was at this time the grand Mart of English Goods, Anno Decimo Nono Hen.
VII. Cap. 22
and there was a Law made in favor of the English Merchants, prohibiting the
Men of Calice to be Factors for Merchant-Strangers living in England: Which Law
was at this time repealed, and all Laws made in Derogation of the Merchants of
the Stilliard were repealed. In the beginning of the Reign of Henry VIII. Cap.
23
they got leave to Custom one Man's Goods in the Name of another, and indeed
were favored this whole Reign; Aliens Duties were taken off by the King's
Proclamation, which produced the like Effect that we feel at this time. Anno
32. Hen. VIII. Cap. 15
They got the whole Trade into their hands, and it was with great difficulty
recovered in the Year 1552, the Fifth and Sixth Years of Edw. VI. in whose
Journals it thus appears, That the Merchants of the Stilliard shipped off Forty
thousand Clothes, and our English Merchants not Four thousand, and all was
exported and imported in Foreign Bottoms. The English Merchants being at this
low ebb, put in their Complaint to the King and Council against these Merchants
of the Stilliard or Tutonicorum: And they gave in their Answer to the said
Complaint upon the 18th. Day of January; and upon the 25th. their Answer was
delivered to some Learned Council to peruse it. Upon the 18th. Day of February
the Merchant-Adventurers put in their Replication to the said Answer; and upon
the 23d. a Decree was made by the Board, That upon Knowledge and Information of
their Charters, they had found, first, That they were no sufficient
Corporation; secondly, That their Names, Numbers, and Nations were unknown;
thirdly, When Edw. IV. did restore them to their Privileges, it was upon the
Condition they should cover no Foreigners Goods, which they had done: For these
Considerations, Sentence was given, That they had forfeited their Liberties,
and were to be no more than Strangers. Upon the 28th. Day came Ambassadors from
Hamburgh, Lubeck, and the Regent of Flanders, to speak upon the Behalf of these
Merchants of the Stilliard; and upon the 2d. of March the Answer was committed
to the Lord Chancellor, the two Secretaries, Sir Robert Bows, and Sir John
Baker, Judge Mountague Griffith; Sollicitors, Gosnald, Goodrick, and Brooks. It
remained under Consideration until the 1st. Day of May, and then the Merchants
of the Stilliard received their full Answer, confirming the former Judgment of
the Council. This gave Encouragement to a great many English Merchants to come
into this Company; and in October 3. following, they shipped off Forty thousand
Clothes. At this time our Woollen Manufactures came again under the
Consideration of the good Samaritane, being miserably debased by these
Merchants of the Stilliard, as appears by the Preamble of the Statute, Anno 5.
and 6. Edw. VI. cap. 6
and several discreet and sage Knights and Burghesses undertook the Matter, by
consulting diverse honest Clothiers, Woollen-Drapers, etc. a Law was made with
great Caution to suppress Wool-broggers, who were got to a great height. And
upon this Foundation Trade was carried on the whole Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
and never wholly thrown open until the Year 1663. What is here asserted is
Matter of Fact, and I appeal to the nicest Historian, whether the Affairs of
England were not in a much more flourishing Condition, from Edward IV. to the
End of Henry VII. and from Edward VI. to the End of Queen Elizabeth, than it
has been during such time that Trade was laid open to Merchant-Aliens. Never
was greater Marks of Kindness shown by any Prince than ours, by repeated
Recommendations of the Care of Trade; nay, at last in Words at length, by a
Bill to encourage the fair Merchant, our Manufactures, and discourage
clandestine Trading: And the Hardships which have been undergone by our Poor,
through the Neglect thereof, had never been born but from the entire
Satisfaction and Confidence in His Majesty's Favor. England is said to be a
mighty Animal that will never die, unless it destroy it self. No Age can
produce more unnatural Instances than ours, nor was ever the true Interest of
England, in point of Trade, more in danger of being supplanted by her own Sons.
And thus I leave our Woollen Manufactures, Queen Elizabeth's Mines, and the
Indies of England, to Consideration under the unfortunate Circumstances of poor
Belisarus, Date obolum Belisario, quem invidia, non culpa caecavit.
and with the like Inscription as he had wrote upon his Breast, Dum Spiro Spero.


