Duke Dangerfield DECLARING How he Represented The D. of MON -- In the COUNTRY;
With his Miraculous gift of Touching, making Knights, and other Pranks in
Staffordshire. How he was brought to Town, Examined before the King and
Counsel, and Committed to Newgate.
DAnger field, having brought himself to the last shift, and that so damnable
black, that it was ready to drop off his back for want of Change, began thus to
argue with himself.

Am I he that laid so many profound Plots? that famous Danger field that writ
the Legend, the Inconvincible Narrative! that laid the Foundation of a deep
Plot in the bottom of a Meal-Tub? He that offered to kill his King for 20 l.
and shall I now be afraid to take upon me the person of a Duke? The D. of M --
A Duke out of Fashion, and out at heels, no place nor being in the Earth, and
but a Vagabond, no more then my self?

This is no Age for Whoreing, Swearing nor Lying, I Will try what fooling will
do. I will be a Duke, and the Duke of Mon -- I, and a King for the time, and
why should I not? I am an English Man as well as he, I am as good a Subject as
he, and for ought I know, have as good a Title to the Crown.

With that having furnished himself with a Star and a Purple Livery Coat
purchased in Long-lane, down he went into Staffordshire, keeping the Star close
covered under a Campain Coat.

The Banishment of the D. of M -- out of Brussells, made luckelv for his
purpose, for being turned out of Flanders beyond the Seas, the Straffordians
thought he had no other Refuge but into England, He did not fail to confirm
them in this opinion, ever and anon talking of Flanders, Brussels, and the
unkindness of the M. de Grana in banishing him his Territories; which with the
Star and blew Garter (which now and then he took occasion to show) made the
People believe he was not only the D -- of M. but adored him as a King.

And now to convince them, that he was of Royal Extraction, he begins with his
first Miracle of Touching (as a gift peculiar to himself) for he generally
Touched all Night, besides once or twice a day as the patient presented. As a
Badge of his Royalty, he tied about their Necks Counterfeit half Geanies which
he Coined himself for that purpose, fastened in halfpeny Tape, for every of
which he had two real Gennies which put him in stock.

The next, his Counterfeit Grace (to give further tokens of his Sovereignty)
falls a Knighting all the Scum of the Country, by which means in a short time
he brought 400 l. Fees into the Treasury, viz.

Sir Jer. Joil. Dogboy, Sir Simon Smut, Blaksmith, Sir Barnaby Button, Weaver,
Sir Solomon Sole, Cobbler, Sir Lio^el Long, Carrier, Sir Brason Nose, Kettle
Tinker.
Ferguson was principal Chaplain, Baxter Arch Bishop of Canrerbury, D. Bur --
Dean of the Chapel, with other Changes at Court, which will be to tedious to
Name.

Having got six blank Patents for Baronets (which he designed to dispose of in
the City) away he trudges to Town. He had not got to Milsend when he was
discovered by an old Suffered John Sing, an honest Layman, who this D. Danger
field h^^ twice put up in Newgate for a Jesuit. He dogged him to Whit^ Chapel
where he see him lodged, and brought the Intelligence to Madam Celier, who glad
to catch the old Badger in his own Trap, went with a strong Guard and secured
his Grace in the presence, which was the Kitching, under a Canopie in the
Chi^ney Corner. The sham Duke seeing himself thus surpised, and by one whom he
had so much abused before, cried out Celiere^ The Scarlet Witch! The Eternal
Sorceres.

Cel. Dangerfield, the Rogue in Grain! the Everlasting Villain!

Dan. Have thou outlived my Fury? Withstood all the Volleys of Tur^ and rotten
Eggs, and lives yet to be my Tormenter?

Cel. I have out lived the Pillory, to see thee recant at the Gallows.

Dan. This is a plaguey turn of Fortune. What worse can happen?

Cel. Yes, When thou art turned off the Ladder with a mealy mouthed confession.

Dan. The Meal Tub Plot was mine I must confess, though you suffered (...)

Cel. Do you begin to confess? You know what follows.

Dan. If I had been hanged when I was Dangerfield, and a poor Devil, no had
pitty'd me, But now I have lived to be a Duke, I dye with Honor, a Fig for the
World.

Cel. Thou wast ever an Impudent fellow, but this was boldness indeed, take his
Name upon thee, when no Man would be in his Coat. Now you (...) answer for it
and all your Villainy.

With that they catry'd him in a Coach with a strong Guard, and a (...) Retinue
of his old Friends the Rabble, to White Hall, where being Examine by the King
and Council (having nothing to say but that he knew the w^^on't) he was
carried to Newgate in the same splendour where any Woman (...) be Touched, or
Man dubbed Knight of the Order for 13-Pence-half-penny.

LONDON. Printed for J. Smith. 1685.


