A New VOYAGE to the LEVANT



A New Voyage TO THE LEVANT: CONTAINING An Account of the most Remarkable
Curiosities in Germany, France, Italy, Malta, and Turkey; With Historical
Observations relating to the Present and Ancient State of those Countries.

By the Sieur du Mont.

Done into ENGLISH; and Adorned with FIGURES.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. for M. Gillyflower, in Westminster Hall; T. Goodwin,
at the Queen's-Head, and M. Wotton, at the Three Daggers in Fleetstreet; J.
Walthoe, under the Cloisters in the Middle Temple; and R. Parker, at the
Unicorn under the Royal Exchange, 1696.

To Monsieur William de Schuylenburg, LORD of Dukenburg, Counselor, and Clerk
of the Council TO HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY.
SIR,
I Have taken the Liberty to offer you a Present which perhaps will surprise
you; for we are generally possessed with an Opinion that it is impossible for
the same Person to manage both a Sword and a Pen. If I had the least
Inclination to pretend to the Quality of an Author, I would endeavor to
demonstrate the Unreasonableness of that Prejudice; nor do I believe that I
should find it a very difficult Task to perform. I could easily transcribe the
Stories of so many famous Captains who were equally remarkable for their Wit
and for their Valor; and displayed the former in their Writings with as much
Honor and Success as they signalized the latter in the most dangerous Battles:
And from these Instances I would conclude that the nearest and most direct Way
to Glory is to follow the bright Tracts of those Illustrious Heroes. But since
the Prosecution of so noble an Attempt would require a larger Stock of Merit
and Abilities than ever I could boast of, I will not be guilty of so much
Vanity as to allege those Examples in my own Vindication. Nor will I trouble
You with any studied or formal Apology, since I Am confident You will be easily
persuaded to forgive my Boldness in presenting You with the Observations I made
during my Travels, which I thought I might communicate to the Public without
invading the Province, or provoking the Jealousy of Men of Letters. I made it
my Recreation for some Weeks to prepare 'em for the Press, and shall be
satisfied if they can furnish You with any tolerable Entertainment for some
Hours. Your Approbation is all the Glory, and the highest Recompense I desire.
It Is true, I cannot ask so noble a Reward without discovering the Boldness of
my Ambition; for you have so nice a Taste, and so exact a Judgment, that you
never bestow that Favor but on such as merit Applause from all the World. But
I encourage my self with reflecting on that Goodness which is so natural and
peculiar to You, and even presume to hope that the Sweetness of Your Temper
will put a favorable Bias upon Your Judgment, and incline You to excuse, or at
least to overlook my Errors. This, SIR, is the only Favor I beg leave to
desire; for I never entertained a Thought of courting Your Protection on the
Score of so mean a Present. I know that must be obtained by a very different
Method; nor do I hope to procure it by any other Way than that by which all
Good Men who have the Happiness to be known to you, may pretend to it. It Is
from Your Generosity alone that I expect so glorious an Advantage, and from
that compassionate and bountiful Inclination, which has rendered You the
Support of so many Illustrious Exiles, whom the Tempest of the Age has cast
upon the Shores of Holland, where, by Your Favor, they have found not only a
Safe but a Peaceful and Convenient Retreat, and are enabled to outlive the
Loss of all their Hopes and Fortunes. Since then a Man of Honor may assure
himself of Your Protection without being obliged to bribe Your Favor, I might
be justly accused both of Folly and Injustice if I should endeavor to obtain
it by indirect Methods. No, Sir, I never harbored so criminal a Thought; and
the only reason why I make bold to consecrate the Fruit of my Travels to You,
is because this Dedication will furnish me with an Opportunity to acknowledge
the vast Debt I owe You. The Iniquity of Fortune made me incapable of
expressing the Sense I have of Your Goodness; and I can assure You, that
Consideration alone sat heavier upon me than all the rest of my Disasters. And
is it not natural for a Man in such a Condition to embrace the first Occasion
he can meet with of satisfying in some Measure the extreme Desire he has to
express his Gratitude? Permit me then to acknowledge that I have received very
considerable Favors from You, that You bestowed 'em in the most obliging
Manner imaginable, that I never merited 'em, that You could not have the least
Reason to believe that ever I could requite 'em, and consequently that You were
only acted by a Principle of doing Good, without the least hope of a Return.
This, Sir, is what I desire to publish to all the World; this is the only
Motive that incited me to prefix this Letter to those which You will find in
the Body of the Treatise; and to convince You that I had no other Design in my
View, I shall pnrposely avoid the usual Strain of Dedications, and save You the
trouble of reading those Praises which Your Merit challenges from all the
World, and Your Modesty will not receive even from Your best Friends. It Is not
without extreme Reluctance that I decline so inviting a Subject; and I had
almost made bold to tell You, that You were obliged to me for my Silence. You
know what a vast Field lies before me, and with how much Pleasure and
Satisfaction I would have made Use of this Opportunity to acquaint the World
with Your unalterable Love to Your Country, Your inviolable Fidelity to the
State, Your Zeal and Affection to His Majesty's Service, Your extraordinary
Abilities and Capacity for the Management of those important Affairs that are
entrusted to Your Care; the Clearness and Quickness of Your Apprehension, the
Solidity of Your Judgment, Your uncommon Generosity, the charming Sweetness of
Your Temper, Your incorruptible Probity, and all the other eminent Virtues and
Endowments, which has gained You the Esteem and Admiration of all the World.
'Twou'd be an endless Task to mention all those rare and noble Qualities which
have so justly intitl'd You to the Favor of the greatest King in the World.
But I must not forget my Promise, and therefore shall content my self with
admiring you in Silence, after I have begged Leave to assure You that I am, and
shall ever remain, with a profound Respect,

SIR, Your most Humble and most Obedient Servant, Du Mont.

THE PREFACE.
THE Custom of Writing Prefaces has been so long established, and is grown so
common, that what was formerly looked upon as a Courtesy, is now reckoned a
Duty: and if the Reader be not coax'd into good Humor, he thinks himself
engaged in Honor to resent the Affront, and the Book must be damned for the
Clownishness of the Author. But though I dare not venture to send this Treatise
abroad without so necessary an Ornament, I must confess I Am somewhat puzzled
how to begin my Address. It Is true, I might pretend a Right (and perhaps as
justly too as many others) to that threadbare Excuse of common Scriblers; that
neither my Humor, nor Profession inclines me to set up for an Author, that
this Treatise was composed and designed for my own private Use, that I happened
to show it to some Friends, and was at last constrained by their perpetual and
resistless Importunities, to consent to its Publication. But though I should
spoil my Compliment to the Reader, I will neither endeavor to court his
Favor, nor save my Credit by a Lie: that is, I will not pretend that I was
either forced or persuaded to a thing which I chose for a Diversion in my
Winter Quarters, where I spent my time in revising and putting in Order the
Notes I had taken during my Travels. As to the Method I have observed in
communicating my Observations, besides other Advantages it is certainly most
convenient for a Man of my Profession. One that is not accustomed to Writing,
expresses his Thoughts more easily in familiar Letters than in a continued
Discourse: for he is neither acquainted with the Niceties of a correct Style,
nor able to preserve an exact Uniformity and Connection in so great a Variety of
Matter.

'Twou'd be a difficult and laborious Task to answer all the Objections that
may be made against this Work: And therefore since I am not naturally over-fond
of making Apologies, I Am resolved to let it go at a venture, and take its Fate
among the Critics, without giving my self the Trouble to consider, much less
to prevent or confute their Censures. However it must be acknowledged, that
it is the Design of all Authors, and mine in particular, to please, and
therefore it will not be improper to be speak the Reader's Favor, since he
must shortly become my Judge: and I may justly desire to be heard before my
Doom be pronounced.

In the first place, I expect to be censured for writing on a Subject which has
been already handled by so many Learned and Inquisitive Travelers, and seems
to be quite exhausted by the vast Number of Relations with which they have
obliged the Public. In Answer to this Objection, I might content my self with
desiring the Reader to consult the Prefaces of those Authors who have treated
on the same Subject; but without giving him the Trouble of perusing their
Reasons, I can assure him, that in the following Letters he will meet with
several Observations that are omitted by other Travelers. I made it my
principal Business to observe the Manners and Customs of the People, which are
subject to frequent and considerable Alterations; and consequently I may,
without Vanity, affirm, that my Remarks will furnish the Reader with a fresher,
and more diverting Entertainment, than the dry Relations of a mere Antiquary or
Geographer. Neither is the Subject so barren nor so much exhausted, as the
Objection supposes, and we commonly imagine it to be. A hundred Authors have
handled it before me, and in all Probability a hundred more will treat of it
after me. But almost every Writer pursues a different Method, and takes Notice
of some Things that were neglected by others: and though I have related nothing
but what I have seen or heard, I shall be always glad to peruse the Writings of
succeeding Travelers, and may perhaps find several considerable Remarks in
their Relations that had escaped my own Observation.

It Is true there are some Things so particularly described in the Relations of
other Travelers, that I chose rather to omit many beauful Descriptions with
which I might have embellished my Work, than to transcribe or repeat the
Observations that are already communicated to the Public. As for Example; what
could I have added to the exact Account of the Roman Pantheon, Capitol,
Colliseum, etc. of the Palace of S. Mark at Venice, of the Great Council, and a
thousand other Things of that Nature? 'Twill perhaps be objected, that for the
same Reason I ought to have omitted several other Descriptions, which I have
taken care to insert in my Letters; but to remove that Prejudice 'twill be
sufficient to put the Reader in mind that there is so necessary a Connection
between my Old and New Observations, that I could not possibly mention the
latter, without taking Notice of the former. It Is true, I cannot pretend the
same Excuse for that part of my Book, where I treat of the Egyptian Pyramids,
of Cairo, and the Ruins of Alexandria: But there is something so wonderful and
surprising in those Celebrated Monuments of Antiquity, that I concluded the
curious Reader would be glad of an Opportunity to refresh his Memory by Reading
the Two Letters I have written on that Subject: and as for those who are
already so well acquainted with these Curiosities, that they cannot employ
their Time with Pleasure in Reading a New Account of 'em, they may easily save
themselves that Trouble, by skipping over Ten or Twelve Leaves.

The same Answer may serve for those who win (...) apt to censure me for
inserting in my Two first Letters, an Abridgment of the Campaign in Germany in
1689. and of the Barbarities that were committed by the French in that Country.
And besides, I must beg Leave to tell those Gentlemen, that several Men of
Sense are of a very different Opinion, and esteem that an Ornament, which they
perhaps may reckon a Fault.

I could easily dispatch such nibbling Critics if I were not afraid of being
attacked by more formidable Adversaries, who will absolutely condemn all those
little Stories which I thought fit to insert in my Work; either to give the
Reader a clearer and more comprehensive Idea of the Genius and Customs of the
People of whom I have occasion to discourse, or for some other Reasons that
need not be mentioned. Since I must expect to be treated with the utmost Rigor
and Spite by such peevish and merciless Censurers; I do not think my self
obliged either to submit to their Judgment, or to appease their Anger. And
therefore I shall content my self with telling 'em plainly, that they may lay
aside my Book, when they meet with any Thing in it that offends 'em, and that I
shall be equally unconcerned whether they approve or condemn it.

The Reader may easily perceive, that I designed not to have ended my Relation
at Venice. I thought, in a Second Part, to have given an Account of Germany,
Holland, and Flanders: but the time of Staying in our Winter Quarters being
expired, I was obliged to quit my Closet for the Field, before I had finished
my intended Work. In the mean time, if the First Part meet with an encouraging
Reception, the Second shall be completed next Winter; if not, I must even take
my Rest, or find out some other Employment; for I never was, nor will be of an
Humor to cloy the Public with my Writings.

THE CONTENTS.
LETTER I. THE Design of the two first Letters. Description of Spire. The Bone
of a Man who was Twenty five Foot high. Of the Burning of the City, and the
Consternation of the Inhabitants. Of the Plundering of the Town, and the
Sacrileges that were Committed on that Occasion. Treasure found in the Jesuits
House. Description of Manheim. Of the razing of that City. Several other Towns
demolished. 1 LETTER II. Relation of the Campaign in Germany. The Elector of
Brandenburg takes Keiserwaert, and sits down before Bonn. Mentz besieged by the
Dukes of Bavaria and Lorrain. Heidelberg invested by the Marshall de Duras,
who is forced to raise the Siege Seven Days after. Description of the City. The
same Marshall burns Wiselock and Sinsennes. Disorders committed by his Army.
Wingarten and Bruchsal taken. Cocheim stormed by Monsieur de Boufflers, who
afterward makes himself Master of several other Places. The Marshall de Duras
continues his March, and burns Baden, Durlach, and all Wirtemberg. Description
of Baden. Description of Durlach. The Author Arrested. Mentz reduced.
Description and History of Strasburg. 19 LETTER III. Description and History of
Metz. Description if Nanci and Langres. History and Description of Dijon. 25
LETTER IV. The Author travels in Company with a Priest, who pretends to be
acquainted with Charms. Description of Lions. The Marshall de Feuillade's
pleasant Repartees to the Archbishop of that Place. Account of the Vaudois, 32
LETTER V. History and Antiquity of Vienne in Dauphine. Story of a Beggar.
Description and History of Grenoble. Description of a Cistertian Monastery.
Description of Chamberi, Montmelian, S. John de Morienne, and Mount Cennis.
Description of Tunis, 42 LETTER VI. Description of Pignerol. Of the dangerous
Passage over Mount Genevre. The Author stopped at Sisteron. Description of that
Town. Description of Aix in Provenc^. History of Provence. Mildness of its
Climate. Advantages of its Soil. Description of the Turfe's or Earth-Apples
that are found there, 57 LETTER VII. History of Marseilles. The strange
Aversion of the Inbitants against the French. Description of the City. Of the
New Town. Of the Abbey of S. Victor. Of the Galleys. The Deplorable Condition
of the Galley-Slaves. Of the Arsenal, 70 LETTER VIII. Description of S. Baume.
The unusual Stature of Mary Magdalen. By what Accident she came to Provence. Of
the Relick of that Saint at S. Maximin. Of the Amphitheatre at Arles. Of the
Obelisk. Of the Foundation of Nismes. The Temple of Diana. The Tower Magne. The
Square House. The Civil and Free Temper of the People of Languedoc. History of
two unfortunate Lovers. Another of S. Anthony's Ghost at Marseilles 81 LETTER
IX. Of the Isles of If. Of the Bravery of the People of Provence. Of the
Republio of Genoa. Ways to prevent the dangerous Effects of Bombs and
Grenades. General Remarks on Italy. Of the Curtezans. Of the Luxury that
reigns under the Pontificate of Alexander VIII. Compared with that of Innocent
XI. Abuses occasioned by the Privileges granted to Churches as places of
Refuge. Of the unusual Dexterity of a certain Florentine in avoiding a
Musket-Bullet. 100 LETTER X. Of a furious Tempest, in which a little Boy was
carried from one End of the Ship to the other. A Story of another Accident
almost of the same Nature, which happened during a Storm of Lightning at the
Castle of Guernsey. The Author's Arrival at Malta. The quick Return of a
Messenger that was sent from Malta to Provence. Abridgement of the History of
Malta. How it was besieged by Sinan Bassa. The Strength and Beauty of the City
Valette. Of the Arsenal. of S. John's Church. Ceremonies observed at Malta in
the performing of Divine Service. The Antiquity and Institution of the Order.
Its present Condition. Of the Hospital, and how diseased Persons are
entertained in it. 115 LETTER XI. Of the Dryness and Barrenness of Malta. The
extraorordinary Heat of the Climate. The Manners and Customs of the
Inhabitants. Two Stories on that Subject. Of the great Number of Curtezans in
the Island. The Habit of the Women. Of the Bonnes Vogues. Tyrannical
Proceedings of the Inquisition. S. Paul's Grotto. Of the common Opinion that
there are no Serpents in Malta. 131 LETTER XII. The Ruins of Troy. The two
Castles at the Mouth of the Hellespont. The admirable Prospect of
Constantinople from the Sea Marmora. The Character of Monsieur de Chasteauneuf,
the French Ambassador at the Port. History of Constantinople. The Purity of the
Air. The Extent of the City. Of its Strength and Buildings. Of the Besestin and
Hippodrome. Fabulous Traditions concerning the Emperor Leo Isaurus. Description
of Santa Sophia. History of its Foundation. Description of the Mosquee built by
the Sultaness Valide. 142 LETTER XIII. Arsenal of Constantinople. Description
of the Hans and Karavanserai. Inconveniences of Traveling in Turkey. The
French Ambassador sends his Secretary to Poland; and for what Reasons.
Description of the Seraglio. Sultan Amurat's Severity. Monsieur de Chasteauneuf
receives an Audience from the Caimacan. Their Compliments and Discourse.
Ceremonies observed at the Audience. Description of the Caimacan's House. 160
LETTER XIV. The Sultan's magnificent Entry into Constantinople. The Order of
the Cavalcade. The French Ambassador expresses a great deal of Joy on this
Occasion. The Way how Moneys are transmitted to him for Secret Service. Story
of two French Engeneers. The French come over to the Turks in great Numbers. A
remarkable Story of a Spy sent by the Emperor. 175 LETTER XV. Of the Liberty
which the Greeks enjoy in Scio. Of the City of Scio. Of the Mastick that grows
in the Island. A pleasant Story of S. Anthony's Image. Turks and Christians
join in some superstitious Rites. Of the Schools of Homer. Of the free Way of
living in Scio. The Habit of the Inhabitants. 185 LETTER XVI. Of the Island of
Stanchio, where Hippocrates and Appelles were born. Abridgment of the History
of Rhodes. Description of the City. The Head of a Dragon. Of the Rhodian
Colossus. The Author's Arrival at Cyprus, where he sees a Man with four Arms.
Arrival at Alexandria. Description of that City. Pompey's Pillar. Remarks upon
that Column. Catacombs near Alexandria. Manner of Divining among the Arabs. A
Story on that Subject. An Account of the Arabs, and their manner of living. 194
LETTER XVII. The Egyptian Pyramids. An Idol Twenty six Foot high. Catacombs,
or Subterraneous Vaults, in which the Mummy is found. Ruins of M^^phis.
Abridgment of the History of Cairo. Description of that City. The Castle of
Cairo, Joseph's Palace, and Well. Of Maltharea, where there is a Spring of
Water. A Story of the Blessed Virgin. 211 LETTER XVIII. Of Smyrna. Of the
Ancient and Present State of that City. Relation of an Earthquake. Authority of
the Consuls of the Franks. The Author puts himself ^^der the Protection of
Holland, and receives a Thousand Civilities from the Cons^ of that Nation. 223
LETTER XIX. The Aritrarness of the Turk ish Government. The Dignity and
Authority of the Grand Vizier. Of the Bassa's and Grandees of the Empire. The
Weakness of the Government is the Cause of those frequent Disorders that
disturb the Quiet of the Empire. Of the Administration of Justice. Of the
Cadi's, Bassa's, and Vaivods. Of the other Officers, and their Jurisdictions.
Story of a Judge who was bribed to acquit a Malefactor. Several kinds of
Punishment in Turkey. Pleasant Stories which the Magistrates tell of each
other. 232 LETTER XX. The Turks believe there were Four Prophets sent by GOD,
Enoch, Moses, Christ, and Mahomet. Their fondness for Predestination. Of the
White and Black Angels. Their Opinion concerning the Union of the Soul and
Body. Their Ablutions and Devotions. Their Lent. Their Charity. Their Kindness
to Dogs. A Dog Arraigned, Condemned, and Executed. A Battle between the Dogs
and Jaccals. Turkish Conceits about the Plague. 249 LETTER XXI. Turkish Genius
opposite to ours. Their lazy Manner of Living. Their Skill in Horsemanship. Of
Servants Wages. Habit of the Men. Of Marriage, and keeping of Concubines.
Punishment of Whores. Of the Way which the Women take to declare an amorous
Passion. A Story on that Subject. Severity of Husbands. Another Story. Habit of
the Women. Their Way of Painting. Their Beauty and Neatness. Their frequent
Bathing. The Turkish Music. Several Kinds of Dances. Puppet-Shows. Of the
Turkish Salutations and Civility. Of Persons of Quality in Turkey. A blunt
Repartee. 261 LETTER XXII. The Slavery of the Greeks. Their Habit. Dances.
Opinion concerning the Marks of Virginity. Salutation on Easter Day. Their
Separation from the Romish Church, and the Reasons they give for it. The Points
of Doctrine in which they differ from the Romanists. Of the Procession of the
Holy Ghost. Of Purgatory. Of Communion under both Kinds. Of Leavened Bread. Of
the Celibacy of the Clergy. The Habit of the Priests and Religious Persons. The
Structure of their Churches. They believe Transubstantiation. And worship
Images. Their Manner of Painting. A short Account of the Armenians. Opinion of
the Greeks concerning Bodies that remain uncorrupted in the Grave. Funeral
Ceremonies. Weeping-Women. Jewish Impostors. Character of the Jews. Their
Superstition, Jealousy, and Habit. 381 LETTER XXIII. Arrival of Five Barbary
Ships: A particular Account of the Disorders committed by those Barbarians
about a Year ago. The French Consul quarrels with the Capuchins. He is governed
by the Jesuits. Character of the Jesuits. Ignorance of the Turks, and their
surprising Neglect of the Public Interest. Arabian Divination. A Story on that
Subject. The Turks much addicted to the Study of the Philosophers Stone. 301
LETTER XXIV. History of Mahomet IV. Emperor of the Turks. He loses the Battle
of Hersan. The Army revolts against him. He is deposed by the Grandees of the
Empire. His Brother Soliman advanced to the Throne. The Caimacan endeavors to
make his Escape in a French Vessel. He flies toward the Black Sea: is taken
and Beheaded. A new Insurrection against Soliman, in which the City and Galleys
are set on Fire. The Emperor retires to Adrianople. The Duke of Bavaria takes
Belgrade. The Prince of Baden obtains three great Victories: and makes himself
Master of several Places. The Vizier Ismael deposed. The Bassa Kopergli Oglon
put in his Place: He is killed at the Battle of Salankemen. Proposals of Peace.
Story of a Venetian Captain, who put himself under the Protection of France.
Death of the Emperor Soliman. Advancement of his Brother Achmet. Tragical End
of Mustapha Aga. 314 LETTER XXV. The French Ambassador comes to Adrianople:
And breaks the Treaty of Peace. Death of the English Ambassador. Count
Marsigli assassinated. An Italian turns Turk. Ceremonies observed at the
Receiving of a Renegado. The Bones of a Man Twenty Foot high, found at
Thessalonica. The Author prepares for his Departure. News of Count Marsigli's
Recovery. 331 LETTER XXVI. Death of Signior Stephano. The Ship's Company take
him for a Sorcerer. Description of the Isle of Millo. Of Argentiere. Of Zant. A
pleasant Story of the Prince of Brunswick's Amors with a Courtezan.
Description of Ragusa. Of the Government of that Republic. Prospect of Venice,
Description of the New Lazaretto. Orders observed there. Of the Inquisition of
State. Spies entertained by that Tribunal. The Author in Danger of feeling
their Severity. 339 LETTER XXVII. Of the E^tent of Venice. Of its Strength.
Whether it be impregnable. Reasons why it is not fortified. Observations on the
Canals. Of the Streets. Of S. Mark's Place. The Broglio. The Procuraties. The
Palace of S. Mark. S. Mark's Church. The Arsenal. Beauty of the Venetian
Palaces. Of the Ridotti or Gaming-Houses. 354 LETTER XXVIII. Degrees of the
Venetian Nobility. Advantages of the poor Nobles. Extravagant Ceremonies
observed by the Venetians in their Salutations: In Discourse and Letters.
Titles given to Persons according to their several Ranks. The Doge a gaudy
Slave. History of Francis Moresini, the present Doge. The Procurator Moresini's
public Entry. Edicts against Luxury. Of the Knights of S. Mark. Of the Forces
of the Republic. Of the Condition of the Officers and Soldiers. Of the Ships
that belong to the Republic. S. Mark, represented under the Figure of a Lion.
History of that Lion. The Venetian Nobles extremely civil to Strangers. Of the
Bravo's. Habit of the Nobles. 372 LETTER XXIX. Of the Gondola's, and of the
Dexterity of the Gondoliers. Festival after Ascension-Day. Of the Venetian
Ladies, and the Liberty they enjoy. Of the Pleasure and Advantage of
Marsquerades. Of the Venetian Astrologers. Of Girls that come to the Fair. Of
their Dress. Of the Way of Buying 'em. Opinion of the Italians concerning the
Marks of Virginity. Of the Courtezans. A pleasant Story. Of the Opera's and
Comedies. History of Pope Alexander VIII. Ridiculous Opinion of the Italians
concerning the French Customs. 394
The END of the Contents.
BOOKS lately Printed.
THE Present State of Persia: With a faithful Account of the Manners, Religion
and Government of that People. By Monsieur Sanson, a Missionary from the French
King. Adorned with Figures. Done into English.

The Present State of the Empire of Morocco: With a faithful Account of the
Manners, Religion, and Government of that People. By Monsieur de S. Olon,
Ambassador there in the Year 1693. Adorned with Figures.

The Life of the Famous Cardinal-Duke of Richlieu, Principal Minister of State
to Lewis XIII. King of France and Navarre. in Two Volumes. 8 vo.

Letters, written by a French Gentleman; giving a faithful and particular
Account of the Transactions of the Court of France, relating to the Public
Interest of Europe. With Historical and Political Reflections on the ancient
and present State of that Kingdom. By the Famous Monsieur Vassor.

The Roman History, from the Building of the City to the perfect Settlement of
the Empire by Augustus Caesar: Containing the Space of 727 Years. Designed as
well for the Understanding of the Roman Authors, as the Roman Affairs. By
Laurence Echard, A. M. of Christ-College in Cambridge.

A New Voyage to Italy: With a Description of the Chief Towns, Churches, Tombs,
Libraries, Palaces, Statues, and Antiquities of that Country. Together with
useful Instructions for those who shall travel thither. By Maximilian Mission,
Gent. Done into English, and adorned with Figures. In two Volumes. 8 vo.

The Life of the Famous John Baptist Colbert. Late Minister and Secretary of
State to Lewis XIV. the present French King. Done into English from a French
Copy, printed at Cologn this present Year 1695.

Now in the Press, and will be speedily Published.
THE Complete Horseman: Discovering the surest Marks of the Beauty, Goodness,
and Vices of Horses, and describing the Signs and Causes of their Diseases; and
the True Method both of their Preservation and Cure. With Reflections on the
Regular and Preposterous Use of Bleeding and Purging. Together with the Art of
Shooing, and a Description of several Kinds of Shoes, adapted to the various
Defects of Bad Feet, and for the Preservation of those that are good; and the
Best Method of Breeding Colts; with Directions to be observed in Backing 'em,
and Making their Mouths, etc. By the Sieur de Solleysell, one of the Heads of
the Royal Academy at Paris. The Eighth Edition, Reviewed and methodically
Augmented; Done into English, and Adorned with Figures. Folio.

The Complete Surgeon: Or, The whole Art of Surgery Explained, by Way of
Questions and Answers. Containing an exact Account of its Principles, and
several Parts; viz. A Description of the Bones and Muscles: with a Treatise of
Tumors, Ulcers, Wounds, whether Simple or Complicated; and those by Gunshot:
As also of Venereal Diseases, the Scurvey, Luxation, Fractures, and all Sorts
of Chirurgical Operations, together with their proper Bandages and Dressings.
Whereto is added a Chirurgical Dispensatory; showing the Manner how to prepare
all such Medicines as ate most necessary for a Surgeon; and particularly the
Mercurial Panacaea. Written in French by M. le Clerc, Physician in Ordinary,
and Privy-Counsellour to the French King; and faithfully Translated into
English.

A New Voyage TO THE LEVANT.
LETTER I.
SIR,
I must beg leave to complain of the hardness of the Task you impose upon me,
by requiring me to give you an exact Relation of our present Campaign, with the
Description of those Cities in Germany which I shall have occasion to visit;
but neither the Troublesomness of such a Correspondence, nor the Sense of my
own Unfitness to Manage it, shall make me decline an Undertaking by which I may
convince you of my extreme desire to obtain the honor of your Friendship, and
to secure my self in the Possession of it beyond the danger or fear of any
future Alteration.

I shall begin, then, with acquainting you, that we were about eight Days ago
quartered in a City called Spire, which is now a heap of Stones: The
Inhabitants have been threatened these three Months, with the execution of that
fatal Design of reducing the City to Ashes, and during that time lived in a
cruel Uncertainty, and perpetual Fear of their impending Ruin. Spire was
situated in the Palatinate of the Rhine, called of old Nimetum, and its
Inhabitants Nimetes; it was the Seat of the Imperial Chamber, composed of two
Presidents, one a Catholic, and the other a Protestant; and fifteen
Counselors, eight of the Romish, and seven of the other Persuasion. The
Elector of Triers held the Bishopric of that City, the Sovereignty of which is
extended over several fine Territories; and among the rest, Philipsburg, which
the Emperor was obliged to restore to that Prelate, by the Treaty concluded
with France at Triers, in 1685. The Cathedral was a large and fine Structure,
well furnished with Lights, and adorned with great Pyramidal Towers at the four
Corners. On the Right-side of the Church stood the Episcopal Palace, famous for
its Architecture, and enriched on the Inside with a great variety of fine
Pictures; and on the other side was the House of the Canons, with a very
ancient Cloister, in the middle of which there was a Mount of Olives cut in the
Rock, esteemed to be a Masterpiece of Sculpture. Before the Church there was a
great Court or void Space, capable of containing 10000 Men drawn up in
Battalia. All the Houses that surrounded it were well built, especially that of
the Jesuits, which fronted the Bishop's Palace, where those Fathers had a very
curious Library of above 6000 Volumes, which was consumed in the general
Conflagration of the City; with five or six others belonging to private Persons
that were no less considerable. The Inhabitants of Spire were Rich, and lovers
of Pleasure: The City was surrounded with a great number of Gardens abundantly
furnished with every thing that might contribute to the Advantage and Pleasure
of the Owners; for besides the Beauty of the Orange Trees which were preserved
there notwithstanding the Coldness of the Climate; and the various Ornaments of
covered and opened Walks, Flowers, Waterworks, and Statues; there was a great
abundance of all sorts of Fruit Trees. Every Garden had also the convenience of
a Pleasure-House, very handsomely built, and all over Painted and Gilt after the
German Fashion, in which the Gentlemen of Spire passed the time with a great
deal of Satisfaction, some in Drinking, and others in more charming Diversions.
The Townhouse was famous for its Antiquity, which was said to amount to above
twelve Ages since its first Foundation, but had nothing else to recommend it to
the Observation of Travelers. Before the Gate there hung on an Iron-Ring, a
Bone of an Arm, which equaled a Thigh Bone in bigness, and was proportionably
long. It Is affirmed in the Records of the City, that the Man to whom that Bone
belonged, whose Name was Olps, was twenty five Foot high, and that he was
killed about 1300 Years ago in a Siege against the Town, the Ladder breaking
under him as he was scaling the Walls; which gave a fair Opportunity to the
Besieged to rid themselves of so formidable an Enemy, by pouring whole
Hogsheads of boiling Pitch upon him. His Hip-Bone was also preserved in the
great Hall, which I have often seen, without giving much credit to the Story;
for it is hard to conceive, that a Man of such a Gigantine Stature could have
escaped the Obsrvation of Historians.

To return to Spire; The City was taken by the Dauphin about the end of the
last Year, (when he made himself Master of Philipsburg) and was immediately put
under Contribution; and besides, 6000 Men were quartered in it during the
Winter, which made the Inhabitants believe they had already suffered the
severest Effects of their Enemies Fury. But they were extremely surpised, when
in the last Spring they were commanded to raise 60000 Crowns, under pain of
Burning. This rigorous Order could not be executed without reducing 'em to
Beggary; for Money was already very scarce in the City, and yet those Wretches
put themselves to the utmost stretch to raise the Sum; which they had no
sooner paid, but the Baron de Monclair caused a Proclamation to be published
with Sound of Trumpet, commanding all the Inhabitants to retire with their
Goods, because the Town was to be burnt on the 5 th. Day after the publishing
of the Order. And to add to the Cruelty of their Punishment, they were not
suffered to pass the Rhine, where they might have found some Assistance among
their Friends and Relations, but were forced to retire to Alsace, among the
French, who treated them like so many Beasts, without the least Mark of
Humanity or Compassion. After all these Severities, they might have found some
Consolation even in the extremity of their Affliction, if they had been
furnished with Wagons for the Transportation of their Goods; but they were not
to expect the least Favor, and were obliged to hire Wagons of the Peasants
and Sutlers, who, taking Advantage of their Necessity, made 'em pay such
excessive Rates, that they were forced to leave the greatest part of their
Goods for want of Carriage. In that time of Extremity I heard some of those
miserable Creatures offer fifteen Crowns a day for the use of a Horse, that
might have been bought for a smaller Sum. Never any Man beheld so touching an
Object as was occasioned by the Grief and Consternation that covered every Face
in this unfortunate City, at the publishing of the Burning-Order. Our Eyes and
Ears were every where saluted with Tears and Lamentations; the Women especially
moved the hardest Hearts with Compassion, their Despair making 'em tear their
Hair, and strike their Heads against the Wall.

At last the fatal Term being expired, they were forced to bid a lasting
Farewell to the City, and with it to almost all their Goods and Possessions.
Then their Lamentations began afresh, and their Despair appeared more visibly
than ever; nor was it possible for any Heart that was not entirely divested of
all sense of Humanity, to resist the Motions of Compassion that were excited at
the sight of so deplorable an Object. Noblemen, Tradesmen, the Poor and the
Rich, began their doleful March, without any Mark of Distinction, all equally
Miserable; with this only difference, that the Rich were more sensible of their
Misfortunes than those whose Poverty secured 'em from the danger of
considerable Losses. I Am still filled with Horror as often as I reflect on
that dismal Spectacle; and I Am confident you would not be less deeply touched
with a sense of the irrecoverable Ruin of so many innocent Persons, if you had
been an Eyewitness of it. You could not have beheld, without feeling almost
the same Transports of Sorrow, two or three hundred Noble-women and Citizens
Wives walking on foot in the midst of an Infinite Crowd of People, and most of
'em followed by five or six small Children, some of 'em hanging at the Mother's
Breast, not knowing where to shelter themselves during the Night, nor where to
find necessary Refreshment and Sustenance for their wearied Bodies; for the
excessive Contributions that were exacted from 'em, had so drained their
Purses, that three quarters of 'em were not Masters of one Penny; and those who
had the happiness to preserve the Remainders of their Money, had hid it
underground, for fear of being robbed by the Soldiers on the Road, as several
of 'em were who had not used that Precaution.

After their Departure, the Town was abandoned for two Days to the Mercy of the
Soldiers, who committed a Thousand Sacrileges; for hoping to find some hidden
Treasures, they threw down the Altars, dig'd up dead Bodies, and rif^^d the
most Ancient and Venerable Tombs, without sparing those of an Emperor, and
several great Princes and Prelates that were in the Cathedral, which they
turned to a Stable.

After all these Violences, the appointed Day for the final destruction of the
City being come, the Troops were encampt, and 200 Men, each with a lighted
Torch in his Hand, were Commanded to set fire to the Houses; so that in less
than half a Day the Town was entirely consumed, and the last Day of May 1689,
was the last of that Ancient City. And lest the Fire should be too merciful,
the King ordered it to be afterward demolished, and 1000 Soldiers are actually
employed in levelling it with the Ground. They will find some difficulty in
executing their Fury on the great Church, by reason of the unusual thickness of
the Walls, which are all built of ^ewn Stone; yet the strength of that noble
Edifice cannot prevent its Ruin; for lest the Germans should afterward lodge
themselves in it, it is resolved to blow it up with a Mine. The House of the
Jesuits resisted all the Endeavors of the Demolishers for two or three Days;
but they were well paid for their Labor with two Treasures Places burnt^ by
the French

which they found, one of 8000 Livres of coined Silver, hidden underground;
and the other, which probably belonged to some Citizens, who had entrusted it
to those Reverend Fathers, consisting of Plate to the Value of 9 or 10000
Francks, in Iron Coffers, lying under a heap of Books. You would hardly give
Credit to my Relation, if I should undertake to give you a particular Account
of the prodigious quantity of Wine that was wasted on this Occasion; for there
was a sufficient Store of that Liquor in Spire to furnish such a City as Paris
above a Month: And besides, it was of the most excellent sorts, all near eight
Years old at least; and even some of the richest Citizens usually kept it
twelve Years, preserving it in large Casks, many of which contained 100
Hogsheads. I Am persuaded that no other City in the World could boast of so fine
and so numerous Cellars, as Spire; they were deep, large, and well vaulted with
great Pillars that sustained the whole weight of the Houses and Streets; so
that they seemed to be Subterraneous Temples, consecrated to the God Bacchus.
The Citizen with whom I lodged had a very stately one, which contained 100
Casks, such as those I have already described, full of the most excellent sorts
of Wine. I never visited this well-stor'd Cellar, but I thought on our dear N
--, and wished his Company, pleasing my self with the Thought, how nobly I
could have regaled him, especially with one Cask of Wine fifteen Years old,
that was highly prized by all my Friends, though, for my part, I must confess,
that Champagne is infinitely more agreeable to me; and I willingly leave all
those Gross-body'd Wines to the Germans, whose Heads are strong enough to bear
'em. My Landlord, M. Creps, was a very rich Man, he had very fine Houses at
Worms, ^ranckendal, and Spire, besides a small Office in the Imperial Chamber,
which in all yielded him above 15000 Livres a Year, yet by a deplorable Turn of
Fortune, he lost his whole Estate in less than three Months, and is fallen so
extremely poor, that he is forced at present to sell Brandy in our Army, and
resolves to continue that Trade during the rest of the Campaign.

While we are busi'd in demolishing Spire, the Queen's Regiment, and some
others, are employed in the same Exercise at Manheim, a small City built by
Charles Lewis, Elector Palatine, who had the convenience of contriving the
Fortifications as he pleased. All the Houses were exactly uniform, and the four
Gates might be seen at once from the Place of Arms in the midst of the Town.
This was so important and advantageous a Post, that Monsieur Vauban said one
Day to the King, That whatever Prince was Master of Manheim and Philipsburg,
might at once maintain a War against his Majesty and the Emperor. The Baroness
of Aiguenfeld, the second Wife, or (if you will) the Mistress of that Elector,
was buri^d in this City: And our Soldiers not only broke open her Tomb, but
threw her Bones without the Walls. The Duchess of Orleans pretends to have
received several ill Offices from that Lady; but I Am the less inclinable to
think that she was accessory to such an inhuman Action, when I consider her
Kindness to the Rhograves, that Barone^s's Children. Worms, Frankendal,
Ladenburg, Openheim, and Keidiscum, are under the same Sentence that has been
executed on Manheim and Spire: But since I never was in any of those Places, I
cannot gratify your Curiosity with an exact Description of 'em, only I can
inform you that they were considerable Towns, and that they are either already
demolished, or will be quickly reduced to such a Condition, that all that can
be henceforth said of 'em is, Here stood Worms, Spire, Manheim, etc.

These, Sir, are all the remarkable Transactions with which I can at present
acquaint you;

I am, SIR, Your etc.
From the Camp at Spire, June 1689.
LETTER II.
SIR,
I Hope this Letter will in some measure atone for my long Silence, and
convince you that my Neglect was not the only Cause of my not writing to you
once every Month, according to your Desire: For I concluded that a complete
Relation of the Compaign would be a more acceptable Present to you, than if I
had sent you from time to time some interrupted and ill-connected Accounts of
it. Besides, I was so little Master of my Time during the whole Month of
August, that you cannot with Justice refuse to put a less severe Construction
on my Silence: And I Am confident that after you have read the Account of my
Misfortunes in the beginning of this Month, you will esteem me a fitter Object
of your Compassion than Anger. Perhaps you little expected to hear of my
Confinement to a close Prison for fifteen Days; but I can assure you, that if
the Marquess D'Efiat had not vouchsafed me his Protection, and cleared me of
all my suspected Crimes, in a Letter to Monsieur de Chamilly, for ought I know,
I might have been still in the same Condition. But before I give you a
particular Account of that Accident, the Order of time obliges me to entertain
you with a Relation of our Warlike Expeditions.

While our Army, in July, lay quiet, the Elector of Brandenburg attacked and
took Keiserwaert: And we were afterward informed, that, not content with that
Success, he sat down before Bonn; and that Mentz was invested by the Dukes of
Bavaria and Lorrain, with an Army of Seventy thousand Men, which obliged us to
make a Diversion in the Palatinate: And that Design was executed with so much
Fury and Cruelty, that Posterity will hardly ever give credit to that part of
the History of our Age. We pass^d the Rhine at Philips^urg on a Bridge of
Boats, in the beginning of August. I need not tell you that this City was
surrendered to the Dauphin on his Birthday ( November. 1.) which he rendered
famous by his first Conquest: But I cannot forbear doing Justice to the Bravery
and Greatness of Mind which he showed on that Occasion. For he was everywhere
present, and neither gave his Orders by Proxy, nor suffered any thing to be
done without his Knowledge. Philipsburg is a very inconsiderable Town, scarce
able to contain a numerous Garrison, nor can it boast of one remarkable House,
but that which belongs to the Governor. But, notwithstanding those Defects,
it is a place of great importance, both by reason of its Situation between the
Rhine and a large and deep Marsh, and its numerous Fortifications. There was a
Redoubt on the other side of the Rhine to defend the Passage of the River,
which the Dauphin took in two Days: But there are so many new Works added, that
it may be called more properly a considerable Fort than a simple Redoubt. The
next Day we encamped before Heydelberg, which we invested on the side next the
Rhine. This City was part of our last Year's Conquests, and had paid
Contributions two or three times. Some of our Troops had their Winter Quarters
in it, and possessed it without the least Disturbance till the Spring, when by
an unaccountable sort of Policy, we blew up the Castle, and left the Town (I
think) on purpose that we might have the pleasure of Besieging it two Months
after: For you must not imagine because the Trenches were not opened, that the
Siege was never really intended, since it is plain from reason that we sat down
before it with that design, because we could not have chosen a more probable
way to divert the Imperial Forces: And besides, it is certain that Monsieur de
Duras had given Orders for a general Assault the Day on which the Place was
relieved by a Detachment of 3000 Men, who entered the Town with several Boats
laden with Ammunition, and all sorts of necessary Provisions. However, our
Army, consisting of 25000 Men, with 45 Pieces of Cannon, lay seven Days before
it, during which time we lost 8 or 900 good Soldiers, besides several Officers;
and were at last forced to leave a defenseless Town, that might have been
stormed with Sword in Hand the first Night we sat down before it: For we had
already ruined those inconsiderable Fortifications that defended it, before we
left it in the Spring: And at the same time we blew up the Castle, or at least
the best part of it, in which alone the strength of the Place consisted.
Nevertheless all its Defects might have been corrected by an industrious
Master: And besides, it must be acknowledged to be a Place of great Importance,
if we consider the Advantages of its Situation; for it would have opened a
Passage on the Neckar, and made us Masters of the whole Country as far as
Franckfort.

Heydelberg is the Chief City of the Palatinate of the Rhine, seated on the
Neckar, in a Bottom betwixt two Hills. The Castle where the Electors formerly
resided, stands on a Hillock that commands the Town, and has the Advantage of a
lovely, but of late neglected Garden. The Strangers that passed through this City
never failed to pay a Visit to the famous Tun, of above a hundred Years
standing, and were usually received with the ^^llkom* which is a Glass
containing about two Quarts. The French, who quartered here during the Winter,
were so sensible of the Charms of that hospitable Vessel, that they left not
one Drop in it, though it contained above 300 Hogsheads of Wine. Near the City
there is a fair Church, consisting of three several Vaults, under which the
Catholics, Lutherans, and Calvinists perform Divine Service. It was built by
Charles Lewis, Elector Palatine, who named it The Temple of Concord, to put his
Subjects in mind that their Temporal Safety depended on their Union; and that a
diversity of Interests was not a necessary Consequence of Difference in
Religion. This City was formerly Mistress of one of the finest Libraries in the
World, which she possessed till the Year 1622, when Count Tilly having taken
the City, sent part of the Books to Rome, while the rest were dispersed like
those of Alexandria, to the irreparable Loss of the learned World; since no
other Library contained so numerous a Collection of rare Manuscripts.

The City being secur^d by a seasonable Relief from our intended Assault, we
decamped on the 9 th. before Day, and having marched two Leagues, arriv^d about
eight a-clock at the little Town of Wiseloch, which we burnt in our Passage,
after we had thrust out the Inhabitants. Sinsennes, and several other Villages,
met with the same Treatment from our Dragoons, who were always entrusted with
these fiery Commissions. These Ministers of our Fury allowed no longer respite
to the Places they were ordered to destroy, than what might give 'em leisure to
plunder the best Effects of the Inhabitants, ravish their Wives and Daughters,
and commit a thousand other Disorders. The Fame of our Cruelties was quickly
spread over the Countries of Wirtemberg and Baden, and drove away all the
Inhabitants of the Towns and Villages to which we approached; who fled from us
as from the Enemies and Destroyers of Mankind, endeavoring to save their Lives
in the Woods and Forests, where many of 'em seeking to avoid one kind of Death,
met with another no less terrible, and chose rather to be starved than killed;
so that from hence-forward during our whole March, we found not one Person,
either in the Towns or Country through which we passed. Only Weingarten and
Bruchsal pretended to stop our Career; but two Days after they were constrained
to Surrender, and both the Garrisons and Inhabitants were made Prisoners of
War, and the Towns were treated with the same Severity with those that were
formerly mentioned, by the Troops that entered into 'em. At the same time
Monsieur de Boufflers, who commanded a Flying Camp, came before a little Town
called Cocheim, in which there was a Garrison of 600 Men, and fearing least the
Place should be relieved, immediately gave Orders for an Assault, which was
carried on and received with equal Vigor and Bravery. The Action lasted two
Hours, after which our Men were obliged to retire; but the Major, who commanded
in the Town, contenting himself with so remarkable a Success, and concluding
that the Courage of the French Troops was so well cooled, that they would
hardly venture to return to a place where they had met with so rough a
Treatment, instead of taking Measures to prevent a Surprise, went to recruit
his Spirits after so hot an Action, with a Glass of his beloved Wine: In the
mean time Monsieur de Boufflers, upon a Signal which was made to him by some
Traitors in the Town, commanded his Dragoons to renew the Attack, which they
did with greater Vigor than before, and storming the Town, ran to the place of
Arms, with their Swords in their Hands, where they found the Garrison drawn up
in Battalia, whom they put to the Sword, not allowing them the benefit of
Quarter. The Slaughter lasted three Hours, during which, Men, Women, and
Children were killed without Mercy: Nor could the Fury of the Soldiers be
stopped till the General had by repeated Orders commanded 'em to put an end to
the Massacre. They were Masters of the Art of squeezing Money even out of those
who had none, which they had learned in France, at the expense of the poor
Protestants; and here they displayed all their Skill, using the Inhabitants
with the utmost Barbarity, to make 'em discover their Treasures. From thence
Monsieur de Boufflers, continuing his March and his Cruelties, burnt entirely
the Towns of Keyseresch, Dhonu, Hellesheim, Meyem, Ulman, Kerpen, and all the
other Cities and Villages of that Country, which obliged the Elector of
Brandenburg to detach 10000 Men, under the command of General Schonen, to give
him Battle; but that Unfaithful Officer communicated the Orders he had received
to the Marquess de Boufflers, who immediately retired to Philipsburg.

In the mean time we were no less careful than Boufflers's Dragoons to act the
part of brave Incendiaries, and continued our March from Bruchsal to ^aden and
Durlach, where we found the Warehouses, Shops, and Houses full of Commodities
and Furniture, but altogether void of Inhabitants, who were taught by the
Misfortunes of their Neighbors, not to expect our Visit. The Pillage lasted
two Days; after which the Cities were set on Fire, after the laudable Custom of
this Campaign.

Baden is situated in Suabia, and gives the Title of Marquess to a Family, the
Head of which is a Prince of the Empire on a double Account, both by his Birth,
which is Ancient and Illustrious, and by his Principality, which gives him a
Voice in the Diets of the Empire. The Town was Rich, embellished with fine
Houses, fair Streets, and lovely Gardens; and besides had the Advantage of the
most remarkable Baths in Europe. The Princess of Baden left no means on her
side to preserve their City; she solicited the General and the King himself,
and offered to demolish the Walls; but all her Endeavors could not procure the
least Mitigation of its Doom, and Baden was laid in Ashes, as well as its
Neighboring Towns.

Four Leagues from hence lay Durlach, called in Latin, Durlacum, which gives
some Title of Honor, to the Younger Branch of the House of Baden, who have
also a Voice in the Diets. It was in my Opinion a larger and fairer Town than
Baden, inhabited by several rich Merchants, and a considerable number of
Persons of Quality, and adorned with many magnificent Structures, which I had
not time to consider at leisure, before the fatal Sentence was executed upon
'em. The Castle particularly was a stately Edifice; a magnificent Portal opened
a Passage into a vast Court; from whence we ascended by a broad Staircase, to
a large Hall, out of which you might pass into the Apartments appointed for
Winter and Summer, and all the other Seasons. The Furniture of all these
Apartments was very rich, and well-contriv'd, at least as far as I could judge
by what was left; for the most precious Part of it, with all the Plate, was
removed; only there remained several Pieces of very fine Tapestry richly
Wrought, Embroidered Silk Beds of great Value, and some of Gold and Silver;
Tables and Cabinets of China-Work, Looking-Glasses, magnificent Lamps of
Crystal, and several other Ornaments of the same Nature; which inspired the
Beholder with a great Idea of the Richness of that part of the Furniture which
was removed. The Platfond of the Library was enriched with Gilding and very
curious Paintings, and it contained between four and five thousand Volumes;
adjoining to this were two Cabinets full of Papers ranked from top to bottom in
very good Order. The dispositions of the Gardens were suitable to the Beauty of
the House, and the Eye was every where saluted with Objects of Pleasure; but
all those Beauties were consumed by the merciless Fire, and reduced to a few
Heaps of Ashes, and dismal Ruins. During our abode here, the Germans, who had
made a Detachment of Two or Three thousand Men to disturb us, took some of our
Men, with Two hundred Horses that were Forraging in the Country. They had done
the same at Sinsennes, and besides a terrible Sickness made such a prodigious
Havoc among our Troops, that when we arrived at Strasburg we were forced to
send above Six thousand Men to the Hospital, which lessened our Army to such a
Degree, that the Number of those who were rendered useless by the Sickness,
with those who were killed at Heydelberg, Bruch^al, and Weingarten amounted to
11000 Men, of which there were at least 5000 dead, without reckoning above 1000
Horses, that were either taken from us, or died by the Way; for the ill Weather
that had lasted during the whole Campaign, had so weakened and spoiled 'em,
that only such who were very well mounted were Masters of a Horse fit for
Service.

To return to our March; We decamped from Durlach, and leaving Fort-Lewis on
our Right Hand, which is a strong and well-fortify'd Place, built by the King's
Order, we arrived before Stolof, the only Town that escaped the utmost Marks of
our Fury; for the Magistrates, to appease Monsieur de Duras, presented him with
the Sum of 50000 Crowns, which prevailed so far on his good Nature, that he
contented himself with ordering the Town to be pillaged, and the Walls to be
demolished. Two days after we arrived near Strasburg, where I was constrained
to leave the Army, in a manner that was not very agreeable to my Humor. I was
struck with so much Horror, when I reflected on the Barbarities, and the
Desolation of so many Towns of which I had been an Eyewitness, and sometimes
an Instrument, that I could not forbear expressing my Indignation, and was
therefore looked upon as a suspicious Person by some of our most resolute
Burners. It happened one day, that being engaged in a pretty warm Dispute with
some Officers that were none of my best Friends, at the General's Quarters, I
handled those nice Points with a great deal of Freedom, and plainly told 'em my
Opinion of the Revolution in England, and of the Difference between King
William's Way of making War, and that which was in Fashion among us. So bold a
Declaration of my Sentiments, procured me the Title of the Prince of Orange's
Spy; and Complaints were made against me to the Count de Marsin, Commander of
the Brigade, who ordered me to be apprehended, and carried to Strasburg; though I
must own my self obliged to him, that he forbore putting me in the Mercy of a
Council of War, till he should receive a clearer Information of my Crime; in
order to which he commanded my Trunks to be seized, where he found nothing to
confirm his Suspicions, but a Book of Psalms, which was a sufficient
Demonstration (of what I did not deny) that I had been a Hugonot. But the
Marquess d' Efiat had the Generosity (as I told you before) to give me so
favorable a Character in a Letter which he wrote to Monsieur de Chamilly on
this Occasion, that I was set at Liberty after an Imprisonment of fifteen Days,
without any other Punishment, than that I was obliged to hear the tedious
Exhortations of certain Jesuits and Capuchins, to whom I promised to be a Good
Catholic for the future.

We are informed that Mentz was surrendered on the 8 th. instant,
notwithstanding the brave Resistance made by the Marquess d' Uxelles, Governor
of the Place, who performed on this occasion, all that could be expected from a
Man of Courage and an experienced Captain; and defended a Place which is not
very considerable for its Strength, against a numerous Army commanded by two
Princes, on whom, without running the hazard of being accused of Flattery, I
may bestow the glorious Title of Heroes. It Is true he lost a great number of
Men; but none that are acquainted with Affairs of this Nature, will be
surpised at the lessening of the Numbers of a Garrison that turn the War upon
their Besiegers, and make three vigorous Sallies in one Day. The most
considerable Loss they sustained, was occasioned by the general Assault of the
Counterscarp, on the 7 th. instant in the Evening, which lasted five Hours, and
was both carried on, and received with such an obstinate Fury, that few old
Soldiers can pretend to have seen so warm a Dispute. But at last the Besieged
were forced to retire, their Powder failing, and most of their Muskets being
split; and the Imperialists lodged themselves on the Counterscarp, and began to
fill up the Ditch, in order to assault the Town, which obliged the Governor to
beat a Parley, and Capitulate. The Garrison marched out with their Arms and
Baggage, Drums beating, Colors flying, Matches lighted, and their Bullets in
their Mouths, with six Pieces of Cannon, and two Mortars. I hear the King was
so well satisfied with the Marquess d' Uxelles's Conduct on this Occasion, that
he thought he owed him no less a Recompense for making so brave a Defense, than
the Government of Luxemburg, which is one of the most important Places in his
Dominions, besides a Gratuity of 1200 Crowns, which he has already received.
Nor could his Majesty have chosen a more deserving Object of his Favor; for
the Marquess d' Uxelles is not only an excellent Captain, but in all other
respects a well-accomplish'd Person. I never heard that he was accused of any
other Crimes, but Haughtiness to his Inferior Officers, and an Inclination to
certain Pleasures that were brought into Fashion about 20 or 30 Years ago: but
I am so far from pretending to warrant the Truth of these Accusations, that I
must confess I believe 'em to be mere malicious Aspersions.

We have also received Advice, That Bonn is very much straightened; so that if
the King lose that Place, he will only retain Philipsburg, of all the Conquests
his Son made last Year.

In the mean time I must tell you, with all the sincerity of a Friend, that my
late unjust Imprisonment has mightily cooled my Affection to the French
Service; and besides, as young as I am, my Thoughts aspire sometimes to more
solid Objects than bare Pleasure. I Am even resolved then in good earnest to
increase the number of the Refugees; and I Am not a little confirmed in that
Resolution, by a seasonable supply of Money I have just now received. I have no
other Business at present, than to put things in Order for my Departure;
intending to begin my Journey in few Days, on the only Horse I Am now Master of,
for my Servant carried away the other two, which was my whole Equipage. I
design in the first place to visit Geneva, and there to expect a fresh Recruit
of Money, before I begin my remoter Travels.

I remember I have heard you express a desire to be more particularly
acquainted with Strasburg, than the Accounts you have hitherto received of it
could make you; and therefore I shall take this Occasion to satisfy your
Curiosity before I finish my Letter.

Strasburg is a large City, very well built, after the German Fashion, seated
at the end of a vast and fertile Field, extremely smooth and level, so that you
may discover the City from the Mountains of Saverne, which are eight Leagues
distant from it. It Is washed by the River Ill, and divided into the Old and and
New City by the Beusche; and both these Rivers fall into the Rhine, which is
but a quarter of a League distant from the Town. The Bishop of this place is
Suffragan to the Elector of Mentz; and at present the Cardinal of Furstemberg
is Bishop of Strasburg by the Mercy of God, and of the Crown of France. The
Count of Chamilly, Lieutenant General of his Majesty's Armies, is Governor,
and Monsieur de Labadie formerly Major, was made the King's Lieutenant since I
came to the City. It Is a very ancient City, but was never acknowledged for a
Republic till the time of Luther, whose Doctrine it received: And its Rights
were never since disputed till the Year 1682, when the King made himself Master
of it, as a Dependence, or rather the Capital City of Alsace, which belongs to
him by Virtue of the Treaty of Munster. You are not unacquainted with the
Methods that were taken to justify his Pretensions. The Eyes of some of the
principal Burgomasters were so well enlightened with the Sum of 100000 Crowns,
that all their Doubts were cleared in a Moment; and those Conscientious
Magistrates put his Majesty in possession of a Place to which he had asserted
his Right by such convincing Arguments, with all the Self-denial and
Disinteressedness that could be desired. But this Restoration was not made
with the Unanimous Consent of the Citizens, the greatest part of whom bewailed,
and continue still to bewail the Loss of their Liberty, which, next the
Sovereign Good, ought to be the dearest Blessing to all generous Minds. Nor are
their Complaints illgrounded; for they have been extremely harras'd of late,
and even their Religion could not escape the Fury of their new Masters. I know
not what Excuse can be pretended for so manifest a Violation of the Rights of a
free City, that submitted on Condition that its Liberty, and all its other
Privileges, should be preserved entire. Besides, if they be only considered as
Natives of Alsace, what plausible Reason can be alleged why they should be
treated with greater Severity than the rest of their Neighbors? Has not the
King an equal Right to the whole Province? and why should Strasburg be singl'd
out for the Object of his Indignation, since there are several less
considerable Places in Alsace, whose Privileges are suffered to remain
untouched? Thus, for Example, the Inhabitants of St. Mary aux Mines, in the
German part of Lorrain, continue still in the enjoyment of their ancient
Rights; the River separates the Precinct of the Protestants from that of the
Catholics: The same Privileges are common both to the Priests and Ministers,
and they live in a peaceful Union without incroaching upon one another. I was
informed by the Guardian of the Co^deliers in that place, that when the Queen
came thither, in her Journey to receive the Dauphiness, she resolved to build a
Chapel, in performance of a Vow she had made, and appointed the Place where it
should be erected in the Territory of the Protestants, who immediately came to
beg her Majesty not to violate their Privileges, which they showed her; and she
was so well satisfied with the Justice of their Desire, that she was easily
prevailed with to countermand her former Orders. And I can assure you, that the
Privileges of that paltry Village are still preserved with so little
innovation, that I have seen with my own Eyes the Catholics and Protestants
perform Divine Service by Turns in the Parochial Church. But it seems the
People of Strasburg were not thought worthy of so favorable a Treatment. The
Protestants, who were sole Masters of the Cathedral, were compelled to give
place to the Catholics, who are at present possessed both of that and most
other Churches in the City, though about twelve Years ago they could only pretend
a Right to a Chapel that belongs to the Order of Malta. This is certainly one
of the fairest Churches in Europe; and I may venture to say, that its Steeple
cannot be parrallel'd in the whole World: This magnificent Tower is contrived
with wonderful Art, and the Stones are all exactly cut into several Figures,
which charm the Eye of the Spectator: Its heights amounts to 560 Foot, and its
breadth to 52; the Doors are of Brass, and proportionable to the largeness of
the Building. Since the Catholics became Masters of it, they have built a
great Altar, according to the Modern way, in the Floor of the Nave, which is of
a Triangular Figure, with large Marble Columns at the Angles, supporting a Dome
adorned with many Basso-relievo's, and fine Paintings. The Tabernacle is in the
middle of the Altar, enriched with excellent Sculptures; and all the other
Ornaments are Beautiful beyond the possibility of Improvement. But all the
Charms of so rare a Piece of Workmanship cannot long detain the Spectator from
satisfying his Curiosity with a View of that admirable Clock built by the
Chapter, which marks the Minutes, Hours, Days of the Month and Week, the Age of
the Moon, Signs of the Zodiac, and the Centuries or Ages of the World, by a
Wheel that performs only one Round in the space of a hundred Years. If you
would have the pleasure to behold all the Beauties of the Clock, you must wait
till Noon, when the twelve Apostles appear, and each knocks with a Hammer on
the Bell. The striking of this, as well as of all the rest of the Hours, is
preceded by the crowing of a Cock, who claps' his Wings, stretches out his
Neck, and Crows so naturally, that if your Eyes did not convince you that he is
made of Copper, you would certainly conclude him to be really that which he
represents. Immediately after the History of the Annunciation appears, the Door
of the Virgin's Chamber opens, and the Angel Gabriel comes to intimate her
Conception; the Virgin, who is on her Knees at Prayer, turns to hear his
Message; and at the same time the Holy Ghost descends upon her Head in form of
a Dove: And all these Motions are performed with an admirable Exactness.

This beautiful Church is not the only Ornament of Strasburg: The rest of its
Buildings deserve an attentive Consideration, especially the Fortifications, on
which the King has bestowed such prodigious Sums: The Citadel has its peculiar
Beauties, where the King entertains a Company of Cadets. But the City is so
extremely large, and lies so open, that all the Works with which it is
surrounded, could hardly resist the Attacks of a powerful Enemy, if it were not
coverd on all sides by the impregnable Forts erected by his Majesty's Order, on
the Bridge over the Rhine; for all the Advantage an Army could propose by
taking the City while those Forts remain in the Hands of the French, would
amount to no more than the Possession of a large and strong Prison.

'Twou'd be needless to describe the Manners and Customs of the Inhabitants,
since they are so observant of all the Fashions of their New Masters, that a
mere Stranger would imagine 'em to be natural Frenchmen.

I Am persuaded, Sir, you will be as weary in Reading as I am in Writing this
Letter; however, I Am resolved that neither of these Considerations shall
discourage me from pursuing my Design of presenting you from Time to Time, with
Relations of my Travels, which I intend to begin to (...).

I am, SIR, Your etc.
Strasburg, Sept. 1689.
LETTER III.
SIR,
I Left Strasburg about the end of the last Month, and passing by Saverne,
Phalsburg, and Marsal, (which is much different from what it was heretofore)
arrived at Metz in Lorrain, from whence the Cardinal of Furstemburg was gone
some Days before. He retired to this place in the beginning of the Year, not
thinking himself secure at Bonn: And he was even so sensible of the Danger with
which that place was threatened, that he brought along with him the very Bolts
of the Doors of the Episcopal Palace. In the mean time he put on a seeming
Confidence, and talked of nothing but Conquests and Electorates, promising
great things to all his Friends; and even levied two Companies of Soldiers for
his Guard, whom he was afterward forced to disband for want of Money to pay
'em. I staid two Days at Metz, to consider all its Rarities. The City is pretty
large, and tolerably well Fortified. There is a Company of Cadets in the
Citadel, which has four Bastions, with good Ditches full of Water. The
Cathedral, which is dedicated to S. Stephen, is built on the declivity of a
Hillock; so that whereas we usually ascend to other Churches, we must go down
seven or eight Steps to this. It is a large Building, though there is nothing
remarkable in it but the Bap^ismal Font, consisting of one piece of Porphyrie,
about ten Foot long, which is a Rarity in this Country. The Bishop assumes the
Title of a Prince of the Holy Empire; and is a Suffragan of the Elector of
Triers. This City was formerly the Metropolis of the Kingdom of Austrasia,
which Clovis I. gave to his Natural Son Thierry, creating him the first King of
it: Afterward it purchased its Liberty for the Sum of 100000 Crowns, of
Godfrey of Bouillon, at his departure for the Holy Land, and maintained the
Character of a Republic till the Year 1552, in which it was treacherously
seized by the Constable de Montmorenci, in the Name of Henry II. For pretending
to go to the assistance of the Protestants in Germany, he asked permission to
enter the City, under pretext that he had fallen sick by the Way; and the next
Morning sent to acquaint the Mayor and Echevins of the Town, that he was
desirous to communicate an Affair of great importance to 'em before his Death.
When he saw 'em all met together in his Chamber, he started up, and thrust his
Poniard into the Mayor's Breast, for a Signal to his Followers to stab the rest
of the Magistrates: And immediately after the Execution of that cruel Treason,
the French run about the Streets, crying, Vive le Roy, and made themselves
Masters of the Gates, and afterward of the whole City. About the end of the
same Year, it was in vain besieged by Charles V. who was forced to make a
shameful Retreat by the Duke of Guise, who defended the place. Since that
unsuccessful Attempt, Metz remained still under the Dominion or rather
Protection of our Kings: For the Inhabitants carried all their Appeals before
the Imperial Chamber at Spire, till Lewis XIII. established a Parliament in
this place, extending its Jurisdiction over Toul, Verdun, and the Country of
Messin. The Emperor complained of this Innovation; nor was the Contest that
happened on this Occasion entirely decided, till the Peace that was concluded
in 1648. Besides the Parliament, the King erected a new Court of Judicature
here some Years ago, which has had the Impudence (if I may use that Expression
without exposing my self to the same Censure) to cite before it Kings and
Sovereign Princes, to yield Homage and Fealty for some Territories over which
they pretend to have a Right of Superiority, as the Counties of Chini and
Alost, the Duchy of Deux-Ponts, and several others.

This is the only City in France where Jews are permitted to settle; and there
are even some Towns in Alsace where they dare not lodge one Night. At Strasburg
they are forced to pay thirty Sous at the Gate, before they are suffered to
enter the City; and I have been often surpised at the extraordinary dexterity
of the Toll-gatherers in discovering a Man of that Nation.

From Metz I came to Nanci, the chief City of Lorrain, and Residence of the
Dukes of that Name. It Is hardly possible that a Town which has changed its
Masters so often, should be remarkable for its Riches: However, it is very well
fortified; and the same Prince by whose Orders 'twas almost entirely ruined in
1661, was afterward pleased to repair it. The River Meurte passes by the
Walls, and fills the Ditches, which are of a considerable Depth. The City is
divided into the High and Low Town; and the Ducal Palace, which is seated in
the former, is a very large Structure, of an admirable Architecture, and
adorned with many fine Pictures. Among its other Rarities, there is a Humane
Figure of Wood, consisting of several Pieces, fitted together with so much
Exactness and Art, that it may be made to imitate all the Motions and Gestures
of a living Man. S. George's Church is particularly remarkable for the
Magnificent Tombs of the Dukes that lie inter^d there. About seven or eight
Years ago this City was deprived of two of its noblest Ornaments; the famous
Culverin, that shot a Bullet to S. Nicholas, a Village two large Leagues from
Nanci; and the Brazen Horse, that carried the Statue of one of the Dukes of
Lorrain. These are certainly the finest cast Pieces in France, and were always
thought too heavy for Carriage, till a certain Engineer undertook to remove
'em, and succeeded in the Attempt. The latter was designed to support the
King's Statue in the Place of Conquests at Paris, but was found to be of too
small a size; and the other was carried to Dunkirk. The Inhabitants of this
City, and, in general, all the Third State (or Commons) of Lorrain, are still
extremely devoted to the Interest of their true and natural Prince; and scruple
not to express their Affection to him on all Occasions, with a certain innocent
Frankness, which together with their Clownish way of Speaking, is esteemed by
the French rather worthy of Laughter than Anger. But the Nobility are so
dazzl'd with the glaring Prospect of Court-Preferment, that they seem to have
quite forgot the loss of their ancient Privileges, which were so great under
the Government of their Dukes, that they were in a manner Sovereign Princes;
whereas at present they are reduced to an equal Level with the rest of the
Gentlemen of the Kingdom.

I stayed not at Nanci, but continuing my Journey toward Dijon, arrived at
Langres in Champagne. This City is seated on a Mountain almost inaccessible on
all sides: but the Inhabitants have no reason to be proud of the strength of
its Situation, which makes it a kind of Prison; for the Descent from the Town
is extremely uneasy, and a Man may without Vanity boast of his Lungs, if he
can climb from the bottom of the Hill to the Gate, without losing his Breath.
The People of the Country call this the Maiden-City, both because it has not
been taken for several Ages, and by reason of its Fidelity to the Crown: The
Bishop is both a Spiritual and Temporal Lord, and has the Title of Duke and
Peer of France.

The next Day I passed through one of the most charming and fertile Plains in
France, and arrived at Dijon. The City begins to appear at a considerable
distance, and presents a Traveller with the pleasant Prospect of 100 Spires
that overtop the Houses; for which reason Dijon is usually called the Town of
Steeples. It Is seated on the Banks of the O^che and Suson, and was founded by
the Emperor Aurelian, though some affirm that it is much more ancient, and that
he only repaired it. But not to invade the Province of Antiquaries, I shall
content my self with assuring you that it is a very fine City: The Streets are
large and fair, the Courts spacious, the Buildings very beautiful, and the
Churches extremely magnificent. Among the rest I cannot forbear taking notice
of the famous Abbey of S. Benign, which was built by Gregory, Bishop of
Langres, after he had miraculously found the Body of that Saint. It Is one of
the largest, and highest Structures that are anywhere to be seen, adorned with
three Stone-Spires, the height of which is suitable to the rest of the
Building. The Abbey-Church of S. Stephen is on the other Side of the City, and
is no less remarkable for its Beauty. The Front of Our Lady's Church surpasses
all the rest, consisting of a large Clock-Tower all over wrought, rising
between two others smaller, but no less curiously adorned, which charm the Eyes
of the Beholder. S. John's Church, the Holy Chapel, the Convents of the
Jesuits, and Cordeliers, and generally all the rest of the Churches and
Convents deserve particular Observation, especially that of the Carthusians,
without the City, toward the Red Gate, which is one of the richest Monasteries
in the Kingdom. There are a hundred Monks in it, who observe with so religious
a Strictness, their Vows of Solitude and Silence, that a Stranger visiting the
Place would be tempted to think it were uninhabited. And I may venture to add,
that perhaps they may make a better use of their Revenues than any other
Convent in the Kingdom: for besides a considerable Sum which they give to the
Hospital of the Holy Ghost, they distribute every Week five or six hundred
Loaves to the Poor. They have a very fine Cloister, and a finer Church, where
the Dukes of Burgundy, and a King of Poland lie interred in magnificent Tombs.

On a Hillock, on the other Side of the City, there is a Convent of one of the
Orders of Mendicant Friars, said to be the House of S. Bernard's Father, who
was Lord of the Place that still retains the Name of Bourg-fontaines. The Room
where he was born, which is a very little and low Hall, of a square Figure, is
turned to a Chapel, with this Inscription over the Door: Come, my Children, and
I will bring you into the House of my Father, and into the Chamber where my
Mother brought me forth.

Dijon is the Capital City of the Duchy of Burgundy: it is the Seat of a
Parliament, Generality or general Receipt of the Finances, Chamber of Accounts,
and a Court that takes Cognizance of Affairs relating to the Coining and Value
of Money; and besides the States of the Province meet here once in three Years:
so that it wants only the Dignity of an Episcopal See, being under the
Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Langres. It had formerly very considerable
Privileges; and our Kings at their Accession to the Crown, and as often as they
entered into the City, were obliged to swear to preserve 'em. But that Custom
was abolished by the present King, when he passed this way to receive the Queen
at her Arrival from Spain. For when the Mayor accompanied with the rest of the
Magistrates, presented the Keys of the City, together with a Copy of their
Privileges to his Majesty, humbly beseeching him that he would swear to
preserve 'em, after the Example of all his Predecessors, and even of the late
King of Glorious Memory; Cardinal Mazarin replied, Are you so insolent as to
impose an Oath upon your King? The Magistrates surpised at so severe a
Reprimand, answered with a great deal of Respect, that they pretended not to
impose any thing, but only begged and hoped to obtain that Favor from his
Majesty's Justice and Goodness. I understand your Meaning, replied the
Cardinal, you would be a Free City and Commonwealth. And I assure you, in his
Majesty's Name, that, without taking an Oath, he considers you as such, but
prepare your selves to become his Conquest. This Threatening was quickly
executed, for the next Day 8000 Men entered the City, and the Cardinal made a
general Alteration in the Magistracy. The Mayoralty of Dijon was the best Place
of that Nature in France; for besides the Title of a Viscount, the Government
of the City, and of all the Third Estate or Commonalty of Burgundy was annexed
to it. The Inhabitants of this City are generally of a very free and sociable
Temper, and the Women enjoy all the Advantages of an honest Liberty. So
charming a Society puts a kind of easy Constraint upon Strangers, and makes
'em break all their Resolutions of hastening their Departure: for it is
impossible to stay here four and twenty Hours without making some agreeable
Acquaintance, which may afterward prove the Source of a great deal of
Pleasure. The narrow Compass of a Letter will not allow me to insert the
Relation of a very pleasant Adventure that I met with in this place; but I Am
resolved to make you my Confident at our first Meeting. To morrow I intend to
depart for Lions, where I shall have time to give you an Account of my Journey.
In the mean time,

I am, SIR, Your etc.
Dijon, October. 1689.
LETTER IV.
SIR,
CHaalons is a considerable City, honored with the Title of a County, and is
the same with the ancient Cabilonum mentioned in Caesar's Commentaries. It
appears by the Ruins of an old Amphitheatre, that this place was formerly
possessed by the Romans. I lodged at the Pelican, where I had the good Fortune
to meet with three Merchants of Lions, who were returning thither, and promised
to show me all the Rarities of that City. We had scarce traveled a Mile, when
we met with a Priest walking a-foot, in a pretty genteel Garb: He was a Man of
a very serious Mien, but talked wittily. He accepted the Civility of one of our
Company, who offered him the Convenience of riding behind him half a League of
bad way, through which we were obliged to pass. This Accident gave us occasion to
discourse of the Uneasiness of traveling on Foot, and of the Happiness of
those who by Virtue of certain Charms, can ride 30 or 40 Leagues a day. I was
never fond of believing what I cannot comprehend, and I must confess my Reason
was too hard for my Faith on this Occasion. However I know not whether I should
have been able to withstand the Opposition of some of my Fellow-Travellers, if
he who had the Priest behind him had not vigorously undertaken my Defense. The
Dispute continued for some time pretty warm on both sides, till our mutual
Weariness rather than Want of Arguments, made us at last consent to choose the
Priest, who had not yet sided with either Party, to be Judge of our Difference.
He very gravely told us, that the controverted Story was a certain Truth, and
that he knew some Persons who were Masters of that Secret; I could not forbear
laughing at the serious Tone with which he pronounced Sentence against me; and
he was so vexed at my Incredulity, that he began to maintain his Assertion with
a great deal of heat. Immediately his Fellow-Horseman took up the Cudgels, and
they engaged in a Debate which lasted about a Quarter of an Hour; till at last
the Priest perceiving that 'twas in vain to contend longer with so obstinate an
Adversary, told us plainly that he himself could do the Feat, though he never
used to put it in Practice; and that if his Opponent had a Mind to see the
Experiment, he would make his Horse carry him to Mascon in two Hours. The
Merchant took him at his word, and summoned him to perform his Promise, to
which he consented, and immediately the Horse galloped away with so prodigious
a Swiftness, that we lost sight of 'em in a Moment. This Accident did not much
surprise us at first; for we thought the Priest had a Spur concealed in his
hand, with which he pricked the Horse: in the mean time we rode on, but could
neither see, nor hear the least News of our Gallopers till we arrived at Mascon
on the morrow, where we found the Merchand very melancholic. He told us that
he was carried to Mascon exactly in two Hours after he left us, with so much
Ease, that he imagined all the while he was riding at a Hand-Gallop; but that
his Horse fell dead as soon as he entered the Stable. He concluded that the
Priest was a Wizard, and was so firmly persuaded of the Truth of his Opinion,
by the concurring Testimony of our Landlord, who knew the Man, that he entered
an Accusation against him, and procured him to be apprehended the same day. I
was obliged to give Evidence with the rest, and to declare all that I had seen
him do, which, in my Opinion, could not amount to a convincing Proof of his
Guilt. I know no Reason that should hinder us from supposing that a good
English Horse, such as the Merchant's was, might with a good Spur be made to
gallop eight Leagues in two hours, and without any Enchantment fall dead at his
Journey's End. Yet this Accident made a great Noise, and the Poor Devil was
sent to Prison, where I left him. I had almost forgot to tell you that they
found in his Pockets a Piece of Parchment four fingers breadth long, and two
broad, with this Sentence in Red Letters, Adjutor meus, and Protector meus, tu
Domine, ne derelinquas me, with four small Crosses, one at each End, one above,
and another below, which they fansi'd to be a certain Charm or Character.

From Mascon we proceeded on our Journey to Lions, where I was forced to sell
my Horse, who was galled under the Saddle-Bow. I resolved to spend some Days in
this Place, that I might have time to take a full View of a City that is
esteemed the Largest and most Considerable in the Kingdom, next to Paris, and
is certainly worthy of all the Curiosity of a Traveller. It Is seated at the
Confluence of the Rhone and the Saone, in a Bottom between two Hills. The
Houses equal, or rather exceed those of Paris in Height, some of 'em amounting
to six Stories; which makes the Streets somewhat Dark, by reason of their
Narrowness. There are many fine Courts in the City, but none of 'em are
comparable to Belle-Cour, which is embellished with Rows of Trees; though its
principal Ornament consists in the Company that resort to it; for it is the
general Rendezvous of all the People of Quality and good Breeding; and since
the Ladies here are no less Generous than Charming, and cannot justly be
accused of Inhumanity to their Captives, there are many Intrigues formed in
this Place, which are carried on with all the Tenderness and Pleasure that a
reciprocal Passion can inspire.

To give you a compendious Account of the public Edifices in Lions, in which
respect it holds the first Rank, without Controversy, among all the Cities of
France; I shall begin with the Metropolitan Church, dedicated to S. John, and
founded by John King of Burgundy, on the Ruins of a Temple formerly
consecrated to Augustus. There is a Clock near the Choir, which surpasses that
of Strasburg in the fineness of its Contrivance and Workmanship; for, besides
all the Rarities mentioned in the Description of that famous Machine, the Clock
of Lions has several peculiar Beauties; among which I shall only take notice of
the Angel that Chants the Hymn of S. John with all the exactness imaginable.
The Needle that marks the Hours, and grows longer or shorter according to the
various dimensions of the Oval Dial, and the Days of the Week marked by Figures
that appear every Morning in a Nich on the top of the Clock, in the room of
those that possessed the same place the Day before.

The King of France by Virtue of his Crown, is the first Canon of this Church;
and all the rest have the Title of Counts; and must prove their Nobility before
they can be received.

There are several other Magnificent Churches in Lions. That of Notre-dame de
Forvieres is one of the most ancient, which was formerly dedicated to Venus.
Every curious Traveller ought to view the City from the Steeple of this Church,
where he may have a distinct Prospect of its Extent and Situation. Adjoining to
this are the Ruins of the Palace of Augustus, and of a Neighboring
Amphitheatre, where Learned and Inquisitive Antiquaries may find an excellent
Opportunity to display their Skill in the Examination of an infinite Number of
Inscriptions, Statues, Tombs, Urns, Medals, and other rich Monuments of the
Roman Grandeur. But my unacquaintedness with those Studies makes me purposely
decline entering upon this Subject; since I Am confident you will be better pleased
with my Silence, than if I should send you an imperfect or erroneous Account,
under the specious Title of A Description of the Antiquities of Lions.

The Townhouse is a Masterpiece of Art, completely furnished with all the
Advantages and Ornaments of Beauty, Situation, Extent, Height, Architecture,
Marbles, Paintings, Gardens, Fountains, Antiquities, and every thing else that
may recommend a Building to the Observation of a Curious and Knowing Traveller.
Its Front regards the Place des Terreaux, which is one of the most pleasant
Courts in in the City; and before it there is a lovely Fountain, which is none
of its least Considerable Ornaments. In the first place I took notice of a
large Clock-Tower, rising between two high Pavilions, under which is the Entry
to the Palace adorned with large Columns of a precious kind of Marble. Then I
went up some Steps, and coming under the Pavilions, observed two Tables of
Brass, where I found engraved in Ancient Characters, the Patent granted by the
Emperor Cla^dius to the Inhabitants of Lions, when he bestowed the Privileges
of Roman Citizens upon 'em. From thence I entered into the First, and
afterward into the Second Court, where I considered with a great deal of
Pleasure and Attention, the Structure and Design of that Majestic Mass of
Building, which is of a Square Figure, and bounded at the four Corners with as
many large and very high Pavilions. Afterward I went down to the Garden, which
is embellished with Gravel Walks, Beds of Flowers, Fountains, and a hundred
other Ornaments. After I had satisfied my Curiosity with a View of the external
Beauties of this Noble Structure, I returned to admire the inside of it. I went
up a pair of winding Stairs, of a very excellent Contrivance, to the Hall,
where I was agreeably surpised with its Largeness, Gilding, Paintings, and
especially a great number of Pictures of the Kings of France, which are all
finished Pieces: And in the the other Apartments I observed a vast variety of
different Beauties, which I dare not undertake to describe. I spent the whole
Morning in this House, and employed the Afternoon with a great deal of
Satisfaction, in visiting the Hospitals, which may be reckoned among the most
considerable Foundations of that Nature in France. Hotel Dieu is a spacious
Structure, well built, and very rich: All sorts of diseased Persons are
received into it; so that it is always very full, and would hardly be able to
maintain so vast a Charge, notwithstanding the greatness of its Revenues, if
the Archbishop did not bestow upon it the Profits accruing from the
Dispensation of eating Eggs, Milk, Flesh, etc. The Hospital de la Charity is a
Modern Foundation; and though it is not near so large as the former, it may be
justly reckoned equal to it in other respects. On the top of a great Portal,
that serves for an Entry to the Building, there is the Figure of a Pelican,
tearing her Breast, to feed her young ones; the true Emblem of Charity I
observed one thing at Lions which I had not seen in any other part of France, I
mean the Place of Refuge for Criminals, which is neither a Church nor Royal
Palace, but a House appointed for that Purpose, and usually called the
Sanctuary. Toward the Gate des Trions, I saw the Aqueducts that were built by
the Romans for the Conveyance of Water into the City; and not far from thence
there is a Cave, called the Grotto, which is also said to be one of their
Works. The Country about the City is embellished with a vast number of lovely
Seats, among which la Duchere and la Claire deserve a particular Observation.
The City has six Gates, three Bridges, about two hundred Streets, and above a
hundred Churches, Convents, or Chapels. The Archbishop is the chief Prelate of
the Gauls, and by Virtue of his Primacy receives Appeals from all the parts of
France in Ecclesiastical Cases. Monsieur de Villeroy is the present Archbishop,
and Lieutenant General of the whole Province. He is descended of a very
honorable Family, but is certainly one of the roughest and least Complaisant
Men in the World. I cannot forbear relating to you, upon this occasion, a very
pleasant Discourse that passed between this Prelate and Monsieur de la
Feuillade.

That Marshall, says the Story, riding Post to Turin, in a very mean Garb, to
dispatch some Affairs of Importance, stopped at Li^ns to deliver a Packet from
the King to the Archbishop, who taking the Bearer for an Ordinary Courier,
because he pretended to no higher Quality, asked him, Whether there were any
News at Paris. Green Pease, my Lord, replied the Marshall. You mistake my
meaning, Friend, said the Archbishop; I would know what People were saying when
you left Paris? My Lord, answered the Marshall, they were saying Vespers. Then
the Prelate perceiving that the pretended Courier abused him, fell into a
Passion, saying, How, Friend? where were you taught to speak thus to Persons of
my Quality and Character? What are you? -- What do People use to call you? Why,
my Lord, replied the Marshall, some are pleased to call me Friend, others
Monsieur, and the King calls me Cousin. These Words surpised the Archbishop,
who, considering the Marshall more attentively, at last knew him, and made an
Apology for his incivility. Nevertheless I can hardly be induced to believe
that a Man of his Quality would have stooped to such punning Wit, which is only
graceful in the Mouth of a true Courier: Though it is well known that Monsieur de
la Feuillade was a Person of a very odd and singular Humor. You have doubtless
read what an Author of great Reputation relates concerning his Discourse to the
King about the Archbishop of Rheims; and if you can believe that Story, you
will not think this incredible.

Lions is a very ancient City, known to Titus Livius and Plutarch by the Name
of The Island. The Name which it still retains was given to it by Anthony, (who
obtained Celtica Gallia for his part of the Empire) when he entered the City on
a Triumphant Chariot drawn by twelve Lions; and he afterward caused Money to
be coined in the same place, of which I have seen some Pieces, bearing his
Figure on one side, and on the other a Lion, with the Word Lugduni. The Town it
self neither is, nor can be made very strong; but it is commanded by three good
Castles which defend its Avenues. The first is the famous Fort of Peter Ancise,
built on the top of a steep Mountain, with the rare Advantage of an excellent
Spring of Water; the second is that of S. Sebastian; and the third has the Name
of S. Clair.

I intended to have gone directly from Lions to Geneva; but I soon found that I
could not prosecute that Design without throwing my self into unavoidable
Dangers; for the Protestants are so narrowly watched every where, that it is
absolutely impossible to travel thither without a Passport, unless a Man were
Master of the Invention of flying through the Air. Nor is it very safe to demand
a Passport of the Archbishop; for very lately he ordered two Merchants to be
apprehended, for no other reason than that they were going to Geneva. That Name
alone is sufficient to make any Man pass for a Heretic that dares venture to
pronounce it; and he may reckon himself favorably treated if his Crime be not
immediately judged worthy of the Gallows. You cannot imagine with what care I
avoid the mentioning of so dangerous a Word; and, I assure you, I Am so much in
Love with the Principle of Self-preservation, that I talk of nothing but Rome;
and pretend that the only Design of my Travels is to wait upon the Duke de
Chaunes.

All this Caution, and the Commotions that at present disturb this Country, are
occasioned by the return of the Vaudois, who arming themselves in the Canton of
Bern in Switzerland, with a Secrecy that prevented even the Suspicions of their
Enemies, formed two Bodies, one of 1200, and the other of 3000 Men; and
embarking on the Lake of Geneva, forced their way through Savoy to their own
Country, in spite of the united Forces of France and Savoy, who opposed their
Passage, and obliged 'em to five or six Battles, or rather Skirmishes, in which
the Vaudois had still the Advantage; but all those who were caught straggling
were made to pay for their Fellows, and immediately hanged without Mercy. It Is
impossible for a considering Person to reflect without amazement, on the
Success of that Enterprise. The first Body of those poor Exiles had so little
Experience in the Management of Warlike Expeditions, that there was not one
Officer among 'em to conduct the rest; for they had no other Commanders but one
Monsieur Arnaud, a Minister, and under him a Mason, named Turel, for their
Lieutenant General. Judge, Sir, whether such doughty Captains were fitted for
the Achievement of an Attempt, which a Triple number of regulated Troops durst
not have undertaken. This Consideration makes me very inclinable to believe
that the Duke of Savoy not only knew and allowed, but was the Promoter, and
even the Author of their Design; especially since it is plain that he might have
easily prevented the Execution of it, by cutting off their Passage, and making
'em perish in the Mountains.

I have said enough to convince you, that it is not safe for me to prosecute my
intended Journey to Geneva; however I Will leave no means unessay'd, to get out
of the limits of France, and to break through all the Difficulties that lie in my
Way. In pursuance of that Design, which I confess seems in a manner
impracticable, I Am resolved at all Adventures to go to Grenoble, that I may at
least draw nearer the Confines of the Kingdom, in expectation of a more
favorable Opportunity to get beyond 'em. I am,

SIR, Your etc.
Lions, Nov. 1689.
LETTER V.
SIR,
I Acquainted you in my last with my Resolutition to continue my Journey to
Grenoble. At my departure from Lions I hired a Post-Ass at S. Siforins, out of
pure Curiosity to try so rare an Experiment: Though I must confess this way of
Traveling is not altogether without its Advantages; for the Rider may boldly
venture a Fall, without running the hazard of breaking his Neck. I passed through
Vienne, a very Ancient City, and of Old much esteemed by the Romans,
notwithstanding its disadvantageous Situation at the bottom of two great
Mountains, which darken the Place extremely. Pilate, the Governor of
Jerusalem, and our Savior's Judge, was afterward sent hither; and they still
show the Praetorium, or Hall of Justice, where he was wont to pronounce
Judgment. There is a round Stone in the Wall with this Inscription, This is the
Globe of Pilate's Scepter; though its unfitness for such an Use makes me rather
inclinable to believe, that the Inscription speaks of the House, which might be
called The Globe of a Scepter, by way of Figure or Allusion. They also make
Strangers take notice of a square Tower, where they pretend he ended his Days,
after an Imprisonment of Seven Years. The City is full of suchlike
Antiquities, which are the only things in it that deserve a Traveller's
Observation; for the Buildings are very inconsiderable. S. Severus's Church
stands in a Place where formerly the Heathens adored a Hundred Gods, under a
great Tree, that was afterward cut down and rooted up by that Saint's Order,
as appears by this Inscription on a Column: Arborem Deos Severus evertit

There goes a Story, that under that Tree there was found a Death's Head, full
of Gold and Silver, with which the Church was built. I will not pretend to
demonstrate the falseness of this Tradition; but I think I may venture to
conclude, that either the Head was very big, or the Wages of Workmen in those
Days very low; for such a Structure could not now be erected for sixty thousand
Crowns.

Without the City, in a place called The Field de l' Aguille, there is an high
Pyramid, consisting of several Stones joined together without Mortar or Cement,
and supported by an Ancient Vault of the same kind of Architecture, resembling
a little Chapel. The Inhabitants of Vienne pretend that this Pyramid was
erected by an Emperor, with a Design that his Ashes should be placed in an Urn
on the top of it, that his Tomb might be nearer Heaven. The Archiepiscopal
Church is consecrated to S. Maurice, whose Head is preserved in it. The
Archbishop assumes the Quality of Primate of the Primates of the Gauls;
pretending a right to that Title, in opposition to the Archbishop of Lions,
against whom he has a Suit on this Occasion, that (if we we may judge by
Appearances) will not be soon decided. Vienne was the Capital City of Dauphine,
before the erection of a Parliament at Grenoble; and therefore the Kings of
France, among the rest of their Titles, style themselves Dauphins of Viennois.

From thence continuing my Journey, mounted as before, at the rate of five Sous
by the Stage, which is the ordinary Price; I and my Ass had the Fortune to meet
with a Couple of Fellow-Travellers. Immediately I accosted my Companion, and
finding nothing either in his Mien or Discourse that deserved Contempt, I
concluded that he was a Merchant of Lions or Grenoble. About two Hours after
our Meeting, perceiving at a considerable distance a Coach drawn by Six Horses,
and attended with some Horsemen, coming toward us, he presently alighted, and
turned his Ass loose: Then shrinking up one of his Arms, and turning it awry,
as if he had been Lame, he walked bare-headed to the Boot of the Coach, and
begged Charity of the Passengers. I was extremely surpised at so odd and
unexpected an Action, nor could I divine the Meaning of it; for I thought it
almost impossible that a Man, who, I imagined, was neither Poor nor Sick, could
be guilty of so much Baseness: However, since my Beast had already carried me
so far, that I could not observe distinctly what he said or did, I resolved to
suspend my Judgment till I should learn the reason of it from his own Mouth.
As Soon as he came up, I asked what he went to do at the Coach; Somewhat,
replied he, that will doubtless surprise you: Perhaps you did not believe me to
be a professed Beggar; yet I assure you I have no other Trade; and if you stay
at Grenoble, you may be a Witness of my Diligence in that Vocation. I Am going
to the Hospital in that City, where I Am sure of a Lodging, for three Days,
during which I hope to get three Pistoles. I was no less astonished at what I
heard him say, than at what I had already seen him do: But he went on with the
same Frankness, and told me the whole History of his Life. He said he was born
at Avignon, of a considerable Family in that City, and that he had actually a
Revenue of above 200 Livres; that during his Infancy he had so strong an
Inclination to Begging, that he usually stole away from his Father and Mother
to ask Alms on the Highways; where he sometimes picked up twenty or thirty
Sous a Day, which made him so fond of that Course of Life, that he could never
afterward leave it. He assured me, that the Trade of Begging was attended at
least with as much Pleasure as Pain; and that he was so accustomed to it, that
he was resolved to make it the only Business of his Life. In the mean time I
hearkened to him with an Admiration that would not suffer me to interrupt him;
and he scrupled not to acquaint me with most of the usual Tricks of his
Fellow-Vagabonds. They spend their whole Lives in wandering from one Hospital to
another, and know exactly all the Customs of those Places, and the various
Offices of Charity that were appointed by the Founders to be performed in 'em.
Some of 'em cover themselves with Rags, and putting their Arms or Legs out of
Joint, take up their Post at a Church Door from Morning to Night, while others
go about in a pretty decent Garb, and pretending to be poor Officers who have
been robbed of their Money, and are at a great distance from their Friends and
Relations, beg the Charitable Assistance of those whom they meet, with a
certain Bashfulness, and mournful Tone, that deceives many well-dispos'd
Persons. He that instructed me in all these Mysteries, was of the Second Order,
and contemned the others as a sort of Puny Mumpers, who had neither Courage nor
Ambition: Adding, that he got more in a Day that the best of them could do in a
whole Month. Nevertheless these Strolers depend not wholly on Charity; they
have another Trade which is no less Gainful than Begging, I mean the selling of
Pass-Ports to Travelers. My Companion perceiving that I had none, desired me
to buy one of him; and at the first Inn where we alighted, showed me at least a
Hundred. I asked him the Price of One: There are some, answered he, of all
Prices, as well as other Commodities; for some are Authentic, others forged;
some of an old, others of a fresh Date; and if you will be satisfied with such
as are Counterfeit, you shall have 'em for fifteen Sous a-piece. I thanked him
for his Ingenuity; but told him, that I could not trust to a false Passport.
Yet they are as sure as the rest, answered he, for they are never called in
Question; and all the Authentic Pass-Ports I have, are procured on the Credit
of such as I wrote with my own Hand, for otherwise they would not give me any:
However, you may please your self both in the Choice and Goodness of your
Commodity; for I have some for all Places. Then I asked him one for Geneva; but
he told me, that to his great Sorrow and Loss, 'twas impossible to obtain one
for that Place; assuring me, that if he had a Hundred of 'em, he could dispose
of 'em all at the Rate of Ten Pistoles a-piece. At last I gave him two Pistoles
for a Passport to Rome, pretended to be granted by the Archbishop of Lions to
one Bidault, and afterward ratified and approved at Vienne. He swore and
protested that 'twou'd infallibly procure me an unquestioned Passage; but the
extreme desire I had to make my Escape out of France rather than any Credit I
gave to his Asseverations, made me willing to run the Hazard; though, after all,
I apprehended the Danger to be greater than it really was: For as soon as I
presented my counterfeit Passport to the Marquess de S. Andre, he granted me
another without the least Difficulty, appointing me to pass through Chambery, S.
John de Morienne, and Turin.

Grenoble became the Capital City of Dauphine, when Charles VII. established a
Parliament in it, and has ever since continued in the possession of that
Dignity. This Country was bequeathed to King Philip de Valois, by Humbert, the
last Prince of Dauphine, on condition that from thenceforth the Presumptive
Heir of the Crown of France, should be styled Dauphin of Viennois; and bear in
his Coat-Armorial the Arms of France quartered with those of Dauphine, which
are, Or, a Dolphin Azure, Crested, Finn'd, and Eared Gules. The Tomb of Andrew,
Humbert's Son, is in the Church of the Dominicans that fronts the Place de
Grenette, which is the finest in Grenoble, both for its Largeness, and the
Magnificence of the Building with which it is adorned, especially the
Parliament House, to which you enter through a Court, bordered with Shops full of
all sorts of Commodities: It Is of an Antique Structure, and the Chambers are
very well furnished. The Governor's House is large, and has the Advantage of a
very pleasant Prospect. The Episcopal Church of Notre-Dame is another Piece of
Architecture remarkable for its Antiquity. But after all, it is certain that the
principal Glory of Grenoble consists not in its Buildings; and they who would
have the pleasure to be acquainted with all its Beauty, must not expect to
gratify their Curiosity by a Transient View of it. For it has the Honor to be
the Seat of several Noble Families, who are so far above the Clownishness that
might be expected in so remote a Province, that their Conversation and
Deportment may be justly reckoned the Standard of Civility and good Breeding:
So that a Stranger is amazed to find the most refined Politeness of the Court
in the midst of those wild Mountains. It Is seated on the Banks of Issere, in a
Valley, which my Natural aversion to all Hilly Countries will not suffer me to
call Pleasant. Yet at my departure from the City, I saw some places that must
be acknowledged to have a kind of dismal Beauty, especially the Monastery of
the Carthusians. The very Ascent to it is a Journey of six Hours, through Ways
that are almost only passable for Mules, which are very common and extremely
fine in this Country: At least I can assure you, that those who live in it may
for ever despair of seeing any Coach or Wagon near their Habitation, unless it
be made upon the Place. These Mountains, that seem to have been appointed by
Nature as a wild Retreat for Wolves and Boars, are nevertheless inhabited by
Humane Creatures, if I may give that Name to Animals that seem to have a nearer
resemblance to Bears than Men. Their Habit consists of so Course a Cloth, that
they never wear above one Suit of Clothes during their whole Life, though it
should last an hundred Years. It Is a certain reddish Stuff, of the thickness of
two Crown Pieces, and every Thread in it is at least as big as Packthread.
These miserable Wretches are perfect Strangers to all manner of Pleasure: Their
main or only Happiness consists in filling their Stomachs with a sort of Bread
that none of our Dogs would taste; and even that is a Rarity among 'em: They
drink Water, and live Night and Day in Huts of Straw in the midst of their
Oxen, Cows, and Hogs, which are their usual Companions, and are utterly
unacquainted with the Transactions of the rest of Mankind.

It Is impossible to approach the Monastery without feeling an over-bearing
Melancholy that damps the gayest Spirits: it is seated between two high and
rugged Mountains or rather perpendicular Rocks, and the Ghastliness of the
Prospect is heightened by the Pine-Trees, that cast a dismal Shade upon the
jutting Cliffs. And to complete the Horror of the Place, the Ears are stunned
with the amazing Dinn of a Torrent that rolls impetuously through the Bottom
which separates the Mountains. The Monks have spared no Pains to cut a Way
through those naturally impassable Precipices; and it is certain that so laborious
a Work could not be performed without a vast Expense of Treasure. However they
cannot be accused of throwing away their Money upon useless Projects; for, if
you except the trouble of ascending and descending, a Man may walk pretty
easily to the Convent from the Bridges that are built at the two Ends, and in
the narrowest Places at the Bottom, especially that next Grenoble, which joins
the opposite Mountains with a little Arch that over-looks the Torrent, and is
commanded by a House at the End of the Bridge, which Ten Men might defend
against a Hundred thousand. Nor is the Passage to the Convent less difficult on
the other side, so that it might be justly esteemed a very considerable Post,
if it were as important as it is strong: but in my Opinion the Uselesness of the
Conquest secures it as effectually against the Attacks of an Enemy, as the
Strength of its Situation. These Passages end in a sort of Meadow or little
Valley, containing a hundred Paces in breadth, and a large quarter of a League
in length, where the Monastery is seated. The Monks have made several
successless Attempts to cultivate and embellish their solitary Abode; which are
so many convincing Proofs of the Badness of the Soil, that makes it incapable
of Improvement. However, they still continue to increase their Buildings, for
they have the Advantage of Wood, Stones, and Iron upon the Spot, besides the
Convenience of Mills, that are turned by a small Torrent which passes by the
Convent, and furnishes 'em plentifully with Water. I Am persuaded they cannot
eat one half of their Yearly Revenue, which amounts to 300000 Livres: though
Gentlemen of their Order are seldom guilty of pinching their Bellies, and though
they are at a vast Charge in bringing every thing from Grenoble.

As Soon as I arrived, the Father, who is appointed to take Care of Strangers,
brought me into the Chamber called the Inn, or Place of Entertainment, where
they immediately kindled a great Fire, which was a very seasonable piece of
Hospitality, for I was almost frozen with Cold. Not long after the the
Father-Prior came to make me a Compliment, and left a Monk to keep me Company
during my Abode in that Place. The Earliness of my Arrival gave me an
Opportunity to visit the whole House, after I had enjoyed for some time the
comfortable Warmth of the Fire. In the first place, my Father-Companion showed
me the Church, which is long and narrow for want of Room: the Walls are lin'^
with Wood, as in all the other Apartments, by reason of the Moisture of the
Place, that not only spoils the Paintings and Ornaments, but occasion^ violent
Distempers. Afterward we visited the Ha^ of the Chapter-General, which is
wainscotted lik^ the Church, and adorned with some Pictures; an^ among the rest
I took particular notice of a ver^ fine Piece, representing the Martyrdom of
certai^ Fathers of the Order in England. From thence (...) went to the King's
and Bishop's Apartments, whe^^ they usually receive Persons of great Quality;
for others are generally entertained in the Room where (...) was lodged: the
Furniture of these Apartments is ne^^ without Magnificence. The Chapel of the
Novice^ is, in my Opinion, the principal Ornament of the Monastery: for it is
wholly built of Marble, ver^ curiously wrought with Basso-relievo's, and
excelle^^ Paintings; and besides the Altar is adorned with (...) Tabernacle of
Amber, which is a valuable Piec^ and was presented to 'em by a Polander. Since
the usual Contrivance of this kind of Structures w^^ impracticable in this
place, instead of a Square Cloister, they were forced to build a Row of Cells,
above 300 Paces in length. After I had taken a View of all the Apartments, my
Guide brought me back to my Chamber, where we supped on Fish; for there is no
Flesh eaten in the House; after which he left me to repose.

Next Morning about Nine a-clock he returned, to conduct me to the Place where
S. Bruno performed his Penance, which is not accessible without great
difficulty, being on the Top of the Mountain, and so extremely Cold, that I
cannot imagine it was ever inhabited by Men. Nevertheless these Fathers assured
me, that 'twas the constant Habitation of that Saint, with his Six Companions;
and showed me certain Caves or Grotto's cut out of the Rock, where they spent
their Days in the Exercise of Religious Austerities. Since that time the Monks
erected a very fine Chapel, enriched with several Pictures; among which that of
the Saint himself is particularly remarkable for its finished Beauty. They
forget not to make Strangers take notice of their Rock, on which, if you can
believe their Tradition, an Angel appeared to him every Day, and brought him
his necessary Food. But it seems his Companions were not so much in love with
Mortification; for after his Death they left the Hermitage, and descended half
a League lower, to the place where the Monastery is now seated, with the
permission of S Peter himself; who did 'em the favor to appear in Person on
that Occasion, and promised 'em the Virgin's Assistance, on condition they
should rehearse her Office once every Day:

It must be acknowledged that these Fathers do not content themselves with a
bare verbal Renunciation of the World and of Themselves; for their Practice is
suitable to the Austerity of their Profession. The Solitude of their Recess is
certainly worthy of Admiration; they live in a perpetual Confinement among
those almost inaccessible Mountains, where they spend their Lives in Prayer,
Contemplation, and the Severities of Repentance; and are so little acquainted
with the rest of the World, that they are ignorant even of the most Remarkable
Occurrences that are transacted in it. They never eat Flesh, fast three
quarters of the Year, submit to the rigor of Monastical Discipline twice every
Week, wear Sackcloth, spend nine Hours in the Church every Day, observe a
perpetual Silence, and undergo voluntary and frequent Acts of Mortification: So
that if those Persons be damned at last, I may venture to say that they buy
Hell at as dear a rate as the Saints purchase Paradise. To make you less apt to
suspect the Truth of this Relation, 'twill be sufficient to tell you, that the
very sight of the place inspired me with so resistless a Melancholy, that I
spent the whole Night in making serious Reflections on the Vanity of the World.
But, after all, you must not have so favorable an Opinion of the force of this
Religious Charm, as to imagine it sufficient to imprint an indelible Character
of Sanctity; for I assure you, a little of the Air of the World soon dissipated
all my additional Devotion, and I began to recover my wonted Gaiety by degrees,
as I approached Chambery. The Way thither is a remarkable Monument of the
Grandeur and Magnificence of Charles Emmanuel, Duke of Savoy, by whose Orders
it was cut out of the Rock, for the Convenience of his Trading-Subjects; as it
appears by an Inscription fastened to the Rock, and accompanied with the Arms
of that Prince. The Road for a considerable distance from the Monastery, is
bordered with Precipices, and rugged Cliffs, that cast forth an almost
innumerable Multitude of impetuous Torrents, which roll along with a horrid
Dinn. But afterward the Traveller has time to recover his Senses, when at the
end of this frightful Passage, he meets with a pleasant Road, that brings him
insensibly to Chambery.

Chambery is the principal City of the Duchy of Savoy, seated among the
Mountains on the little Rivers of Orbane and Esse. As for Spiritual Affairs,
it is under the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Grenoble; and for its Temporal
Government, there is a Senate, or Court of Justice, resembling a French
Parliament, which takes Cognizance of all Civil and Criminal Suits; and its
Authority is extended over the whole Duchy. This is all the Account I can give
you of Chambery; only I can assure you it is neither large, strong, nor
beautiful. I took a Passport of the President, and proceeding on my Journey,
passed by Montmelian, about two Leagues distant from Chambery, and seated on
the Top of a little Hill, that rises like a Sugar Loaf in the midst of a
Valley: It may be reckoned almost impregnable; for it seems to be placed out of
the reach of all other Enemies but Famine, and want of Provisions: But the
Town, that is seated below, is a Place of no Defense, and much less
considerable than a Thousand Villages in France. S. John de Morienne, where I
arrived the next Day, deserves no better Character, though it be honored with a
Bishop's See. Here I took another Passport of the great Vicar, which I may
reckon cheap, though it cost me very dear; for it brought me safe to this place,
without being at the Charge of renewing it.

Two Days after I arrived at the Village of Laneburg, seated directly at the
Foot of Mount Cennis. This remarkable Hill is famous both for its height, in
which respect it exceeds the tallest Mountains of the Alps; and for a
Bottomless Lake, situated in the middle of its Surface. I ascended a League and
a half before I arrived at the Lake; after which I found a Plain; extending
about a large League; and in that an Inn, where I was accommodated with the
most desirable Entertainment in these Mountains, I mean the warmth of a good
Fire; for the Way is lined on both sides with vast Hills of Snow; and the Wind
is so cold and piercing, that the poor Traveller is hardly able to support
himself on his numm'd Limbs. After I had rested an Hour, I mounted my Mule, for
there are no other Beasts of Carriage able to pass the Mountain; and found the
Descent on the other side as troublesome and uneasy as the Ascent, which I
have already described.

The same Evening I arrived at Suza, a little City in the Frontiers of
Piedmont, seated at the Foot of a Mountain, and separated from Turin by a vast
and fertile Plain: It has the Advantage of a pure and healthy Air, pleasant
Meadows, good Wine, and beautiful Houses. The warmth of the Climate exceeds
that of France, but the Heat is not so intolerable as at Rome; so that the
Traveller finds as great an Alteration at his Descent from the Mountains of
Savoy, as if he were transported in an Instant from Norway to Italy; and is
agreeably ravished at the sudden Change of a stormy Winter into a Mild and
Temperate Spring.

The City of Turin is seated at the other end of this charming Plain, between
the Po and the Loire, which furnish it abundantly with all the Necessaries and
Conveniences of Life. It Is enclosed with strong Walls, and surrounded with
broad, deep, and well-lin'd Ditches. The Citadel is a Masterpiece of
Fortification; for the Duke has spared no Cost to make it Strong and
Magnificent; and if the Goodness of the Soil had been suitable to the Care he
has taken to improve it, I Am confident 'twou'd have been absolutely
impregnable. The Town is all glorious within, and adorned with a Thousand
Beauties: The Public Places are spacious, all newly built with an admirable
Regularity: The Streets are broad, and straight as a Line: The noblest
improvements of Architecture are magnificently displayed in the Palaces; the
Gilding, Paintings, and other Ornaments of the Churches are suitable to the
Beauty of the Buildings; the Shops are full of all sorts of rich and fine
Stuffs; and the Academies for riding the Great Horse, Dancing, and Martial
Exercises, deserve a particular Observation. And to complete the Glories of the
Place, there is a Court, that, notwithstanding its smallness, may be justly
reckoned the Seat of Gallantry and Politeness; It Is composed of a Society of
both Sexes, that are equally Admirable; the Ladies for their resistless Charms;
and the Men for a Nobleness of Mien, and Magnificence of Garb, that seems
peculiar to themselves.

Thus, Sir, I have endeavored to give you in few Words, a just Idea of this
Charming City; for it would be an endless Labor to undertake the particular
Description of every fine Church, and beautiful Palace, in a place where such
Structures are no Rarities. All the Ornaments of this City are Modern; at least
I could not, upon the strictest Enquiry, discover any other Antiquities than
those in the Duke's Gallery, which is full of all sorts of fine Paintings, rare
Munuscripts, Medals, Vases, and other Curiosities of that Nature. The Gate of
the Palace is defended with two Culverins, admirable for their Largeness and
Workmanship; and a Mortar of a prodigious bigness. The Metropolitan Church is
dedicated to S. John, and exceeds all the rest in Magnificence: It Is a stately
Dome, enriched on the Inside with Paintings, of a finished Regularity and
Fineness: And to all the other Ornaments, there was lately added a Chapel of a
surprising Beauty and Richness. This admirable Structure is of an excellent
Architecture, and seems in a manner to be overlaid with a glittering Cover of
Gold and Silver: 'Twas built on purpose for the Holy Handkerchief, which is
kept there at present. You cannot imagine with what Devotion the People of this
Place adorn that Relick; which is a little Sheet, with the Image of our Savior
painted very imperfectly in the middle, of a yellowish Color. I need not tell
you that this is commonly pretended to be the same Cloth in which Christ's Face
was wrapped at his Burial, and that his Image was miraculously stamped upon it:
But there are so many other Pretenders to the same Dignity, that I will not
undertake to decide so doubtful a Controversy.

According to all Appearance, the Duke of Sav^y will not remain long in the
King's Interests; for he has already given out Commissions for the levying of
two Regiments of Foot, and one of Dragoons, with an express Order, not to
receive a Frenchman into 'em; and besides, it is certain that he did not oppose
the Passage of the Barbets, as he might have easily done: For all the Motions
of his Troops, were only in Order to their Encampment at Verecil; and I Am
persuaded the only reason why he suffered the French to act on that Occasion,
was because he could not hinder 'em.

I have met with another Obstacle, that will retard my Journey to Isaly for
some time; for the whole Country is full of Spaniards, who Infest all the
Roads, and commit a Thousand Robberies. The People here are daily alarmed with
fresh Accounts of these Disorders; so that I have been at last prevailed with
to alter my Resolution, and am going to take Journey for Marseilles, where I Am
certainly informed I may find daily Opportunities of embarking for Genoa or
Leghorn.

I am, SIR, Your etc.
Turin, Nov. 1689.
LETTER VI.
SIR,
DUring my short stay at Turin after the Wriing of my last Letter, I had not
the Opportunity of making any remarkable Observation that I had not taken
notice of before; and therefore all that I shall add to the Account I gave you
of that City, is, that the People have an extraordinary Love to their
Sovereign. You Will perhaps tell me, that this is not a very uncommon
Observation, since it is natural for all Men to respect their Governors: But I
hope you will acknowledge, that there are various Degrees in this kind of
Affection, as well as in all others; and that I cannot be accused of Trifling,
when I assure you, that never was the Breast of any Subject filled with a more
ardent and respectful Love to his Prince, than that which the Inhabitants of
Piedmont have for the Duke of Savoy. Nor is their Zeal for his Interest, and
Affection to his Person, the Effect of a blind Inclination: For it is no wonder
that those who owe their Happiness to the mild Influences of his Government are
charmed with the Greatness of his Courage and Magnamity, and a Thousand other
rare Perfections, of which he is certainly Master in a very eminent Degree.

The Duchess is an illustrious Example of Conjugal Affection: it is true, she
is not unmindful of the Blood that fills her Veins; nor will ever forget that
Natural Inclination to the place of her Nativity, that obliges her to be the
declared Protectress of the French: But her Love to her Country is not strong
enough to lessen that which she owes to her Lord, and puts not the least Bias
on her Mind when it comes in Competition with his Interest.

I forgot to tell you in my last, that it Rains almost perpetually at Turin;
and, (whatever you may think on it) this is a very important Remark for Persons
of my Humor and Fortune. I cannot forbear complaining of the Unkindness of my
Destiny, that exposes me to be drenched with every Shower for want of a Coach,
and even envying the Happiness of those who are better provided; for, if God
had thought fit to entrust me with the Management of 10000 Livres a Year, I
would not have denied my self the Pleasure of Traveling in a portable House.

From Turin I came in seven Hours to Pignerol. The Town is very well fortified;
and the Citadel, as now it stands, after so many Additions and Alterations,
may be justly reckoned one of the strongest places in his Majesty's Possession,
and a terrible Thorn in the Duke of Savoy's Foot, which may one Day make him
halt, if he do not take care to pluck it out. Here the unfortunate Monsieur
Fouquet spent the last part of his Life, and (as it is generally believed)
composed that admirable Treatise, entitled, The Counsels of Wisdom. If that
Report be true, even his Enemies must acknowledge, that the Confinement of his
Body disturbed not the Freedom and Tranquillity of his Mind, and that he was
entirely disengaged from the Allurements of this World. Nevertheless, I Am
certainly informed by Persons of unsuspected Credit, that he attempted to make
his Escape by cutting the Sheets of his Bed; and that he was afterward put
under a Guard of four Sentinels instead of one, as well as the Count de Lausun,
who about four Years ago had little reason to flatter himself with the hopes of
a Release. The Marquess d'Herville, the present Governor of Pignerol, is a Man
of a large and comely Stature, brave, and well acquainted with the Duties of
his Office.

Leaving Pignerol I proceeded on my Journey through the long Valley of Sestriere
to Guillestre, and from thence by the Way of Briancon to Ambrun, a little City
on the Frontiers of Dauphine, inaccessible on one side, by reason of the
Steepness of the Rock on which it is built, but only defended on the other with
a weak and single Wall. The Archbishopric of this Place is at present
possessed by Monsieur de Genlis, Nephew to the Marquess de Genlis,
Lieutenant General of his Majesty's Forces, and Captain-Lieutenant of the Duke
of Anjou's Company of Geudarms. This Prelate signalized his Courage and Zeal in
the late Campaign against the Vaudois; for he remained in the Camp all the
Summer, and was personally engaged in the Battle of Salbertrand: And this
unusual Bravery in a Man of his Character, has procured him so much Honor and
Authority in the Country, that when I produced his Passport at Gap, the Major,
who commanded in the Place, told me that if it had been signed by the King
himself it would not have been so much respected. It Is true he gave me a very
favorable Character, for he was not ignorant that I had the Honor to be very
well known to his Uncle: and 'twas also on that Score that he kept me two days
at Ambrun, and entertained me with a great deal of Kindness.

You must give me leave to detain you a while with an Account of my fatiguing
Passage over Mount Genevre: for though it be neither so large nor so high as
Cenis, the crossing of that Mountain put me to more Trouble and Pain than ever
I suffered in any one day of my Life. I was mounted on a Horse that was not
worth Sixpence, which I hired of a Peasant at Briancon, and accompanied with a
Guide who was utterly unacquainted with the Roads, and carried me quite out of
the Way. But that was not my greatest Misfortune, for my Horse stuck so fast in
the Snow, which reached above his Belly, that I could not make him go one Step
farther, and was at last forced to alight and endeavor to open a Passage for
him to the Highway; for I perceived certain Sticks at a considerable distance,
which (I knew) were set up as Marks to keep Travelers from wandering out of the
Road. But I quickly found my Design impracticable, for both I and my Horse were
so benumn'd with the Cold, that we could hardly stir a Leg; and besides the
Wind drove the Snow upon me faster than I could rake it away: so that I was
beginning to give over my useless Labor, and to reflect in good earnest on a
Death that seemed unavoidable, when I discovered certain black Spots, that gave
me some hope of finding a Village not far the place where I thought to have
ended my days. Immediately I left my Guide, Horse and Baggage, and, feeble as I
was, ventured into the midst of the Snow, in quest of those Houses, where at
last, by God's Assistance, I arrived, and was received with all imaginable
Marks of Kindness by those Hospitable Wretches, who brought me into one of
their Hutts, which I found stuffed with Oxen, Cows, Sheep, Cats, Dogs, and (the
most miserable Part of the Family) Men and Women. Nevertheless I assure you
that the Sight of this Place, which perhaps at another time would have turned
my Stomach, seemed more charming to me in that Extremity, than the most
glorious Palace that ever I beheld: I fansi'd my self restored from Death to
Life as soon as I entered that Resemblance of a Hog's Stie, which was as hot as
a Stove. In the mean time I begged some of my kind Hosts to complete their
Charity, by going to relieve the Poor Creature, whom I had left with my Horse
in the midst of the Snow: and their Assistance came very seasonably, for he had
certainly perished if they had stayed half a quarter of an hour longer. After I
had the Satisfaction of seeing him alive, I stretched my wearied Body on a Heap
of Straw, where I enjoyed the most comfortable Night's Rest that ever I had in
my Life. The next day I feasted on a Piece of Bread exactly of the Color of
Soot, and a little dry and salt Cheese; and was in the mean time entertained
with an Account of their Way of Living in this Place. They told me that they
were imprisoned in their dismal Habitations, and almost buried in the Snow for
the Space of seven Months, every Year; during which time they linger out a
miserable Life in the midst of Stench and Nastiness.

After my Arrival at Gap, I sent back my Horse, and hired another, which I
found there by chance, to Sisteron. But to complete the Misfortunes of my
disastrous Journey, as I was crossing a very rapid Torrent about a League from
the last of these Places, having occasion to blow my Nose, I pulled my
Handkerchief out of my Pocket, and with that the Box with my Pass-Ports, which
fell into the Stream, and was in an instant carried quite out of my Sight. If
my Purse with all the Money I was Master of, had been irrecoverably lost, I
could not have been more sensibly vexed: for when I considered with what Rigor
I had been every where examined notwithstanding my Pass-Ports, I concluded that
Imprisonment was the mildest Treatment I could expect to receive at Sisteron.
These Reflections kept me for some time in an Irresolution, whether I should go
forwards; but since the Danger was equal either Way, I resolved to proceed on
my Journey, though I should be forced to take up my Lodging in a Gaol. I found,
to my Cost, the Accomplishment of those Melancholic Presages; for the
Governor laughed at my Excuses, and told me that I must needs have a very mean
Opinion of his Judgment, if I thought to put him off with such an ill-contriv'd
Story. Confess the Truth, added he, you are one of the Barbets, and are going
to Languedoc and Dauphine, to persuade the new Converts in those Provinces to
join with your Party: I answered, That I was too Loyal a Subject to his
Majesty, and too zealous a Catholic to undertake such a Commission; that I was
a mere Stranger to the Barbets; that I came from Turin, and was going to Rome.
What, Sir, replied he, you came from Turin? Morbleau, you came with the
Barbets: I Am better acquainted with your Tricks than you imagine; I say you did
come with 'em, and I Will show you presently some of your own Friends, who will
maintain it to your Face. Immediately he ordered two of those unhappy Wretches
that were fallen into his Hands, to be brought before him, and as soon as they
appeared, Here is one of your Officers, said he to 'em, whom we have caught
straggling. He would have us believe that he has deserted your Party, and left
you with a Design to submit to the King; but we have Reason to suspect his
Sincerity. Confess the Truth ingenuously, and declare all that you know
concerning him, as the only way you can take to obtain the King's Mercy. If I
had been guilty of entertaining a Correspondence with these People, I would
have immediately said something to undeceive 'em, and prevent their biting the
Hook: but since I was altogether unacquainted with 'em, I was glad of that
Occasion to justify my Innocence, and expected their Answer with a Silence
that confuted all my Accusers: and besides, the Prisoners affirmed that they
did not know me. Then the Governor began to examine me more particularly, and
with less Prejudice than before: he asked me which way I came, where I received
Pass-Ports, and who had any Knowledge of me. In answer to the last Question,
having named several Persons, and among the rest the Archbishop of Ambrun, the
Governor assured me, that I might conclude my self out of Danger, if that
Prelate would undertake to answer for me; and I replied, that I hoped he would
not deny me his Testimony. Then the Governor desir d me to write to him,
telling me that he would accompany my Letter with another, and that in the mean
time I should be confined to the Citadel, where I was lodged with two
Lieutenants, from whom and the rest of the Officers, I received all imaginable
Marks of. Civility. Four days after, the Governor having received a very
favorable Answer from the Archbishop of Ambrun, sent for me, and told me that
I was at Liberty to depart when I pleased. I returned him my very humble Thanks
for the Justice he did me, and entreated him to grant me a Passport, since
without that I should certainly be stopped, and perhaps also abused by the
first Corpse de Guard of Peasants on the Road. But he assured me that there was
no need of a Passport, and that all the Roads were free, from Sisteron to
Marseilles.

Since I have had occasion to mention the Barbets so often, I believe it will
not be an unwelcome Gratification of your Curiosity, to give you an Account of
the Original of that Name, which the Piedmontois and Savoyards give to the
Protestants that inhabit their Valleys. The Word Barbe in their Language
signifies Uncle; and besides, an Ancient and Venerable Person; so that in
several Places it is the usual Custom to express a more than ordinary Respect to
a Person by prefixing this Word before his proper Name, as Barbe Peter, Barbe
John, etc. And even by degrees it grew in such Esteem among 'em, that they
thought they could not give a more honorable Title to their Ministers, whom
for that Reason they called Barbe du Plessis, Barbe du Menil, etc. From hence
the Protestants in this Country were nick-nam'd Barbets, as in France they are
called Hugonots, and in Flanders, Gueux.

Sisteron is seated on the Durance, and is so inconsiderable a Town, that
'twou'd be an useless Waste of Time and Paper to undertake the Description of
it. The Citadel stands on a very steep Mountain, and is consequently strong,
but so small that it is scarce capable of Lodging three hundred Soldiers.

The Marquess de Vallevoir, the present Governor of this Place, is an old
Officer, very well known, and much esteemed by the Soldiers. The double Meaning
of his Name had once almost cost him his Life; for as he was walking at Night
on the Ramparts of a Town of which he was Governor, a new Soldier who was then
on the Watch, not knowing him, saluted him with the usual Question on such
Occasions, Qui va la, Who comes there? to which he answered, Vallevoir. But the
Sentinel imagining he had said in a slighting manner, Va le voir, Go see, and
taking it either as an Affront, or as a Refusal to discover his Name and
Quality, discharged his Musket, and shot him into the Belly so dangerously,
that he had almost died of the Wound.

From Sisteron I came in a Day and a half to Aix, which is but five Leagues
distant from hence, and was founded by Caius Sextius, a Roman Consul, who
called it by his own Name, in Memory of the Hot Baths he had built there, which
are still to be seen without the Walls. It Is neither large nor strong, but it
may be justly said to be a very pleasant City, for it is seated in a lovely
Plain, that produces Store of good Wine; and besides, it is adorned with a
considerable Number of new Houses, which are very fine, and built after the
Italian Fashion. The Nobility of Provence are, without dispute, the greatest
Lovers of Building in France, and are at the greatest Charge in gratifying
their Inclinations to Architecture; and there are in this Country a great
Number of admirably well-contriv'd Structures that may pass for little Palaces.
The Metropolitan Church, called S. Savior's, is particularly remarkable for
the Tombs of four Counts of Provence, a small subterraneous Chapel, where it is
said S. Mary Magdalen ended her Days, and especially the Baptismal Font of
white Marble, adorned with Reliefs that are much esteemed by the best Judges,
and covered with a little Marble Dome, supported with Columns of the same,
making all together a very valuable Piece. The Place des Precheurs is the
finest of all the spacious Courts or Squares in the City, both for its Neatness
and Largeness, and for the Beauty of the Structures that surround it, among
which the ancient Palace of Justice deserves a particular Observation. In one
of its Apartments, where the Counts of Provence kept their Residence, there is
a very fine Room, at present called, The King's Chamber, richly gilt, and hung
round with the Pictures of our Kings. After the Traveller has satisfied his
Curiosity in this Place, he may visit the Course, or public Walking-Place and
Rendezvous of Coaches, which is 800 Paces long, and 15 broad, without reckoning
the paved Streets on both Sides for the Coaches. It Is enclosed with Ballisters
of Wood, and all over-shadow'd with tufty Trees, whose spreading Boughs cast
such an agreeable Coolness in the Heat of Summer, that one may walk in this
lovely Place without the least incommodity, at Three a Clock in the Afternoon:
and besides, at convenient Intervals, there are Benches of Stone, where those
who are weary may rest themselves. The Houses that environ it are all very
fine, and inhabited by Persons of Quality, who choose to live there for the
Pleasure of the Prospect, and the Convenience of walking without losing Sight
of their Houses. This is the general Rendezvous of the genteeler part of the
Inhabitants of the Town, who flock hither every Evening, and increase the
Pleasures of the Place with their agreeable Society and Conversation. You will
be easily persuaded to believe that there are some handsome Women to be found
among so much good Company: but I Am afraid you will stand in need of all your
Faith to give Credit to another Observation I made in this City. It Is perhaps
the peculiar Advantage of the Gentlemen of Aix, that they are possessed of the
dearest and most distinguishing Privilege of the Beautiful Sex; Ten or Twelve
of 'em especially, who are so many Adolphus's and Jucundus's, and outvie the
most charming Ladies that ever were admired for the delicate Mixture of Roses
and Lilies in their Complexion, the Luster of their Eyes, and the incomparable
Graces of their Mouth. These wondrous Youths are so many convincing Proofs of
the Reasonableness of the first Part of that common Saying in this Country,
which ascribes the Preeminence in Beauty to the Men of Aix, and the Women of
Marseilles.

The whole Country of Provence is under the Authority of the Parliament, which
was established here by Lewis XII. Ann. 1501. The Archbishopric of this Place
is remarkable for its Antiquity, and the Extent of its Jurisdiction: for it is
the Metropolitan See of a very large Ecclesiastical Province, and the first
Bishop was S. Maximin, a Disciple of S. Lazarus.

Since the County of Provence was dismembered from the Roman Empire, it has had
the Misfortune to change its Masters very often: but instead of presenting you
with a Catalogue of all its Sovereigns, I shall content my self with observing
that it was annexed to the Crown of France, under the Reig^ of Lewis XI. by
Rene, Count of Provence, and King of Naples and Sicily; and that the Privileges
reserved to the Inhabitants, by the Conditions of that Donation, were involved
in the same Fate with those of Languedoc, Dauphine, Burgundy, Bretaign, etc.
For you know the King has a notable Faculty of Judging in his own Cause, and is
furnished on all Occasions, with irresistible Arguments to demonstrate, That
his Will and Pleasure are the only Limits of his Royal Authority.

The Air of this Province is so mild, that it is seldom or never observed to be
subject to Frosts: but the Advantages of its Climate are considerably lessened
by the Boisterousness of the Winds that reign in it. And besides, the Country
is generally so mountainous, that one half of it is not cultivated; and the
little fertile Ground that remains, is so full of Stones, that a Man would be
tempted to think they had been purposely brought thither. The Laborers take
care to remove those that lie in their way, and, instead of Hedges, surround
their Fields with Stone-Walls, which are almost every where three Foot high: so
that if ever this Country be made the Seat of a War, 'twill not be an easy
Task to open a Passage through it for the Cavalry.

But, to make amends for the Inconveniency of the Soil, which is neither proper
for Corn nor Pasturage, it produces very good Wine, and great Store of such
excellent Olives, that the Oil of 'em is esteemed the best and sweetest in
Europe. The Wine is of several Sorts; for, besides the Red, which is most
common, and not inferior to Burgundy, there is the Pale-Red, Red, White, and
delicious Muscadin. The best grows at Ciotat, a little Town between Marseilles
and Toulon; but 'twou'd be needless to describe its Excellencies to you, who
have tasted it so often at Paris. There is also a mixed Sort of Wine, called
Malmsey, much esteemed by the People of this Country, who make it, by boiling
Red Muscadin with Cinnamon, Cloves, and the best Aqua-Vitae. They have also
abundance of Ortolans, (which are delicate, and very beautiful Birds, of the
Bigness of a Lark) good Quails, Red-legg'd Partridges, and some Francolins,
which are a Sort of the immediately preceding Species of Birds, for they have
both the same Cry, and Color of Feathers; only the Wings of the latter are
spotted, black and white, their Legs are somewhat smaller, and they are thought
to exceed the others very considerably in their Agreeableness to the Taste. But
all these Marks are not sufficient to distinguish 'em when they are dressed,
and therefore the Cooks usually stick one of the Feathers of the Wings into the
Body of a Francolin, that it may not be taken for a Red Partridge. It Is not so
hard a Task to know the delicious Earth-Apples or Swine-bread, that are so
cheap in this Country: for though they are brought to the Table covered with a
Napkin to keep 'em warm, the whole Chamber is immediately perfumed with their
odoriferous Scent. You must not imagine your self to be a competent Judge of
this excellent subterraneous Fruit, because you commonly eat 'em dried in
Ragou's at Paris: for they are incomparably more pleasant, when the fresh Pulp
is eaten like an Apple, without any other Preparation than peeling off the
Rind. It Is certain, that Maids have reason to complain of the Tyrannical Custom
that restrains 'em from tasting a Dish which all the World admires, under
Pretext that it is too powerful an Incentive to Amorous Inclinations.

This kind of Earth-Apple is neither a Plant, Herb, nor Mushroom: it grows in a
very little time, sometimes equalling a Man's Fist in Bigness; and is always
found at the depth of half a Foot under the Surface of the Ground. 'Twou'd be
impossible to discover these admirable Productions of the Earth, without the
Assistance of the Hogs, who smell 'em out: The Country People follow these
Animals, especially when they perceive 'em busi'd in digging up the Ground; and
when they have gathered so many, that the Weight of 'em may amount to five or
six Pounds, they carry 'em to the Market, where they sell 'em for 7 or 8 Sous a
Pound. Next these you cannot imagine any thing of a more delicious Taste than
the large Grapes of Provence, which the People of the Country have the Secret
to preserve till May, as fresh as if they were newly picked from the Tree,
bringing Baskets full of 'em every Day to the Market. But this is not the only
Reason why Provence may boast of an Autumn in the midst of Winter; for the
Arbute-Trees are not only ever green, like Bays, but continue to bear Fruit
till Carnaval-time. This Fru^^ resembles a very large Straw-berry; but its
Goodness is not answerable to its Beauty, for it is full of small Seeds like
Sand. These, with the excellent Figs that are so common in this Country, and
some Peaches, are, I think, all the Kinds of Fruit that are to be found in it.
But I must except the Canton of Hieres, which may justly dispute with Blois the
Title of The Garden of France: For Orange, Citron, and Pomegranate-Trees grow
as naturally there, and are brought up with as little Care as Oaks and
Chesnut-Trees in other Places. These Advantages are owing to the peculiar
Advantages of its Situation; for it seems to ingross all the Heat and fruitful
Influences of the Sun, and to be wholly exempted from all the Inconveniences
of even the sharpest Winters.

You may expect in my next an Account of the City of Marseilles, and of S.
Baume; In the mean time I am, with a great deal of Zeal and Affection,

SIR, Your etc.
Marseilles, Dec. 1689.
LETTER VII.
SIR,
MArseilles is one of the most ancient Cities in France; and tho it was famous
in all Ages, it is not an easy Task to trace its Original, notwithstanding the
Opinion of some Writers, who pretend that 'twas founded by the Greek Exiles,
who were driven out of their Country by Cyrus the Great. 'Twas formerly the
seat of an Illustrious Assembly of learned Senators, and of an Accademy, which
was the general Rendezvous of Studious Persons from all the Corners of the
World. These glorious Advantages made it in a manner the Metropolis of the
Commonwealth of Learning; and inspired the Romans with so high an Esteem for
it, that they courted the Friendship of the Citizens of Marseilles, while the
rest of the Inhabitants of Provence were their Conquered Vassals. After the
Fall of the Roman Empire, 'twas governed as a Republic by four Counts; till at
last the Inhabitants, finding themselves unable to withstand the united force
of their Neighbors, put themselves under the Authority and Protection of the
Kings of France. But the Conditions of this Voluntary Submission were very
Honorable and Advantageous for 'twas concluded, that the City and its
Territory, which comprehends two Leagues round, should be exempted from all
manner of Taxes, Charges, and Impositions; that the King should not pretend a
Right to any Customs or Duties for Goods Exported or Imported; That the City
should be governed by Four Consuls, who should hold their Office for Life, and
be elected by the Citizens; only 'twas agreed, That one Judge or Magistrate
might be sent by the King, with the Title of Viguier: That they should not be
obliged to receive any Garrison, or be commanded by any Citadel but that of
Notre-Dame de la Guard: Besides several other Articles of the same Nature,
which remained in force till the King's Voyage thither; when he took the
occasion of a Mutiny that was raised against the Duke of Guise, General of his
Galleys, to abolish all the Privileges of Marseilles. You may imagine with what
Consternation and inward Rage they heard of their Sovereign's Approach in a
Hostile manner, with an Army at his Heels; and afterward beheld him enter the
Breach as into a conquered City: However they set a good Face on it, and
resolving to make the best they could of a desperate Game, received the
Destroyer of their Liberty with all imaginable Marks of Love and Respect. In
the mean time he ordered ten thousand Men to march into the City, who seized on
the principal Posts, and were lodged in the Citizen's Houses; and afterward
told 'em, that he had observed a great Number of pretty Buildings in their
Territory, and was so well pleased with 'em, that he was resolved to build one
more. This Design was quickly put in execution; for the Citadel was erected at
the Mouth of the Port on the Right-side, and Fort S. John on the other. The
People of Marseilles perceiving that Reason was too feeble a Defense against
Violence, very tamely submitted to the new Yoke that was imposed upon 'em: And
their forced Complaisance on this Occasion, was made the Subject of a Song; of
which these are two Stanza's: He told'em he would build a Fort,
And swore 'twas merely to protect 'em:
They swore again they thanked him for it,
Because they durst not contradict him.
They vowed they were his loyal Slaves,
With Lives and Fortunes to assist him;
Ready to serve him to their Graves,
Because unable to resist him.


Whatever were the Sentiments of these unfortunate People at that time, I can
assure you that most of the old Inhabitants are struck with so much Horror at
the remembrance of that. Disaster, that they never relate the Story of it
without the deepest Marks of a lively Sorrow. And they still retain such an
inconceivable Abhorrence against the French, that they scarce ever mention 'em
but in the most reproachful Terms that Spite or Disdain can invent. They look
upon all those of that Nation to be contemptible Wretches; and you cannot do
'em a more provoking Injury than to call 'em Frenchmen. I cannot give you a
more lively Representation of their implacable Hatred against our Nation, than
by relating a Story which I heard the other Day: When the King concluded the last
Peace with Algiers, Commissioners were sent on board all the Galleys, and into
the Baths, to release all the French Slaves they could find: Some of these
Officers perceiving a Man, whom they took to be one of their own Nation,
standing in a careless manner, without showing the least desire to be Enrolled
in their List, asked him, Whether he was a Frenchman: No, answered he: What
Countryman art thou then? said one of the Commissioners: I Am a Native of
Marseilles, replied the Slave: Very well, said the Commssioners; write to thy
King of Marseilles, that he may set thee at liberty. This is no contrived
Story, but so certain and well-attested a Truth, that I know some Persons who
were present when the Accident happened: Nor will the credibleness of this
Relation be questioned by any who have had occasion to converse with the
Inhabitants of this City, or to be Witnesses of their extreme Aversion against
our Countrymen. If any of 'em gives his Daughter in Marriage to a Frenchman, or
makes a Man of that Nation his particular Friend, he exposes himself infallibly
to the Hatred and Scorn of all his Neighbors: And if a Maid should receive a
Visit from a Frenchman, she might for ever despair of finding a Husband in her
own Country. To conclude; The People of Marseilles are in all respects
diametrically opposite to us; only I must except from this general Rule, the
Nobility of this City, and of the Country in which it is seated, than whom there
are none of their Quality in France that can lay a juster Claim to Antiquity of
Descent, and Politeness of Manners; nor any that are better affected to his
Majesty's Service.

The Language of Provence is extremely harsh and unpleasant, especially in
Marseilles, and the Territory that belongs to it, where the Pronunciation is as
Guttural as in Arabia. You can hardly imagine what a vast Alteration the very
Sound or Accent makes in a Language: There is scarce any difference at all
between the Words of the Dialects that are used in Provence and Languedoc, and
nevertheless this is as amorous and agreeable as that is rough and uncouth. A
Stranger is never more sensible of the Truth of this Observation, than at his
first Arrival: And I remember that the very Day on which I came to this City, I
was astonished at the intolerable Clownishness with which a handsome young Lady
pronounced these Words, to diswade one of her Kinsmen from quarrelling with an
ordinary Woman: Hai, mon Cousin, said she, lache stata quelle femme, non sabais
pas qua cau a la test dau Diable. This made me tell a Gentleman, who, some
Days after, asked my Opinion of the Women of Marseilles, That I admired their
Beauty, but could wish they were dumb, because their Speech was such a Bugbear,
that all the Charms of their Countenance could never retain a French Lover. If
you were acquainted with their Humor, replied he, you would be easily
convinced, that the very Reason you allege would make 'em in love with their
Pronounciation.

Marseilles is one of the most populous Cities in France; but the third part of
those who reside in it are Strangers. The old part of the Town is neither very
large nor fair: The Streets are narrow, crooked, and uneven, by reason of its
Situation on a Hillock; but it is at least double of what it was thirty Years
ago. The Course, or Public Place for taking the Air, is exactly in the middle
of a long and very straight Street, that reaches from the Gate of Aix to that
of Rome, and separates the Old from the New Town. It Is 1000 Paces long, (which
is only the third part of the length of the Street) and in all other respects
is like to that of Aix. Four Men are hired by the City, to Water it twice a Day
in Summer, that the Dust may not offend the Gentlemen and Citizens, who flock
thither every Evening in such Multitudes, that a Man can hardly turn himself in
the Crowd. The Houses that Border it are built pretty regularly, but are not so
fine as at Aix.

The New City is well built; the Streets are broad, straight, and light; and
besides, it is considerable for the Quality of its Inhabitants; for all the
Officers of the Galleys, the Gentry, and the richer part of the Citizens choose
to live in it. The Extent of the Walls of the City has been considerably
augmented within these three Years; for besides what they contain^d before,
there is a large Space enclosed behind the Arsenal for a ^lace of Arms, which
(when finished) will be 300 Paces square. The King bestows the Ground about
this Place on those who will build Houses on it, provided they observe the
Lines marked out for that purpose. By means of this new Addition, the Abbey of
S. Victor is advanced further within the Town, being a Monastery of unreform'd
Benedictines, who acknowledge no other Superior but the Pope, in
Ecclesiastical Cases. There are 50000 Livres a Year annexed to this House, for
the Maintenance of eighteen or twenty Monks, who know very well how to enjoy
all the comforts of so plentiful a Revenue. The Neighborhood of these
Independent Gentlemen is so great an Eyesore to the Bishop of Marseilles, that
he has several times endeavored to make 'em consent to the Reunion of their
Monastery with the Chapter of the Cathedral, offering 'em all the Privileges of
the Canons, with the Coadjutorship of the Bishopric for their Prior: But they
have hitherto kept themselves from being dazzl'd with the seeming
Advantageousness of these Proposals. The present Bishop is of the Family of
Vintimille, descended from the Counts of Marseilles, and Nephew of Cardinal
Fourbain Janson, his Predecessor in the Bishopric. He is well-shap'd,
handsome, not above thirty Years old, has very much the Air of the Court, and
might be reckoned a very handsome Man, if his Teeth were somewhat smaller, and
more evenly set. He is a Man of Sense and good Breeding, of a pleasant Wit and
agreeable Conversation. He is none of those morose Censurers, who affect a
certain Surliness and ill Humor on all Occasions. His Life is a convincing
Argument that the Pleasures of this World are not altogether inconsistent with
Devotion. He plays, hears Opera's, visits Ladies, and if we may believe the
common Report, is not hated by 'em: Yet all these must be acknowledged to be
innocent Liberties, since he always preserves a due regard to the Laws of
Decency, and never seems to be guilty of any Criminal Design. I know a Person
who took the liberey to desire the use of his Purple Habit and Golden Cross,
for a Masque: The Prelate replied, That these Accoutrements were Sacred; but
very civilly accommodated him with his Cassock, short Cloak, and Perriwig. He
has a Niece who is admitted into the Nunnery of S. Ursula, at Marseilles, and
is certainly the most amiable Girl in the World: His Affection to her is
suitable to her Merit; and since she is yet too young to bear the Austerities
of a Religious Life, he suffers her to live with her Father, the Marquess de
Fourbain: In the mean time he visits her daily, and instructs her in all the
Duties of her Profession. Let us leave 'em in this Holy Occupation, and take a
View of the Port of Marseilles.

It Is enclosed within the City, which secures it on all sides from the Violence
of the Winds; and its Mouth that before was not above thirty Paces broad, is
streighten'd by two Moles, leaving a very narrow Passage for the Galleys, which
is shut up with a Chain every Night, and opened at Seven in the Morning. The
Harbor by the largest Computation is not above twelve hundred Paces long, and
three hundred broad; and besides, it is so shallow that a Man of War cannot
enter into it. However it is the Station of all the King's Galleys, of which
there are forty five, including the old Patronne, which at present serves only
for a Show, and for an Instance of the late prodigious Increase of the French
Grandeur. All the rest of the Galleys are magnificently Painted and Gilt,
especially the new Patronne, which is adorned with the finest Basso-Relievo's
that are made in this Age: Besides the Flags, Banners, Streamers, and Pendants,
which are all incredibly Rich. All these Ornaments are of the best and finest
red Dama^k, with Flower-de-Luces, Devices, and Coats of Arms embroidered with
Gold: The principal Flag is above forty Foot long, and ten broad; and all the
rest are proportionably large: The Poop, where the General has his Chamber, is
covered with the same Stuff, enriched with a Fringe of Gold and Silk.

All the other Galleys are adorned after the same manner, only instead of Gold
they have Yellowish Silk, which is no less agreeable to the Sight, especially
at a Distance. It Is impossible to behold a more stately Prospect than those
Galleys when they appear in all their Magnificence on Sundays and Holydays. But
notwithstanding all these external Beauties, they are only splendid Prisons to
the most miserable Wretches in the World; the poor Slaves are chained together,
eaten up with Vermin and Scabs, beaten from Morning to Night, and exposed to
all the Injuries of Cold. Their only Habit is a sort of wide and short Jacket,
without Shoes or Stockings, without a Shirt for Change, without Straw to lie
upon, without any other Food than a little Bread as black as Soot; and to crown
their Misery, without the least hope of a Deliverance from this deplorable
Captivity, more insupportable than that of the Turks. There comes not a Person
of Quality to Marseilles whom the Intendant does not regale with this sight on
board the new Patronne, which on these Occasions is embellished with all its
Ornaments. The Galley-Slaves perform their Exercise by the Sound of a Fisquet:
First they salute the Intendant and those that are with him, bellowing out
thrice Hou, hou, hou, as if they were Bears in a Humane Form: In the next place
they stretch a Rope from one side of the Galley to the other, and then a
Sail-Yard; this done, they set up the Tent and take it down again; after which
comes the most necessary part of their Exercise, they pull off their Jackets
and Shirts, shaking off the Lice into the Sea, and sweeping 'em away with their
Hands: Then they put on their Clothes, and the Haut-boys entertain their
Company; who at their Departure receive the same howling Salutation as at
first. I know not what Pleasure some Persons may take in beholding so dismal a
Spectacle, but I assure you it had a quite contrary Effect upon me: I was
altogether unable to resist the Motions of a most tender Compassion, mixed with
Horror; and I Am persuaded you could not preserve the usual Tranquillity of
your Mind at the reading of a lively Recital of the Reflections I made on this
Occasion: I shall therefore leave this melancholy Subject, and proceed to
entertain you with something more diverting.

These Galleys are Manned with a Regiment, composed of as many Companies as
there are Vessels, each Company consisting of one hundred and twenty Men, who
exceed all the Soldiers in the King's Service, in Comeliness of Person, and
Largeness of Stature; for the Captains never grudge to advance Ten Louis d'
Or's when they meet with a Man that pleases 'em: And besides, there are two
considerable Encouragements that invite Men to enter into this Service; for
they have a Sous a Day more than in the Land-Army; and the Campaign, or time of
Action, never lasts above two Months. There is also a distinct Company, called
the Guards of the Standard, who are clothed in Red, with a Gold Galoon, and
trained up to be Ensigns of the Galleys: This Company consisted formerly of
fifty Men, but their Number was doubled this Winter, and 'twas ordered that no
Person henceforth should be admitted into it, without a Brevet.

The Duke of Maine is at present General of the Galleys; but since that Office
is purely Honorary, all the Duties of it are executed by the
Lieutenant General, the Chevalier de Noailles, Brother to the Duke of that
Name. This Officer is much envied, if not hated, by some old Commanders of
Squadrons, who grumbl'd extremely to see him advanced before 'em; yet since he
is a very brave Man, and possessed of his Master's Favor, his Court is always
pretty numerous. Some days ago he visited the Arsenal, and I took hold of that
Occasion to satisfy my Curiosity, which I could hardly have done at another
time; for Monsieur de Montmor, the Intendant, keeps the Keys of the most
considerable Places, and never parts with 'em out of his Custody, but when
there is something to be done that requires the opening of the Doors. Though this
Arsenal was not begun to be built till about Thirty Years ago, it may be
divided into the Old and the New; since the Additions that have been made
within these four Years, make it at least double of what it was before. The
Length of the Old Arsenal is equal to the Breadth of the Port which it fronts;
It contains particular Magazines for all the Galleys, marked with their
respective Names, with large Round Doors. This is the Lower Story on one Side;
the other contains Magazines of Cannon, Bombs, Carcasses, and Gunpowder, in
which it is said there are Two thousand Pieces of Cannon, and Five hundred
Bombs. The Upper Story is divided into Rooms, where the Flags, Pendants, Sails,
and the rest of the Tackling are kept; but most of 'em are empty. Here is also
a fair Hall of Arms, the Walls of which are hung with Six thousand Muskets,
and as many Sabres, all kept in very good Order: And near this is another,
where there are Five hundred Suits of Armor, all entire and bright as Silver.
The whole Arsenal is one single Mass of Building, in the Middle of which there
is a Dome with a Clock: and though in the general it may be reckoned a fine
Building, there is nothing in it that deserves to be admired. The New Arsenal
begins where the other ends, and stretches along the Port almost to the
Citadel: It Is larger than the Old Arsenal, though not so well built, but when
it is finished 'twill exceed the other, not only in Vastness of Extent, but in
the Beauty and Convenience of a fine Canal, through which the Galleys may come to
the Doors of their respective Magazines. It Is also said that there will be
Stoves built there for the Galley-Slaves, to lessen the Miseries they usually
suffer in the Winter. This is the Place where the Galleys are built, in a
certain dry Ditch or Dock, into which they can let as much Water as they
please, by a Sluice; so that the Galley is immediately set a-float, without the
least Trouble in Lanching it. The Place of Arms, of which I took notice before,
will be behind the Arsenal.

There is not one fine Church in Marseilles, but there are some very ancient.
That of Notre-Dame des Accoules was formerly consecrated to Pallas, that of S.
Savior to Apollo, and the Cathedral or Church de la Major, is said to have
been a Temple of Diana. In the last the Body of S. Lazarus, the first Bishop of
this City, is kept in a Silver Shrine; and there are several other Holy
Rarities both in this and S. Victor's Church; where, besides the Head of that
Saint, they preserve the True Cross of S. Andrew, which is seven Foot long, and
consists of two Joists joined cross-ways, after the Figure of an X. Here is
also a Grotto, where Mary Magdalen did Penance for some time. The whole City is
full of such Places, but none of 'em is so much respected as S. Baume, where
it is said she lived 33 Years. Notwithstanding all the Difficulties and
discouraging Rubbs I met with in my Passage through the Mountains, my Curiosity
was still strong enough to oblige me to undertake a Pilgrimage to that Place;
and in my next you may expect an Account of the Observations I made there.

I am, SIR, Your etc.
Marseilles, Feb. 1690.
LETTER VIII.
SIR,
S. Baume is a Cave in the midst of a Rock, which is so extremely high and
steep, that by taking a distant View of this Place, you would think it
impossible to ascend to it. And certainly the Ascent was very difficult at
first, since at present, though there are Steps very industriously cut out of the
Rock, it requires a Man's whole Skill and Agility to mount these artificial
Stairs, holding his Horse by the Bri^le; and the Pleasure of arriving at the
Top of 'em is very considerably increased by the need one has of Rest. This
Rock is the Top of the highest Mountain of Provence, between Marseilles and
Toulon; and you must ascend continually for the space of two Hours, before you
can arrive at the Rock: The Cave is possessed by certain Jacobin Friars, sent
thither by the Prior of S. Maximin, who allows each of 'em a Thousand Livres a
Year for their Maintenance, without reckoning their Masses: And I Am confident
they cannot spare much out of so considerable a Revenue, since they are obliged
to be at a vast and almost daily Charge for the Carriage of such things as are
necessary for their Subsistence, the Situation of the Place not permitting 'em
to lay up great store of Provisions. On the right side of the Entrance into the
Cave, they have taken Advantage of a piece of the Rock that jutts out beyond
the rest of it, to contrive a little Convent, consisting of seventeen Cells,
and three double Chambers, which are appointed for the King, the Bishop, and
the Governor of the Province, or at least are called by their Names. On the
other side of the Entry there is an Inn, where we paid dear for what we eat,
besides the Chaplets and Medals with which my Companions loaded themselves.
It Is Morally impossible that ever any Person could have lived in this Cave as
many Days as Mary Magdalen, according to the Tradition, lived Years in it, by
reason of the extreme Coldness and Moistness of the place, occasioned by the
continual dropping of Water from the impending Rock, which falls in such
abundance, that it fills a kind of Well or Cistern below. The Monks pretend
that this perpetual dropping is a miraculous Emblem of the Tears which that
Saint shed in this place; and that it is naturally impossible for Water to
spring out of so high a Rock. This is a Philosophical Question, which you may
determine at your leisure; for I Am resolved to say nothing on this Subject that
may prepossess your Judgment.

In the bottom of the Cave there is a little Rock, about three Foot high, which
I vehemently suspect to be Artificial; for it is exactly contrived like a Bed,
with the resemblance of a Bolster, as if it had been made on purpose for that
use. It Is enclosed with a great Iron Grate, which the Monks open, that the
Spectators may have a full View of the Saint's Image of Marble, painted and
gilt: She is laid at her full length, her Head leaning on her Right Hand, and
in her other holding the Pix, in which she kept consecrated Wafers or Hosts.
This Image is much bigger than the Life, being seven Foot long; and yet they
pretend that it is an exact imitation both of her Face and Stature. It Is strange
that the Scripture should neither mention her unusual Bigness, her Quality,
(for they say she was a Princess) nor her Voyage: And it is still more
surprising, that a Woman of her Stature could charm such a Crowd of Lovers: I
know not whether the Men of her Age had a particular Inclination to Court
Giantesses; but I question very much whether such a Bouncing Girl would find so
many Admirers among us.

After a Traveller has satisfied his Curiosity with a View of all these
Rarities, it is the usual Custom to go up to the Top of the Rock, called S.
Pilon, whither that Saint was carried seven times a Day by the Angels, that she
might have the Convenience of saying her Prayers at that Place. I will not
detain you with the particular Relation of the rest of her Adventures: But
since, perhaps, you may not be unwilling to know how, and by what odd Accident
she came to this Place, I shall give you a short Account of that part of her
History. After our Savior's Ascension, there arose a violent Persecution
against his Disciples, as you may see at length in the Acts of the Apostles:
Among the rest, the Family of S. Lazarus was involved in the common Calamity;
but the Jews, unwilling to make Persons of Quality suffer the utmost Severities
that were usually inflicted on others, instead of putting 'em to Death, placed
Lazarus and his Sister, S. Maximin, and some others, whose Names I do not
remember, in a Bark, without Oars, Rudder, or Sails, abandoning 'em to the
Mercy of the Winds, which by the Providence of God, brought 'em into the Port
of Marseilles, where they spent several Years in Preaching the Gospel: Their
Memory is preserved to this Day, by a great number of Chapels erected in the
places where it is pretended the He and She Saints usually pronounced their
Sermons; which had such a prevailing Influence on their Hearers, that the whole
City was converted. After such happy Success, S. Lazarus was made Bishop, and
Mary Magdalen went to do Penance in the horrid Cave of S. Baume. Her Head, and
one of her Arms are kept at S. Maximin, amongst a great number of fine Relics:
Her Head is enchas'd in a kind of Bust of Gold, ending a little below her
Shoulders, and enriched with a great number of very fine Jewels, among which
there is an admirable Ruby, equalling a Man's Thumb both in Length and Breadth:
This Bust was presented by Charles II. King of Switzerland, Count of Provence.
The whole Face of this Head is exposed to view, contrary to the Custom of other
Places, where the Shrine is only showed, and the Spectator must employ his
Faith, if it be strong enough, to discover the Relics: But here one may
distinctly perceive a Death's Head of so vast a size, that if it be Mary
Magdalen's, we cannot justly refuse our Assent to the Tradition, that assures
us of the unusual Bulkiness of the rest of her Body. Our Guide made us observe
a little dry Scurf about the middle of her Forehead, somewhat toward her Left
Eye, and told us, that this was the place where our Savior put his Finger,
when, after his Resurrection, he said to her, John 20. 17.
Touch me not, etc. But since I had never observed in the Scripture, that
Christ put his Finger on her Forehead, when he spoke these Words, I asked a
Father where I might find that Passage: He told me that it was a Holy Tradition
of the Church, which I was obliged to believe, under pain of Heresy; adding,
upon the Authority of the same Tradition, That during the Forty Days which
Christ spent with his Disciples after his Resurrection This is a direct
Contradiction to the last Chapter of S. Matthew's Gospel, where it is said of
the two Mary's, that as they were going from the Sepulcher, Jesus met 'em, and
that they came and held him by the Feet, and worshipped him.
, he never touched any thing but this part of Mary Magdalen's Forehead, and S.
Thomas's Hand, both which remain entire to this Day.

This Head is preserved in a Subterraneous Cave, closed with four Iron Doors;
and we were told, that the Bodies of S. Magdalen, S. Maximin, S. Marcellus, and
S. Sidonius, were put into four Marble Sepulchers, that are still to be seen in
this Cave, which was contrived on purpose for their Burying-place; but that
these Holy Bodies were afterward more honorably lodged. In the same Cave, or
Subterraneous Chapel, they show also a little Glass Vial, containing certain
small Flints that were moistened with the Blood that our Savior shed upon the
Cross; endeavoring to make the Spectatours believe that the Blood is still
visible; but whatever care I took to consider these Flints with all imaginable
Attention, I could not perceive the least Tincture of Blood. Coming up from
hence, we were desired to take Notice of a Shrine of Porphyrie, which contains
the rest of that Saint's Bones, except one of her Arms, which is enchas'd in
Silver, and suitable in bigness to the Head: Her Flaxen Hair is in another
Reliquary: And there are in the same place many other Rarities of this Nature,
which 'twou'd be too tedious to enumerate.

The Church that belongs to this Convent, is large, well lighted, and very much
esteemed for its Architecture. The Inside is adorned with several fine Marble
Columns, especially the great Altar, which was built by Lewis XIII. in
performance of a Vow; and is reckoned one of the largest, and most magnificent
Altars in France. All the rest of the Church is covered with Paintings, by the
most celebrated Hands, which are also the Effects of Vows: And every Altar is
enriched with all sorts of Vessels, Candlesticks, Lamps, and other Ornaments of
Gold and Silver, in great abundance. This Church was built by Charles, Duke of
Anjou, King of Sicily, who endowed it with a very plentiful Revenue; and the
Foundation being since increased by the Piety of our Kings, there is a very
honorable Maintenance for Fifty Monks who live here.

I Am afraid the Holiness of the Place will scarce make amends for my detaining
you so long at S. Baume; and therefore since a change of Entertainment is
always very acceptable to a cloyed Appetite, I hope you will have the less
Reluctance to accompany me in a little Journey to Arles and Nismes, where you
might divert your self with a View of those Admirable Antiquities, and
Illustrious Monuments of the Roman Grandeur that are to be seen in those places.

Arles is a City of Provence, and was formerly the Metropolis of a Kingdom of
the same Name. 'Twas adorned by its old Masters, the Romans, with Temples,
Palaces, Amphitheatres, and other magnificent Works, most of which were ruined
in the succeeding Revolutions. The Amphitheatre, commonly called les Arrenes,
has escaped the Fate of the rest, though not so well as that of Nimes; for it is
impossible to walk on the Top from one end to the other; so that I could not
measure its Length and Breadth.

The Townhouse is very remarkable, both for its Structure and Antiquities:
Among the rest there is a Marble Statue of Diana, which formerly pronounced
Oracles to those who came to consult her in her Temple, which was seated in the
same place where the Townhouse stands at present, as appears by the
Foundations that are under the Clock-Tower. All the Walls of the City are full
of pieces of Statues, Cornices, and Columns, which give the Spectatour a great
Idea of the Number and Beauty of its Ancient Ornaments. Among its finest
Antiquities, I may justly reckon that admirable Obelisk which some Years ago
was found entire in the Ground, and was since erected to the Glory of Lewis the
Great, by the Care and Contrivance of the Gentlemen of the Royal Academy, with
very beautiful Inscriptions on the Pedestal, both in Latin and French; and a
Golden Sun on the Top, which you know is the King's Emblem, and the Soul of his
Device. This Obelisk wants the usual Ornament of Monuments of that Nature, and,
at least in this respect may be justly esteemed a Rarity. But though there are no
Hieroglyphical Figures upon it, to determine its Age, and discover its first
Contrivers, it is generally reputed a Work of the Egyptians. I know not whether
the same Opinion will prevail in After-Ages; for perhaps Posterity viewing the
Inscriptions that have been lately added to it, will do our Age the Honor to
believe that 'twas capable of Undertaking and Finishing such Works; if they be
not kept from falling into that Error, by the Consideration of the Granite of
which it is built.

This City is the Seat of an Archbishop, and of an Academy of Ingenious
Persons, under the Name of the Royal Academy of Arles; to whom the Public must
own it self obliged for many Curious and Learned Treatises. It Is situated on
the Rhone, at the distance of seven Leagues from its Mouth: But no Ship, nor
great Bark, can come up to the City, by reason of the Banks of Sand with which
that River is pestered.

Having satisfied my Curiosity at Arles, I resolved to visit Nismes, one of the
most remarkable Cities in Languedoc, for its Trade, Antiquity, and I may also
add, for its Largeness, though it is at present much less considerable in that
respect than when (if we may give credit to History) 'twas founded by Marius,
who chose this for the place of his Residence, and built it in imitation of
Rome, observing an exact Equality in the Dimensions of the New City, as well as
in its Public Places and Buildings. But Time, that impartial Destroyer of all
things, has made so many Alterations in both these Illustrious Cities, that at
present there is not the least Resemblance between 'em.

The principal Monument of Antiquity at Nismes, is its Amphitheatre, the
largest and most entire Structure of that Nature that is at present to be seen
in any part of the World. I cannot forbear complaining that Private Persons are
suffered to fill it with Houses, which quite take away the Prospect of it, and
consequently all its Beauty; whereas if it were still empty, as when 'twas
possessed by the Romans, all the Curious part of the World would come to admire
the Magnificence of its Structure. It Is of a perfectly round or circular
Figure, having only one Door, with a Tower on each side of it: It contains 150
Paces in Diameter, and its Circumference amounts to 460. The Inside of the
Circle is Pyramidal, in form of Stairs, where the People sat to behold the
Fights of Beasts, and other Public Sights; and below there are very fair
vaulted Galleries, where the Spectatours might walk till the Shows began. This
lower Story is adorned with fine Columns, with their Cornices; and from place
to place there are Heads of Animals, Eagles and Fasces in Relief. The whole
Amphitheatre is built of large Free-Stones, some of which are three Foot square
on all sides; and particularly those on the Top of the Building.

We went out at the Gate la Bouquerie, to see the famous Temple of Diana, where
that Goddess pronounced her Oracles. It Is an exact Square, the length of each
side amounting to Seventy Paces: The Door is round, ten Foot broad, and fifteen
high. This is a very Massive Edifice, according to the ancient manner of
Building, and consists of Stones as large as those of the Amphitheatre; so that
it might serve for a Fort in Case of Necessity, and even might hold out for
some time against Cannon.

Not far from thence there is another no less remarkable Structure, called, la
Tour Magne, which we may reasonably conclude to have been designed for a
Mausolaeum, and built in imitation, though not after the Model, of the Egyptian
Monuments. It Is a high and solid Pyramidal Tower, without any Vault or
Concavity; and there are Steps made round it, by which one may ascend to the
Top, though not without Danger; for they are extremely worn and broken in several
places; so that I chose rather to content my self with viewing it from below,
than to run the hazard of going up. From thence I returned to the City, and
went to see an old Palace, called, The Square House, which at present is the
Dwelling House of a Private Person. It Is much longer than broad, built with
great Free-Stones, and adorned on the Outside with several fine Columns, with
their Bases and Cornices. Some think this House was formerly the Praetorium, or
Hall of Judgment; but others are of opinion that 'twas the Capitol of Nismes.

This City is full of People of Quality and Breeding; and though there is so
small a distance between it and Provence, I can assure you, that their Customs
are not only different but opposite; and instead of that Scorn and Contempt
with which Frenchmen are treated at Marseilles, here they are entertained with
all imaginable Civility, and with the highest Marks of Love and Friendship. You
would hardly give Credit to some Instances of this Nature which I could relate
to you: The Ladies take pleasure to accost a Stranger whom they find walking
alone; Their Conversation is accompanied with all the Sprightliness and
innocent Freedom that can be desired. For though they have as tender a Regard to
their Honor as any of their Sex in France; their Virtue is not barbarous and
inhumane; and provided a Man have an Inclination to Love, and be Master of a
competent Stock of Merit, joined with some external Accomplishments, he may
venture to engage with those favorable Enemies with almost certain Hopes of
Success. I have heard a hundred Relations of such amorous Adventures of
Strangers, who taking Fire at first sight, were afterward blessed with the
Possession of the Object of their Flames; and preserving their Love after
Marriage, had never any Reason to repent of the Suddenness of their Choice. For
if I might depend upon the Character I have received of the Ladies of
Languedoc, and it is almost impossible for one who has conversed with 'em to
doubt of the Truth of it; a Man cannot trust his Heart in better Hands, nor
make a more advantageous Resignation of his Liberty. They are naturally Loving,
Complaisant, and Constant even to Death; and besides they are generally of a
very pleasant Humor, and all their Actions are accompanied with a certain
Amorous Air that seems always to demand a Heart, and puts it out of the Owner's
Power to refuse it. It Is not without an extreme Displeasure that I must content
my self with relating what I heard on this Occasion, and that I cannot add my
own Experience to the Testimony of others; but I cannot pretend to the
Happiness of those who find Fortune ready to compliment 'em with a Mistress at
their first Arrival: and since the main Design of my Travels would not suffer
me to stay long in this Place, I saw my self deprived of a Pleasure of which I
had conceived so agreeable an Idea, and left with an extreme Reluctance, that
lovely Country, where the Customs and Manner of Living are so suitable to my
Genius and Inclinations. But at my Return to this Place I was somewhat
comforted by a late Instance of the Misfortunes of Love, and my Grief was in
some measure abated, when I reflected on all the Troubles and Disasters that
usually attend a Passion from which we expect nothing but the Enjoyment of
undisturbed Delight and Satisfaction.

Two Young Pilgrims betwixt the Age of Twenty and Twenty two Years, passed
through this City about three Months ago, and like the rest of those miserable
Wanderers, who rove about the World under the Protection of a Pilgrim's Staff,
were constrained to take up their Lodging at the Hospital de la Charity, where
one of 'em, not longer able to endure the Fatigues, Cold, Hunger, and perpetual
Want of every thing that is necessary for Life, sunk at last under such an
insupportable Load of Misery, and fell into a Fever, accompanied with so great
a Weakness, that the Surgeons began to despair of his Recovery. His Companion
seeing him in this Condition, was so overwhelmed with Sorrow, that the very
Servants of the Hospital, who were wont to be unconcerned Spectators of such
Accidents, were touched with Compassion: He never stirred from his sick
Friend's Bedside, gave him his Broth, served him with a wonderful Zeal and
Assiduity, and would not suffer any other to come near him. The sick Person, on
the other side, was not pleased with any thing but what came from the Hands of
his beloved Companion, and received his Services with all the Marks of
Gratitude, and of a most tender Affection. In the mean time the Sickness of the
one, and the Grief of the other were daily and equally augmented: The
disconsolate Mourner embraced his dying Friend every Moment, and bathed his
Face with Tears. At last, on the Ninth Day, the Fever was succeeded by a
violent Crisis, and the sick Pilgrim, after some Convulsions, fell into a
Swoon, and was thought to be dead. His Friend then losing all Patience, gave
himself up entirely to the Excess of his Grief, and throwing himself upon the
dear Body, with the Transports of a Despair, that melted the Hearts of all the
Assistants, burst forth into Lamentations, which discovered his secret, and
made 'em know that the Person whom they hitherto treated as a poor Pilgrim, was
a young Lady: Alas! my dear N... cried he, Thou art no more! Thy fair Eyes are
shut for ever! It Is done -- Thou have lost thy dear Life, and it is I who have
robbed thee of it. Ah! my Love! my Soul! continued he, thou have paid dear for
thy Love to me, who am the wretched occasion of thy Death in thy most blooming
Age. Ah! fatal Love! cruel Parents! unfortunate, and too-loving Daughter!
These, and suchlike Exclamations he uttered with unconceivable Despair, for
the space of a quarter of an Hour; after which, perceiving that she showed some
Signs of Life, he sent immediately for a Physician, and throwing himself at his
Feet, Sir, said he, I conjure you by all that is dear to you in the World,
refuse not your Assistance to this young Maid: She is a Person of Quality, and
deserves your utmost Care for her Preservation: Leave no Means unattempted;
spare no Cost, Sir, I beseech you, and be confident that you shall not lose
your Labor; you shall have whatever you please to demand; take my promise, and
you shall find me to be a Man of Honor. The Physician being moved with
Compassion, assured him that the sick Person should not Perish by his Neglect:
And after he had administered such Remedies as were most necessary in her
present Condition, he begged her Lover to inform him who they were, and by what
Accident they fell into such deplorable Circumstances. The young Man told him,
that he was a Native of Lorrain, and born a Gentleman, though with a very small
Fortune; That he fell in Love with this young Lady, who was of a very Rich and
Honorable Family; That She requited his Love with a Reciprocal Affection,
notwithstanding the Opposition made by her Father, and all the rest of her
Family, who designing to settle her Advantageously in the World, would never be
persuaded to accept of so poor a Son-in-Law; That, nevertheless, they kept a
Correspendence for two Years, giving and receiving all the Marks of an
unexpressible Tenderness, and confirming by mutual and repeated Oaths, their
resolution to die, rather than to be guilty of the least Infidelity; That her
Father having provided a considerable Match for her, would have forced her to
comply with his Inclinations; That She rejected the Proposal with great
Constancy, and was very rigorously treated by her Father on that Occasion; and,
That when she could not resist any longer, they resolved to make their Escape,
choosing rather to live poorly and miserably together, than to purchase the
Enjoyment of a plentiful Fortune at the rate of being for ever separated. In
pursuance of that Design, as he informed the Physician, he seized on one of her
Father's Horses, and after she had disguised her self in a Man's Habit, he
brought her to Paris, where their Money failing, they were forced to sell their
Horse; and that little Stock being also exhausted, they were reduced to the
miserable Condition in which he found 'em: 'Yet, added he, we were firmly
resolved to spend the Remainder of our Lives like wretched Vagabonds, rather
than to submit to the Tyranny of our Relations, if this fatal Sickness had not
made me alter my Resolution. I cannot longer bear, continued he, the sight of
so dismal an Object: My Constancy is overcome by her Sufferings; and if God
would vouchsafe to restore her Health, I design to carry her back to her
Father; though considering the extreme Violence of his Humor, I cannot expect a
milder Punishment than Death, for the Injury he pretends I have done him.

The Physician, who is a very Humane Person, was struck with Compassion at the
Recital of their Misfortunes, and promised to assist 'em not only as a
Physician, but as a Friend. Immediately he ordered the young Lady to be taken
out of the nasty Couch where she lay, and to be carried to a convenient
Chamber; where she was laid in a good Bed, and carefully attended till her
Recovery, which happened not long after. In the mean time, he made their
Condition known to the Bishop, who, as I told you in my last, is none of those
morose Censurers, who exclaim against the least Breach of the Rules of Decency;
and indeed, he was sensibly touched with the disast'rous Condition of these
sorrowful Lovers; and admiring the odd Effects of Love and Fortune, he looked
upon 'em as Objects of Compassion, and assured 'em, that it should not be his
Fault, if their Sufferings were not crowned with the Happiness they deserved.
They were soon sensible of the Sincerity of his Kindness; for he joined 'em
together in Marriage, Clothed 'em, and entertained 'em; till having written to
their Relations, and obtained their pardon, he sent them back to their own
Country. To keep you from suspecting the Truth of this Relation, 'twill be
sufficient to acquaint you, that it is not above Fifteen Days since that
admirable pair of Lovers departed from this Place. I am so much in Love with
the Bishop's Generosity on this Occasion, and even I think my self so extremely
obliged to him for it, that I know nothing so difficult, which I would not
undertake for his Service: And I Am confident that a Man who is capable of
performing an Action of that Nature, must infallibly be Master of all the
Cardinal Virtues.

And to convince you that he is no less remarkable for his Prudence, and the
solidity of his Judgment, I shall add one Story more before I finish my Letter.

About four or five Months ago, the Convent of the Monks of S. Anthony in this
City began to be haunted with one of those Ill-natured Spirits, who not
contenting themselves with making a frightful Noise, beat and knock down all
that come in their Way. The Monks who came out of their Chambers at Night, were
the chief Sufferers by these Disorders; for their troublesome Guest watched 'em
so narrowly, and was so exact in walking his Rounds, that 'twas impossible to
stir abroad without falling into his Clutches; and he always bestowed so
furious a Correction on those whom he caught straggling, that they durst not
venture out of Doors from six a-clock at Night to six in the Morning: And even
those who had the Wit to keep out of harms way, could not escape altogether
unmolested; for they were terrified with the Clinking of Chains, and such other
Noises that are usually ascribed to returning Spirits. There were several
Chapters held on this Occasion, and the Fathers still concluded that their
deceased Prior's Ghost was come either to impart some Matter of Importance to
'em, or to ask some Questions, and that there was none of 'em worthy to be his
Confident, or to be acquainted with the Reason why he gave 'em so many
unwelcome Visits. After some time spent in Deliberation, 'twas resolved to say
a great Number of Masses for his Soul, and to keep as close as they could for
the future, to avoid coming within the reach of his Fists. In the mean time
this wondrous Ghost was the common Subject of the public Talk, and of the
Sermons of the Monks, who showed the print of his Hand on the Wall of the
Refectory, and offered a Reward of 100 Crowns to any Man that would undertake
to lodge there, and speak to the Ghost, that they might know what he wanted.
This was a very welcome piece of News to one Blanchet, a Native of Paris, who
had so much Courage, and so little Money, that he might have been easily
persuaded to expose himself to far greater Dangers for a less considerable
Sum. Immediately he went to the Fathers, and offered 'em his Service, assuring
'em he would talk to the Spirit, The Ghost of St. Antony of Mar(...) P.(...)

and endeavor to procure 'em Satisfaction. The Monks embraced the Proposal,
and the Bargain was concluded: But the Bishop, hearing of so gross an Abuse,
sent for the Superior, and having reproached him with Weakness and
Superstition, forbid him to suffer that Man to lodge in the House, or to show
the print of the Hnad to any Person whatsoever; adding, That such a
Circumstance was very unsuitable to the Nature of a Spirit, and that he ought
rather to watch himself, than to entrust the Management of an Affair of that
Nature to another. Blanchet, according to his Promise, came in the Evening,
armed Cap-a-pee; but instead of his expected Reward, he was dismissed with a
Compliment. Some Days after, my Curiosity prompted me to desire a Sight of the
Hand; but the Monks refused me that Favor, excusing themselves upon the
Bishop's Prohibition. I applauded his Wisdom, and took the Liberty to tell 'em,
That they should not suffer themselves to be frighted into the belief of an
Apparition, till they were convinced of the Truth of it by a strict Examination
of all the Circumstances; and that they ought not to instill Superstition into
the Minds of the People, since they were naturally too much inclined to it. The
Monk to whom I addressed my Discourse, was so offended at it, that I was almost
afraid he would have pulled out my Eyes: He wondered what could move me to
offer him such Advice, and asked whether I took him, and all his Illustrious
Brethren, for a Company of Enthusiasts. My Freedom had irritated him so
extremely, that he was incapable of Reason, and therefore I left him. But the
Bishop's Conduct, and my Opinion, were sufficiently justified by an Accident
that happened some Days after. A certain Captain of a Galley coming one Night
to Sup with another Captain, whose House is very near the Convent, left his
Chairmen below, who being surpised with a violent Shower, carried the Chair
into the Court of the Monastery, and placed it under a Portico; where one of
'em sitting down in it, fell into so deep a Sleep that he perceived not when
the Gate was shut, and waked not till Midnight. His unwillingness to disturb
the Fathers at such an unseasonable Hour, made him resolve to sit in his Chair
till next Morning: And an Hour after, he saw a Person covered from Head to Foot
with a long Black Gown, who having opened the Gate of the Court with a Key,
began to walk up and down, and cough'd several times very softly. The poor
Chairman was at first struck with Terror, for he was one of those who believed
the Story of the Apparition; but being a Man of Resolution, he took Courage,
and observed the Motions of the Spirit. Not long after one of the Monks
appeared at a Window, and asked softly, Are you there? Yes, said the Ghost,
Throw down the Rope. You have staid very long, replied the Father; and crying
'st, two or three times, let fall a Ladder of Ropes, by the help of which, the
Spirit got into the Convent, and three Hours after came down again, and went
out. Next Morning the Chairman divulged the Secret; and 'twas afterward
discovered that the pretended Ghost was a Whore, whom one of the Monks brought
into the Convent every Night, having invented that Disguise to fright those who
might see his Mistress: And least any of his Companions should come out of
their Cells, and disturb his Pleasures, he dragged Chains through the Dormitory,
knocked at the Doors, and beat those whom he met so unmercifully, that their
Fears were much greater than their Curiosity. This Accident has so extremely
lessened the Reputation of those Fathers, who before this Discovery were
thought to live pretty regularly, that at present they dare not show their
Faces: And S. Anthony's Ghost is become a proverbial Expression, or softer Term
for a Whore.

I shall conclude this Letter with telling you, That there are so many
Occasions of going to Turkey to be met with in this place, that I^m fully
resolved to undertake a Voyage thither. I may perhaps find some English or
Dutch Vessels there, and without any considerable Charge satisfy my Curiosity
with the View of a Country of which I have heard so many Wonders. I Am just
going to embark on the S. Anthony of Ciotat, bound first for Genoa, and then
for L^ghorn, and commanded by Captain Marin, who designs to stay so long in the
last of these places, that I shall have an Opportunity to see part of Italy,
before we set sail for Constantinople, from whence you may expect a farther
Account of my Travels.

I am, SIR, Your etc.
Marseilles, March 1690.
LETTER IX.
SIR,
AFter I have told you that we set sail from Marseilles on the 25 th. of March,
you must not expect to hear more News of us till our Landing; for I cannot
imagine what pleasure you could take in reading, that on such a Day the South
or East Winds were contrary to us, or that we were forced to tack about to the
North or West. I Am so far from looking upon the Sea as my Element, that I never
found the least Inclination to be acquainted with it. Besides, Sir, I must
confess I Am naturally apt to judge of others by my self; and therefore when I
remember how often I have skip'd over such Passages in the Relations of
Travelers, I cannot forbear concluding that you would be as little pleased
with so dull an Entertainment. Since then you will have the Advantage of
passing from one Port to another, without feeling the Inconveniences of bad
Weather, or being troubled with the Noisy Hurry of the Mariners, I hope you
will be the more easily persuaded to stop a while with me at the Isles of If,
where we spent a whole Day at Anchor, after we came out of the Port of
Marseilles.

The Isles of If are three small Islands about three Miles distant from
Marseilles, forming a very safe Harbor against any sorts of Wind, which is
defended by two strong Castles, where the King keeps a Garrison. These Islands
are of great Importance to secure the Trade of Marseilles; for without the
Advantage of their Neighborhood, that City would be a kind of Prison, since
'twou'd be impossible for any Vessels to go out of the Port, without exposing
themselves to the Insults of their Enemies: And besides, the Storms that are so
frequent in the Mediterranean, would drive many Ships upon the Shore, if they
had not the Convenience of standing into this Harbor. But notwithstanding the
Advantageous Situation of these Islands, and the great Importance of the
Harbor for the Security of Trade, they were mortgaged by one of our Kings to
the Duke of Florence, for six hundred thousand Crowns. Whilst the Princes of
that Family enjoyed the possession of this Post, the Spaniards left no means
unessay'd to make himself Master of it; but they were either resolved to keep
it in their own Power, or afraid to incur the Anger of the French, since it is
certain that they rejected all the Proposals that were made to 'em upon this
Occasion. These Islands were afterward reunited to the Crown, by the Marriage
of Mary de Medicis with Henry the Fourth. And the Success of that Negotiation
was in a great measure owing to the Marquess de Pile, who was then Governor of
the Place; for he made Duke Francis sensible, that 'twas better to comply with
the Desires of that Monarch, than to engage himself in a War with so potent an
Enemy. In consideration of so acceptable a piece of Service, the Marquess was
continued in his former Post, and the Reversion of his Office was bestowed on
his Son, who died there, leaving two Sons, the elder of whom, who enjoys his
Grandfather's Title, succeeded in the Government of these Islands; and the
younger, called the Count de Forville, was made Governor Viguier of
Marseilles, and Captain of one of the King's Galleys; the yearly Revenue of
these two Places amounting to 20000 Livres.

To make amends for the less favorable part of the Character I gave you of the
Natives of Prov^nce, I shall take this Occasion to acquaint you with some of
their better Qualities: For I love to do Justice to all Men; and besides, I
would willingly make my Peace with the Inhabitants, before I leave their
Country: They are very good Mariners, and are famous over all Europe for their
Industry and Diligence: Nor are they less remarkable for their Courage and
Bravery; for they are so little capable of Fear, that they would reckon it a
piece of Cowardice to turn their Backs to ten times their Number of Enemies.
Not very long ago, our Captain's Uncle, called Blaise Marin, in a Ship of Forty
Guns, maintained a Fight for three Days together, during a Calm, against five
Tripolin Men of War, with so much Resolution and Success, that they were forced
at last to leave him. And a small Bark of thirty Men, was about a Year ago
snatched out of the very Jaws of the Algerines, by the Prudence and Bravery of
the Pilot. She was chased by one of the largest of the Enemy's Ships, in which
there were four hundred Men, till seeing no possibility of escaping, that
Handful of Men resolved to board the Ship that pursued 'em, without lowering
their Sails, or grappling the Vessels together: And the Pilot leaping on board
the Enemy's Ship, with his Curtelas in his Hand, cut the Rope that sustained
their Main-Sail, which they could not hoise again in above three Hours. In the
mean time the Pilot jumped into his own Bark, and Crying, Courage, my Boys,
we are saved, steered away from the Enemy, who could never afterward come up
with him. The Merchants at his Return, presented him with a Gold Medal; nor
could they in Justice do less Honor to so rare a Merit. But they will not be
so kind to a Captain, called Curet, who had the Misfortune to be taken by the
Galleys of Naples about three Months ago: For though he had only 24 Guns mounted,
and 100 Men on board, to resist seven Galleys that attacked him; his Countrymen
exclaim against him as the basest of Cowards; and I know not whether 'twill
ever be safe for him to show his Face at Marseilles. But after all, this seems
to be a Rodomontade, rather than an effect of true Courage; since it must be
acknowledged that seven Galleys are a very unequal Match for the strongest
Merchant-Ship in the World.

Three Days after our departure from If, we arrived at Genoa, which you know is
usually called Genoa the Proud, though in my Opinion it cannot pretend the least
Right to that Title: It Is the Capital City of Liguria, and had its Name from
Janus the first, King of Italy; or according to others, from double-fac'd
Janus. Some make this Janus King of the Toians; and others deduce the Etymology
of the Word from Janua, a Gate, or Door; because Genoa is as it were the Gate
of Italy. Authors are generally much divided concerning the true Name of this
City: Luitprand, Tircin, and some others, call it Janua; Titus Livius, Ptolomy,
and Strabo, give it the Name of Genua; and the latter Opinion seems to be
better grounded than the former, especially since it is confirmed by a small
Copper-Plate, which is to be seen in this Place, and was found Ann. 1507. by a
Peasant, as he was Tilling the Ground. The Inscription is engraved in very
small, but pretty distinct, Roman Characters; and in it the Genoese are called
Genuates.

The time of its Foundation is unknown, at least I never had the Fortune to
meet with a satisfactory Account of it in any Author, either Ancient or Modern.
It Is seated at the bottom of a little Gulf, on the Declivity, and at the Foot
of a Hill, seeming to consist of several Stories. The Port lies very open
toward the Sea, and therefore cannot afford safe Anchorage for Ships. The City
contains five and thirty Parishes; the Streets are uneven, and very narrow,
though the Houses are extremely high. In the middle of the Public Place, there
is a Marble Statue of an unusual bigness, representing Andrew Doria, the
Deliverer of the Republic, trampling on three Turks Heads, in Memory of the
signal Victories he obtained over these Infidels. The Palaces of Genoa are very
much admired; and it must be acknowledged that some of 'em are very fine
Structures; but the principal Beauty of those few that deserve that Title,
consists in the Marble of which they are built.

Marble is no Rarity in this Country; all the Churches are adorned with it, as
well as the Palace Royal, where his Serenity keeps his Residence: But after
all, you must not imagine that the Streets are paved with it. Since we staid
but two Days in the City, I could not find an Opportunity to see the Inside of
any of the Palaces, and therefore I cannot satisfy your Curiosity with a
Description of 'em. You are so well acquainted with the nature of the
Government, that 'twou'd be needless to give you any farther Account of it;
only I cannot forbear taking notice of the extreme Decrease of the Power and
Grandeur of this Republic since those glorious Days, when they extended their
Conquests to the Tanais, and made themselves Masters of all the Coasts of Asia,
and the Islands of Cyprus, Scio, Lesbos, etc. They still retain a little
Island, with the Title of a Kingdom, and are extremely proud of it, though, in my
Opinion, without any reason. The Habits of the Nobles resemble those of the
Counselors in France; they dare not wear Gold or Silver when they come abroad;
but in their Houses they have very rich Vests, and costly Night-Gowns.

Since the late Bombardment of the City, they cannot endure those of our
Nation. They showed me a Convent of Nuns, into which there fell not one Bomb,
though there were above a hundred shot at it; and told me, that there was a Hand
seen in the Air, which diverted their Course, and threw 'em another way. The
Jews, who are detested by all the World, were in great Favor here during those
terrible Disorders, because they found out a way to quench the Bombs with Ox
Hides: Yet this is not a new Invention; for the same was practiced long before
by the Inhabitants of Groningen, when they were besieged by the Bishop of
Munster in 1672: And since that time the Algerines made use of the same Secret;
besides the covering of their Streets with Sand. Nor is there any thing
wonderful in the Success of this Stratagem; for one may easily and infallibly
smother a Bomb if he can come in time to stop the Hole before the Fusee be
spent. At the Assault of the Horn-Work at Philipsburg, I saw a Soldier take the
same way to prevent the Effect of the Grenades, which the Germans threw among
us: For he gathered 'em as they fell, and stopping the Touchhole with his
Hand, either smothered 'em immediately, or threw 'em back upon the Enemies. But
though this may be easily done, it cannot be attempted without Danger; for the
Fusee is always made as short as possible; and if the Fire should happen to
reach the Powder when the Man throws himself upon the Bomb, the shutting out of
the Air would only (...) it burst the sooner.

But though the shortness of our stay at Genoa would not permit me to gratify
your Curiosity with an Account of the Beauties and Rarities of that City; I
confess I cannot pretend the same Excuse for declining to undertake the
Description of Rome, Florence, and the place where I am at present. I have
spent two whole Months in examining and admiring that infinite Number of
Wonders that seem to have been brought from all the parts of the World, and
shut up in this Country, as in a vast Repository. I have even wallow'd in
Delight, and been kept in a continual Rapture with the amazing View of so many
noble Structures, august Monuments of Antiquity, inestimable Libraries,
Statues, Pictures, Works of Marble and Porphyrie, and a Thousand other
Curiosities, of which there is a prodigious and even incredible Abundance in
these places. I have seen all these magnificent Rarities; I have viewed 'em
with all imaginable Pleasure and Attention, and my Mind is still full of their
agreeable Idea's; but though I have not forgot what I promised you, neither the
Consideration of your Satisfaction, nor of my own Engagement, can make me
willing to keep my Promise with respect to Italy. You must even give me leave
to claim the Privilege of a Norman once in my Life; and you will easily
dispense with the Account you expected from me, if you peruse the Relations of
so many Travelers, who have visited this lovely Country from one end to the
other, especially the late Work of Monsieur Misson: For what can be added to so
exact a Description? Is there any Corner in Italy, that has escaped his
inquisitive Curiosity, or any thing remarkable in it which he has not
illustrated with Learned and Judicious Reflections? He is a complete Traveller;
he has forgot nothing that deserves to be taken notice of, and has so entirely
exhausted his Subject, that there is nothing left for future Observers. And
therefore, instead of describing Italy, I shall only desire you to consult his
Book, by the Assistance of which, you may make one of the pleasantest Voyages
in the World without going out of your Closet. But since you will perhaps
expect that I should at least add something to convince you that I have seen
these celebrated Places, I shall adventure to tell you, that among so many
admirable Rarities that filled me with Wonder and Amazement, there is nothing,
in my Opinion, more extraordinary and surprising than the Pomp and Magnificence
of the Court of Rome. I know not whether this Remark will make amends for my
Silence in other Respects: You Will perhaps tell me, that it is a stale and
trivial Observation: However, you must give me leave to assure you, that it is
not an easy Task to represent all its Wonders; and I must confess, that
hitherto I had never any Idea of it, that did not come short of the Truth. The
Court of Rome is no less Numerous and Magnificent than that of France; and
perhaps I might venture to say, that the latter is exceeded by the former.
Every Cardinal is a Prince, who receives daily all the Marks of Honor and
Respect from a Thousand Prelates, and other Ecclesiastics, that look upon him
as their Sovereign, and place their whole Felicity in his Favor. Nothing is
wanting to complete the Splendour of their Dignity: Magnificent Palaces, rich
Furnitures, delicious Tables, Pleasure-Houses, Gardens, Grotto's, Fountains,
numerous Trains of Servants, and, to crown all, the Conversation and Society of
the handsomest Ladies in Europe; for you must not imagine that their Character
confines 'em to all the Austerities of a Monastic Life; and, excepting only
some Gray-Bearded Dotards, that pretend to the Popedom, the rest are as Gay and
Amorous as any young French Prince. 'Twou'd be needless to apply this Character
particularly to all the Members of the Sacred College; and therefore I shall
content my self with assuring you, that none deserves it more justly than the
Cardinal Patron, who has acquired so Universal a Reputation of an accomplished
Gallant, that it is generally reckoned the most effectual way to obtain a Favor
of him, to make use of the Intercession of a Lady; and even he scruples not to
declare, that he has not the Force to refuse any thing to a fair Petitioner.

Those who love Pleasure and Luxury, cannot desire a more favorable Treatment
than they meet with under the present Pontificate. The Holy Father encourages
'em by his own Example; his Table and Furniture are Magnificent, and his
Nephews resemble so many Sovereigns. The Prince Mark is attended with a Train
of forty Lacqueys, all clad in a Livery of Cloth of Gold, and his Stable is
furnished with sixty of the finest Horses in Rome; though all this is a manifest
Violation of the Edicts that were published to regulate the Affairs of the
Nepotism. It Is true, the People grumble extremely to see their Substance
exhausted, and the very Blood drained out of their Bodies, to maintain the
extravagant Vanity of those Upstart Favorites, who about a Year ago were as
poor as themselves. But among so many Marks of Splendor, there is nothing more
surprising, than the Magnificent Gondola's, built by the Pope's Orders, which
are the first that ever graced the Tiber. His Holiness goes thither very often
to take the Air, accompanied with those that have the greatest Share in his
Favor; and it is thought he designs to bring the Venetian Fresco into Fashion
at Rome, which in my Opinion is a Project that may be easily accomplished,
since the Roman Ladies love to be seen, as well as the rest of the Fair Sex.

In the mean time the Luxury and Vanity of the present Pope, gives occasion to
several well-dispos'd Persons, to make Comparisons between his Conduct, and
that of his Predecessor, which you may reasonably conclude are not in the
least Advantageous to his Holiness: For there is certainly a very remarkable
Difference between these two Pontiffs: He who at present fills the Chair, makes
it his only business to gratify his Inclination to Pleasure, and to Aggrandize
his Family; whereas the good Pope Innocent applied himself only to the
performance of the Duties of his Office, reforming the Abuses that had crept
into Rome, visiting the Hospitals, and assisting the Poor. And besides, he left
no Means unessay'd, to restore Peace to Christendom: And when an unjust Power
endeavored to extend its Usurpations to the Church it self, we had the
Pleasure to see that generous Prelate oppose the incroaching Tyranny, with a
Resolution and Piety worthy of a Common Father. His Private Life, and Domestic
Occupations, were no less Edifying: He was easy of Access to all Men, and
hearkened favorably to the Poor when they came to represent their Grievances
to him, or to beg his Assistance. His external Deportment was very simple, and
so free from the least Appearance of Worldly Pomp, that he might be called the
Model of Humility. I Am assured by several Persons of unquestioned Credit, that
the Expense of his Table was fixed at One Shilling.
Two Julio's a Day, and that the whole Charge of his Provisions did not exceed
Fifty Crowns a Year. I cannot without Astonishment reflect on the admirable
Sobriety of a Person who might be justly ranked among the most Potent Princes
in the World; and am not at all surpised that most Persons here esteem him a
Saint. It Is said that Miracles are wrought at his Tomb; and if that Report
continue a while longer, he will certainly be the only Object of the People's
Devotion. I know not whether the Zeal of his Adorers may not one Day procure
the deceased Pope a place among the Canonized Saints: But considering the
Reputation of his Successor, I may venture to assure you, that he will never
be enrolled among that Number.

Under this Pontificat the Curtezans have resumed their expiring Courage, and
begin to appear with the same Haughtiness and Insolency that seemed to be in
some Measure curbed under the Government of Innocent XI. That Jovial Society,
which may be reckoned a Fourth Order in the State, and no less considerable
than any of the rest, will, in all probability, maintain its Privileges and
Liberties as long as the Supreme Power is lodged in the Clergy, who will never
deprive themselves of so necessary a Diversion. And truly, I know not how so
many young Persons that are engaged in a Vow which they are not able to
perform, could subsist, without the comfortable Assistance of those
Communicative Ladies. Honest Matrons are daily affronted by those domineering
Strumpets, whose Insolence they must suffer patiently, since 'twou'd be in vain
to contend with the Mistresses of their Masters. I Am not in the least surpised
at their Haughtiness and Pride; but I confess I could never have believed,
without the Testimony of my own Eyes, that they had so much Liberty, and so
little Shame. We had no sooner drop^d Anchor before Leghorn, but we were
immediately boarded by a Dozen of these Female Pirates, who, in spite of the
Captain, carried off an equal Number of Prizes; for Mariners look upon this
Port as a priviledg'd Place, where they may ramble without control. It Is true,
they find Pleasure is not a cheap Commodity in this place; for these Ladies are
not so Hospitable as to entertain Travelers Gratis, and they usually set a
very high price on their Favors, especially at Rome, which may be called the
Center of Whores. I will not pretend to warrant the Truth of their Opinion, who
say, That at Rome Whores may sue a Man for their Hire: But I can assure you,
that they may and do demand the Assistance of the Corte, or Watch, who have
Orders to protect 'em, and see 'em paid, according to the Quality of the
Person. The Corte is a Band of Sbirri's, who walk the Rounds every Night, to
prevent Disorders; but their Authority is so small, and the care they take to
suppress Abuses so ineffectual, that I know not whether the City receives any
Benefit by 'em: For since they are not permitted to Fire at any Person, it is
easy for any Man that has the Advantage of a Nimble Pair of Heels, to avoid
falling into their Clutches; and there are some roaring Hectors, who not only
make Head against 'em, but even keep 'em in Awe. I might reckon up a Thousand
Instances of such insolent Villainies; but I shall content my self with
mentioning one that happened very lately: The City was never plagued with a
more desperate Villain than a certain Neapolitan Lord, called, The Prince de la
Matrice, who was Ringleader of Fifty Bandits that were fit Companions for such
a Master: He and his Gang made all the Sbirri's in Rome quake, and continued
their Insolences above a Year, till at last the Pope having issued out an Order
to take him alive or dead, he took Sanctuary in a Church, where he Capitulated
with his Holiness, and was permitted to depart with Bag and Baggage, he and all
his Companions. It Is certainly a very great Abuse, that Churches should serve
as places of Retreat for Villains; and so long as these Privileges remain, the
abolishing of the Franchises will never put a Stop to the reigning Disorders.
But, which is still more intolerable, the Churches are not only so many
Sanctuaries to secure Malefactors from Punishment, but the Theaters where they
act their Villainies. The other Day, when the People were met to hear Vesper's
at the Church of S. Lewis, and were busy at their Devotion, Fifteen or Twenty
Persons cried out on a sudden, Fly, fly, the Church is falling; and immediately
run toward the Door, with so many signs of Fear, that the People were almost
persuaded that the Church was tumbling about their Ears. And since on such
Occasions it is natural for a Man to think of saving himself, before he consider
the greatness or probability of the Danger, the People in the Church followed
those whom they saw running out, with so much haste and confusion, that several
Persons were trodden under Foot, and so hurt that they were forced to keep
their Beds. In the mean time the Rogues were not idle Spectatours of the Fright
they had occasioned; and some began to miss their Purses, and others their
Silver-hilted Swords, as soon as the Tumult was appeased, and the Cheat
discovered.

During my abode at Rome, I had the fortune to meet with the same Priest, who,
as I told you in one of my preceding Letters, was imprisoned at Mascon on
suspicion of Witchcraft: He makes his Court to Cardinal Chigi, whom he
solicites very earnestly, and expects to obtain a Benefice from him; but he is
certainly an incorrigible Fool, as you may perceive by the Account he gave me
of himself. He assured me, that he entertained a most intimate Fellowship and
Correspondence with certain imaginary Inhabitants of the Air, by whose
Assistance he pretends that one may easily surmount all Difficulties, and would
have persuaded me, that these Spirits opened the Doors of the Prison when he
was in danger of being condemned as a Sorcerer. I was so surpised at the
Novelty and Oddness of his Opinion, that I resolved to discourse seriously with
him about it, and asked him how he came acquainted with that Airy People, and
why they would not discover themselves to the rest of Mankind. He replied, that
they communicated their Favors only to those who are willing to hearken to
'em, and to enter into a Society with 'em; adding, that they have many
Correspondents in the World who live unknown, and conceal themselves with all
possible Care, to avoid the Fate of so many Honest Persons, that have been
burnt alive for Witchcraft in several places of the Kingdom. He denied
positively that there were any Witches, saying, That God was too Just and Good
to give so much Power to the Devil, who, according to his Opinion, lies bound
in Hell, from whence he shall never be released. But I soon perceived that
there was as much Confusion in his Brain as in his Discourse, and that he was a
mere Fantastical Enthusiast.

I know not what Credit ye will give to this Man's Relation concerning his
imaginary Acquaintances in the Air; but you may firmly believe the Story with
which I am going to conclude my Letter, since I was an Eyewitness of all that
passed. A certain Florentine Soldier in this City, without pretending to be
invulnerable, undertook for a Wager of a Crown to stand as a Mark till four
Bullets were successively shot at him, and performed his Undertaking without
receiving the least hurt, though the Man who discharged the Gun stood but fifty
Paces from him, and could neither be suspected of Collusion, nor want of Skill,
since all the four Bullets pierced the Door against which the Florentin stood.
You will doubtless look upon this as a very odd and surprising Accident: I was
so amazed at it, that I know not whether I could have believed it if I had not
seen it: Yet I can assure you, that the Florentin is no Magician, and that his
Secret only consists in shifting his place as soon as he perceives the flashing
of the Powder: And the Account he gave me of the easiness of his Undertaking,
has considerably lessened my Surprizal at the Success of it: However, I would
not for 10000 Pistols try the Experiment any otherwise than by shooting a
Bullet into the Sea. The Soldier found out this way to give me some
Satisfaction; and I observed that the Bullet remained so long in the Air, that
a Man might easily have avoided it.

Our Captain having taken in all his Lading, expects only a fair Wind; and by
good fortune, the third part of the Cargo belongs to Malta; so that I shall
have the pleasure of spending at the least Fifteen Days in that celebrated
Island.

I am, SIR, Your etc.
Leghorn, May 1690.
LETTER X.
SIR,
Though I promised in my last to excuse you from sharing with us in the
Inconveniences of the Sea, and to bring you from France to Turkey, without
meeting with one Storm; I cannot forbear giving you account of one that
overtook us in the height of Sardinia. And I have even the confidence to think
that you will not complain of my breach of Promise, since we had all the
Trouble, and you will only have the Pleasure; if there be any truth in the
common Observation, That Men usually take delight in hearing a Relation of
distant Misfortunes.

The pleasure of our Voyage was not disturbed for the first two Days, though we
made no great Progress; but on the Third, about seven in the Morning, there
arose on the sudden a most furious North-East Wind, which burst our Sails as if
they had been made of Paper; and between the Wind on one side, and the
South-West Surges on the other, our Ship was so violently tossed, that our
Mariners durst not stir from the Sides of the Ship, for fear of being washed
off by the Waves. Never was there any Object more capable of striking Terror
into the Spectatour; never any Noise more frightful and amazing than that which
was occasioned by the tumbling of the Casks and Boxes, the Wind, Thunder, and
Sea, the cracking of the Ship, and the howling of some Women that were on
board. A horrid Gloom turned the Day into Night, and was succeeded by a Flash
of Lightning that covered our Ship for above a Minute, and was accompanied with
a terrible and stupefying Crack. I know not what we did in the mean time, nor
was there one among my Fellow-Passengers that could inform me what was done in
that dreadful Minute: For we were all so stunned, that there were hardly any
Signs of Life left in us. All the Account I can give you is, that when we
recovered our senses, we perceived that the Lightning had left a thick and
black Smoke, accompanied with a sulphurous and noisome Stench, that would have
kill^d us if it had lasted a quarter of an Hour; but it was dissipated in a
Moment. We found also that we were removed from the places where we were when
the Lightning fell; which Change, doubtless, proceeded from the violent Motion
and Agitation of the Ship. Among the rest, one of the Ship-Boys who lay
sculking in the Fore-Castle, was thrown upon the Hatches in the other end of
the Ship, and so bruised, and black with Contusions, (though I may say more
properly, that there was only one Contusion, which covered his whole Body) that
we have still reason to doubt of his Recovery. The Mariners concluded that the
Devil was the Author of all these Disorders, and that there was some Person in
the Company under a Sentence of Excommunication: For (you know) extraordinary
Accidents are usually esteemed Miracles by the superstitious Vulgar. It Is true,
the throwing of the Boy so far may at the first View seem to be above the Power
of Nature; but an attentive Considerer will not be much surpised at this
Effect of the Tempest, since this is not the first time that a Hurricane has
snatched up Men, and even whole Ships. This puts me in mind of a Story almost
of the same Nature, which I heard at Guernsey, a little Island, subject to the
Crown of England. It happened one Day, that during a violent Storm, a Flash of
Lightning set fire to the Powder in the Castle, and blew it up, with the whole
Garrison. Only Ten or Twelve Persons escaped, among whom the Governor had the
good fortune to be preserved in a very singular manner: They assured me that he
was carried through the Air in his Bed, and laid down upon the Castle Wall, the
Foot of which is bathed by the Sea; and that not knowing how to get down,
because the Wall was equally steep on both sides, he remained there till the
Weather began to grow calm, and then made signs to the People of the Town, who
came to his Assistance.

This furious Tempest was succeeded by pretty fair Weather, which we enjoyed
during the rest of our Voyage to Malta, where we arrived six Days after, and in
nine Days from Leghorn; so that we made above a hundred Miles a Day, for the
distance betwixt these two Places amounts to about a Thousand Miles. We had no
reason to complain of the slowness of our Passage, tho 'we might have performed
the Voyage much sooner if the Wind had been constantly favorable: For the
Captain assured me, that the Great Master of Malta, having sent an express to
Aix in Provence, the Ship on which the Messenger embarked, met with so strong
an Easterly Wind, that she was carried nine hundred Miles in three Days, and
arrived at the Port of Marseilles, where finding another Ship ready to set sail
for Malta, he took Post for Aix, and having dispatched his Business, returned
the same Night to Marseilles, where he embarked in that Vessel, which
immediately set sail with a most favorable Westerly Gale, and in three Days
arrived at Malta: So that in Seven Days he performed a Voyage of eighteen
hundred Miles, traveled ten Leagues by Land, and dispatched his Affairs. I
must confess few Travelers are so fortunate; but that which happens rarely may
happen sometimes.

This Island was of old called Melita; and its present Name is an Abbreviation
or Corruption of the former: It lies in the thirty fourth Degree of North
Latitude, being seventy Miles in compass, twenty five long, and ten broad.
Under the Reign of Augustus, and long before, 'twas governed by its own Kings,
from whom it was taken by the Saracens, who afterward lost it to the
Christians. In the Year 1530, Charles V. erected it into a Sovereignty, which
he bestowed on the Knights of S. John, who eight Years before were driven out
of Rhodes by the Turks, and had till then ^rov'd as Pirates upon the Sea. The
Conditions of the Donation were, That the Nomination of the Bishop should
belong to him; That the Knights should present him Yearly with a Falcon, as a
Mark of Homage; and that they should not receive into their Ports any Ships or
Vessels at Enmity with the Crown of Spain, which they punctually observe to
this Day. But the Spaniard has no reason to boast of this Custom as a peculiar
Mark of Honor or Acknowledgment, since his Ships meet with the same Treatment
with those of other Princes, and are never admitted into the Harbors of this
Island. I Am so loath to send you an imperfect Account of this Place, that I
cannot forbear taking notice of the famous Siege which it suffered Ann. 1565.
though I cannot reasonably suppose you to be ignorant of a Transaction that made
so great a Noise in the World. Sultan Solomon, resolving to extirpate the whole
Order, sent a formidable Army against 'em, under the command of Sinan Bassa,
who possessed himself of the Island, burnt the Villages, made the Inhabitants
Slaves, and destroyed the whole Country with Fire and Sword. But the Castle of
S. Angelo put a Stop to his Fury, and resisted all his Attacks, till upon the
News of the approach of the powerful Aids sent by the Christian Princes, he was
forced to make a disorderly Retreat, leaving two great pieces of Cannon, one of
which lies at the bottom of the Water in the Port; and the other under the
Baraque of Italy, commonly call d, The great Basilisk, and carrying 120 pound
Ball. The next Year the Great Master, de la Valette, laid the Foundation of the
New City, and called it by his own Name. I may venture to say, without an
Hyperbole, that this is the strongest City in the World: I never saw so many,
nor better contrived Works; and besides, the Strength of the Place is very
considerably augmented by the Advantages of its Situation; for all the
Half-Moons and Bastions are cut out of the Rock, as well as the Counterscarp
that defends 'em; and the Ditches, which in some places are sixty Foot deep,
and proportionably broad.

The Castle of S. Angelo is in the Old City, which is separated from the other
by a double Port, consisting of two Harbors, divided by a Neck of Land, which
have but one Mouth. At the end of this Isthmus stands the Castle of S. Elm,
defending the Entry of both Ports, in one of which the Ships that arrive are
obliged to perform their Quarantain, having the convenience of a little Island,
which serves as a Lazaretto for the Passengers and their Goods. On the other
side is the great Harbor, frequented by those who are permitted to converse
with the Inhabitants. Both these Harbors are safe and convenient; but the
Entry is extremely dangerous, by reason of the Rocks that lie hid under the
Water.

The New City, called Valette, is seated partly on the Top, and partly on the
Declivity of a rising Ground, descending to the Shore. The Streets are
straight, running in parallel Lines both through the Length and Breadth of the
City, and are so contriv^d, that the Ascent is only discernable in four or
five, the rest being exactly level. The Houses are generally fair, built after
the Italian Fashion, with Platforms on the Top; so that the Sketch of the New
City resembles perfectly a Rectilinear Amphitheatre. The Old City is not so
beautiful, and is at present only inhabited by the Common People; yet it is the
Seat of the Bishop and his Chapter, which may vie with any Society of that
Nature in Italy, being composed of four and twenty Canons, who wear the
Episcopal Habit, and have each a Thousand Crowns a Year.

There is but one public Place or Square in the City Valette, which is
considerable for its Beauty, adorned with a Fountain in the middle, the Water
of which falling into a Basket of Stone so artificially cut, that it seems to
be transparent, makes one of the pleasantest Cascades in the World. The Front
of the Great Master's Palace makes one entire side of the Square. There is
nothing admirable either in the Inside or Outside of this Structure; it is of a
Square Figure, and separated from the Neighboring Buildings by four Streets.
It Is divided into the Winter and Summer Apartments: The first, which is the
most ancient and least beautiful, is painted throughout with the
Representations of Victories obtained over the Turks, and particularly the
raising of the Siege of Malta, accompanied with Explanatory Inscriptions. The
Summer Apartment was built by the late Great Master, Vignacourt, who beautify^d
Malta with so many Ornaments, and would have certainly made this a very
Magnificent Palace, if Death had not interrupted his Designs. That which is
chiefly remarkable in it is the Hall of Arms, where there are 30000 Muskets, as
many Bandaliers, 10000 Cuirasses and Helmets, with a proportionable Number of
Swords, Pikes, Pistols, and Scimitars, all ranked in the finest Order
imaginable. There is an incredible number of cast Pieces of Cannon in this
City; for though I never reckoned 'em my self, I Am assured by Persons of
unquestioned Credit, that there are 1060, and all of a considerable bigness.

The Churches of Malta are incomparably beautiful, the Italian Neatness reigns
throughout, and they are every where adorned with Painting and Gilding. The
principal Church is dedicated to S. John Baptist, the Patron of the Order: The
Prospect of it is not very pleasant; but to make amends for the Defects of the
Outside, I never saw any thing that could with Justice be compared to the
Richness and Beauty of the Inside. It Is as light as an open Field, and all its
Ornaments appear with so unclouded a Luster, and so charm the Eye of the
Spectatour, that I believe never any Man came out of it without Reluctance.
It Is paved throughout with large pieces of black and white Marble: The Walls
and Columns are lined to the very Cornices, with curious Wainscotting, which
hardly obstructs the Sight; and the Life of S. John is painted in Fresco, on
the Vault, by the Hand of the Chevalier Mathias. But the finest Work of that
Nature in the Church is the beheading of the Holy Baptist, represented in a
Chapel of the same Name, by the Hand of Michael Angelo; this Picture was
presented to the Order by one of the Dukes of Florence, and may be reckoned a
very considerable Complement, since the Princes of that Family are seldom wont
to part with such rare and beautiful Pieces.

The many and magnificent Epitaphs of the Great Masters, and Grand Crosses,
with their Scutcheons, are none of the least remarkable Ornaments of this
Church; and among the rest, the Great Master Vignacourt's Epitaph is extremely
beautiful.

Every one of the Seven Languages has a peculiar Chapel in this Church, which
they strive to adorn in Emulation of one another. There is not a Church in the
World where Vessels of Gold and Silver are more common than in this. Among
other curious Works, there are two Angels of the last of these Metals, as big
as the Life: But the most finished Piece is a golden Sun of Filagram-Work, to
receive the Holy Sacrament, of which the Workmanship alone cost 2000 Crowns.
The Treasury is so full of Relics, that 'twou'd be an endless Labor to
describe ^em; and therefore I shall only tell you, that the finest Piece I saw
in it is the Bishop's Mitre, set all over with the richest Jewels.

The Great Altar in the Nave is esteemed one of the most magnificent Works of
that Nature in Europe: It stands by it self, after the Modern Fashion, like
that of Strasburg, which it exceeds both in Largeness and Richness. I saw the
Grand Prior of the Order say Mass here in Ceremony, and after the same manner
as the Pope does at Rome. His Habit is not different from that of a Bishop; but
he is served by eight Deacons and Subdeacons, with a great deal of State and
Ceremony. The place where he sits while the Epistles and Gospels are read, is
on the Right Hand as you go to the Altar, and directly opposite to the Great
Master, who sits in an armed Chair on the Lefthand, unde a Canopy, two Pages
standing behind to serve him. The Grand Crosses are seated in the middle of the
Nave, on a double Row of Benches, with Rails or Backs, which enclose the place.
The Bailiffs and Commanders are placed on the Seats behind; and the rest of the
Knights sit either in the Chapels belonging to their Language, or in any other
part of the Church. To return to their manner of Officiating; I observed two
Ceremonies I had never seen before, since they are Marks of Respect that are
only showed to the Pope: For there are two Clerks who fan the Grand Prior's
Head and Face all the while he says Mass, with two large Fans of Ostridge
Feathers; and after he has done, he sits down in his Chair, and the same Clerks
coming in their Surplices, undress him from Head to Foot, pulling off even his
Slippers. The Prior is one of the most considerable Officers of the Order, and
is ranked before the Grand Crosses, and immediately after the Bishop and Great
Master, who only preceed him, though he is not chosen out of the Classis of Noble
Knights. The present Possessour of this Dignity is a Native of Aix in Provence,
and is a Person of Merit, though of mean Birth.

Since I have insensibly entered upon this Subject, I shall take this occasion
to acquaint you with the various Degrees and Dignities of these Knights; but
you must only expect a general Idea of the Order, and I believe you desire no
more.

The usual Title of these Knights is of no older date than their Settlement in
this Island; for according to their Institution they ought to be called Knights
of S. John of Jerusalem. The Design of the Foundation was for Hospitality, and
for the Relief and Assistance of the poor Pilgrims who came from all the parts
of the World to visit the Holy Places. At first the Order was composed of
Persons of mean Rank or Quality, living under a Superior, called Gerard, a
Frenchman by birth, who had built a Hospital in the same Place where they
pretend Zacharias used to perform his Devotions, and dedicated it to S. John
Baptist. This Gerard, who may be reckoned the Founder of the Order, was a Man
of a very Holy Life, and spent his time in doing all the Offices of
Hospitality, according to his Profession. It Is said, that he carried Bread
every Night to the Christian Army, when Jerusalem was besieged by Godfrey of
Bouillon; and that being suspected, he was narrowly observed, and at last
surpised in the very act. Immediately he was seized, and carried before the
Governor, with a Burden of Loaves, which were miraculously changed into
Stones when his Accusers began to take 'em out of the Bag; so that he was fully
acquitted.

Sometime after, Godfrey having taken the Town, was not unmindful of his
Benefactour; he caress^d him, and wrote in his Favor to Pope Paschal II. who
confirmed him and his Religious Company in the Exercise of their Pious
Occupations, by a Bu^ I granted for that purpose, and dated October. 19. 1113,
ordaining that after Gerard's Death, the Rectors should be elected by the
Members of the Society. By Virtue of this Bull, they made choice of one Roger
for their second Rector, whom they afterward honored with the Title of
Master: 'I was he who contrived and establish d the Statutes of the Order, and
made his Society take up Arms against the Infidels: He order d em to wear black
Mantles of Camels Skin, in imitation of S. John^s Habit in the Wilderness; to
which he added a white Cross with eight Points, to denote the Eight Beatitudes.
This Habit is clos d at the Neck, and has two Sleeves ending in a Point, which
are thrown backwards, that the Knights may more conveniently serve and assist
sick Persons. It Is not much different from that with which Esculap^us is
clothed, in Ancient Paintings. This Institution was confirm d by the Popes,
Gelasius, Calixtus II. and Honorius II. and afterward, Ann. 1130. by Innocent
II. who gave 'em for Arms, Gules, a Cross Argent. Under Pope Honorius the
Pl^beian Knights were not only separated from the Nobles, but almost excluded
out of the Order, since they were only suffered to remain in it in the Quality
of Chaplains or Servants. This is as properly a Religious Order as that of the
Carmelites, or Augustine Friars; and when the Great Master writes to any of the
Knights, he directs his Letters thus; For our Dear and Well-beloved, the
Religious Brother N... Knight of the Order of S. John. And they are qualify d
with the same Title in all Public Writings at Malta.

On the Day of their Profession, they must brandish a Sword thrice, as it were
to defy the Enemies of the Name of Christ: Afterward they take the Vows of
Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience. In performance of the First, they live in the
Inns of their respective Languages, enjoying all things in Common, and the
Order inherits their Estates: The Second hinders 'em from Marrying; and the
Third obliges 'em to come to Malta as often as their Appearance is required by
the Great Master, and to obey all his Orders by Virtue of their Holy Obedience.
Thus they content themselves with a seeming Performance of these Vows, but
their Practice is not in the least answerable to their Profession: For, in the
first place, their Poverty would satisfy my largest Desires, since most of 'em
receive considerable Pensions from their Relations, besides Eighty Crowns a
Year from their respective Inns, which may be reckoned a very comfortable
Maintenance. Nor are they more religious Observers of their Second Vow; they
are just as Chaste as my self, and I know not what they can pretend to enjoy in
Common but Women, whom they have so well accustomed to that way of living, that
a Faithful Wife is a very scarce Commodity in Malta. And as for the last Vow,
if Obedience consist in Grimaces, they are certainly the most Obedient
Gentlemen in the World; but if, for Example, the Great Master should take a
Fancy to recall the Chevalier de Noailles, I question very much whether he
would obey the Summons. To conclude, I cannot give you a juster Character of
'em, than in their own Words; They are only Poor when a Curtesan demands her
Fees; Obedient at Table, where they are always invited to Eat and Drink
heartily; and Chaste at Church, which is their greatest Penance.

The Order is composed of four different Classes; or rather there is only one,
which tolerates the rest out of Charity. The first is that of the Noble
Knights, who before their Admission must prove their Nobility in the presence
of certain Commissioners, who are sent to examine their Pedigree upon the
Place. They wear a Cross of Gold enameled, hanging at one of their
Button-Holes, as you have doubtless observed in France. The Second is the Class
of Priests, who for the most part are not noble, yet wear a Cross, as the
first. The Third is that of the Serving Knights, who are not Noble, and only
wear a Cross of white Satin sowed upon their Iustaucor, and of a different
Figure from that of the Nobles. The Fourth and last is composed of the Great
Master's Menial Servants, or of some indigent Persons, to whom he grants that
Favor, which brings 'em no other Advantage than the usual Salary of fourscore
Crowns; and their Cross is like that of the Serving Knights. Of all the Four
Classes, the first only can aspire to the Dignities of the Order, that is, to
the Title and Office of Commanders, Grand Crosses, and Great Master. The two
first are given in Order, according to their Seniority; for the oldest Knights
are in Course promoted to be Commanders, and the oldest Commanders to be Grand
Crosses. But the Office of Great Master is only obtain d by Election, without
the least regard to Seniority; so that frequently a simple Commander is
preferred before all the Grand Crosses.

The Grand Crosses are so called from a large Cross of white Satin, that
covers their whole Breast, from their first Button-Hole to the Belly. It Is
sewed upon a kind of Sleeveless Vest, meeting on the side, which in Winter is
made of black Cloth, and in Summer of Silk. All the rest of the Knights wear a
red Vest of the same Fashion when they go to War, but the Cross is white, and
of the same Figure with that which they wear at their Button-Holes; but the
Cross of the Serving Knights is of a Circular Figure.

All the Employments and Offices of Honor and Profit are at the Disposal of
the Great Master, who is obliged to choose one of the Nobles: But there are few
even of that Classis who dare aspire to the Dignity of Captain of the Galleys,
by reason of the vast Charge that attends it, since the Order only allows him a
Set of Plate, which he must restore when he quits that Employment. But to make
amends for that Inconveniency, the Captains of the Galleys are soon after
promoted to a Commandery; for though I told you that these Places are usually
given to the Senior Knights, yet there are a considerable Number of 'em at the
Great Master^s disposal, who bestows 'em on his Favorites. These are called
Commanderies of Grace, or Favor, which exclude not the Possessors of 'em from
enjoying the Commanderies that fall to 'em by right of Seniority: And besides,
there are certain particular Offices belonging to each Language, such as that
of Treasurer, Master of the Artillery, etc. The Three Sovereign Jurisdictions
of Malta belong to the College of the Grand Crosses. The First is the Great
Council, composed of all the Members of the College: The Second is the Council
of the Treasury; and the Third of the Marine, or Admiralty; consisting each of
three Members. Besides, the Great Master chooses every Year a Captain of the
Verga, who must be a Native of Malta, and consequently no Knight: His Office is
to administer Justice to the Inhabitants of the City and Country. This right of
Seniority which gives a Title to the Offices of Commanders and Grand Crosses,
is a great Mortification to those who are not made Knights in their Youth: And
therefore they who design to obtain that Dignity for their Children, procure
'em to be received into the Order as soon as they are born, that they may not
wait too long for Preferrment. In the mean time, those who have no Estates live
in their respective Inns, of which every Language has one. The Seven Languages
are those of Provence, Auvergne, France, Italy, Arragon, Germany, and Castile.
Over every Language there is a Grand Cross, to whom the Order allows eighty
Crowns for each Man.

The Members of the Second Class serve at the Altar, and are only capable of
Ecclesiastical Preferment: Thus they may obtain the Offices of Vicars, Canons,
and Grand Prior, which is the highest Dignity within the reach of their
Ambition.

The Serving Knights are incapable of being promoted to the Dignity of a Grand
Cross, or of enjoying a Commandery by right of Seniority; but they may possess
Commanderies of Grace, which the Great Master sometimes bestows on 'em, either
as a particular Mark of his Kindness, or as a Reward of their Valor. They may
rigg out Privateers under the Banner of the Order; but none of this Classis can
be made Captain of the Galleys, since the Noble Knights would not submit to his
Authority.

As for the Great Master's Knights, who compose the Fourth Class, they receive
no other Honor or Advantage by their Admission into the Order, but a Salary of
Eighty Crowns a Year, and the Title of Knights of S. John.

To these Four Classes I might add a Fifth, I mean the Knights of the Holy
Sepulcher, who wear a Cross of Gold Potency; but since they are not
acknowledged by the Knights of Malta, and have no other Patents than what they
receive from the Fathers Observants, who are at present Guardians of the
Sepulcher, I will not trouble you with a farther Account of 'em.

Having given you a general Idea of the Four Classes, and of all the inferior
Offices, I shall in the next place proceed to consider the Supreme Dignity of
the Order. The Great, Master is very careful to preserve the Respect due to his
Character, and seldom Converses familiarly with the Knights, nor even with the
Grand Crosses. When he goes to Church, all the Knights whom he meets in the
Square, and by the Way, join in his Train; and when he returns they make a
double File, through which he passes. All the Officers of his Household are Noble
Knights, even the very Pages, of whom he entertains twenty four. His principal
Officers are the Master of the Horse, the Major Domo, and the High Chamberlain.
The present Great Master is descended from the Illustrious House of Caraffa: He
is a large and thick Man, of a good Mien, but very old: He keeps a Table for a
hundred Knights, whom he chooses to be partakers of his Bounty, and who by that
means may save the Pension they receive from the Order.

The Habits of the Knights are very different at Malta: The French, Italians,
and Spaniards retaining the Modes of their respective Nations. The Garb of the
last is so odd, that I cannot forbear giving you some Account of it: They wear
a Doublet slit before and behind, and the Sleeves are also slit, and close at
the Wrists; an old-fashioned Collar, narrow Breeches fastened with Buttons;
and, in a Word, I could not choose a more Comical Habit if I were going to act
the Spaniard in a Mask. The Italians are dressed exactly like so many
Scaramouchi^s.

The Order takes care to preserve some external Marks of Hospitality, which, as
I told you, was the Design of their Institution: They keep a Magnificent
Hospital, endowed with a Revenue of 50000 Livres. The Commandery of it belongs
to the French Language, and is one of the principal Offices of the Order: The
Magnificence of the Structure does not appear on the Outside, but the
Apartments are very fine. There are five Halls, capable of containing four
hundred sick Persons, who are served by the Knights when they Eat or Drink, the
Servants of the Hospital taking care of the rest. The Vessels are generally of
Silver; the Beds are good, and the Linen is changed pretty often. And besides,
the diseased are so plentifully furnished with all things that are proper for
their Entertainment and Cure, that the Knights themselves scruple not to lodge
here when they are sick. It Is true, they are not laid in the same Rooms with so
many dead and dying Persons, whose Company alone would infect the soundest Man
in the World with their Distempers: For they lie in separate Halls, and are
served apart. Catholics of all Nations, without exception, are received into
the Hospital; but these Acts of Charity are not very Chargeable to the Order,
since their Guests are seldom very Numerous.

These few Observations may suffice to give you an Idea of the Order of Malta.
My next shall contain an Account of the Island in general, and of the Manners
and Customs of its Inhabitants: In the mean time I wish you good Night, and am,

SIR, Your etc.
Malta, June 1690.
LETTER XI.
SIR,
MAlta is so low an Island that it is scarce discernible above twenty Miles off
at Sea, even in the clearest Weather; so that many Ships pass by without
perceiving it. There are no Woods in it by reason of the shallowness of the
Ground; for the whole Island is only a dry Rock, which, with much ado, may be
made to produce something. And the scarcity of Earth makes it so precious, that
if a Man were found stealing it out of his Neighbors Grounds, he would be
punished with the utmost Severity. The only Trees that grow there are Oranges,
Citrons, Apricocks, Peaches, and Pomgranates, which require no great depth of
Earth; and even these grow only in certain parts of the Island, the rest being
planted with Vines, which bear a very delicious Grape: There are also
Strawberries, Pastaiques, and excellent Figs, and a prodigious quantity of the
best M^lo^s in the World, which we eat as often as we please: They are almost
all white, but sweet as Sugar, and melt in the Mouth. The Pastaique is a Fruit
very much resembling a Citrul, but not quite so big. It Is eaten raw like a
Melon, and melts in the Mouth. Though it be exposed a whole Day to the Sunbeams,
it remains as fresh as if it had been kept in Snow. There are two sorts of it,
one red, and the other white: The first is the best; but the Buyer must take
'em at a venture, as well as Melons. It Is the usual Custom when five or six
Citizens meet on the public Place, to open a Score of 'em, and those who have
the fortune to meet with none but white ones, are obliged to pay for the rest;
which they call playing at Pastaiques.

Malta is hotter than Rome, or any other place in Europe; and the stifling Heat
of the Climate is so much the more insupportable, because there are no cool
Breezes to temper it; and the Brow of the Hill is exposed directly to the
South. The Peasants are as black as Egyptians; for they take no care to
preserve themselves from the Sun; and the most scorching Heat is not able to
drive 'em into their Houses, or even make 'em leave off working. This is an
evident Demonstration of the Power of Nature in performing things that seem to
be impossible: For there are few things which a Man may not suffer if he be
accustomed to 'em from his Infancy, as the Maltese are in this case, who inure
the Bodies of their Children to Heat, by making 'em go stark naked, without
Shirt, Drawers, or Cap, as soon as they are taken from their Mother s Breast,
to the Age of Ten Years; so that their Skin grows as hard as Leather. You will
easily perceive that I speak of the Peasants, and Meaner sort of the
Inhabitants; for all the rest cloth their Children as they do in other
Countries: Only to preserve themselves from the Heat, they never go abroad
during the hottest part of the Day; and besides, they cloth themselves very
slightly, and sleep from Noon till four a-clock. The richer sort make use of a
kind of Fans, which are very much in fashion among Persons of Quality in Italy,
I mean certain Machines hung at the Ceiling, about three Foot broad and usually
made of some Silk Stuff, stretch^d upon small and very thin Laths, surrounded
with Ostrich-Feathers. There is also a small silken Cord fastened to it, and
drawn through a Hole into the Antichamber, where a Servant is placed to keep the
Machine playing by pulling the Cord. These Fans are usually hung over a Couch,
or Bed of Repose, where a Man may lie and enjoy the Pleasure of Fanning as long
as he pleases: And sometimes one of 'em is placed on the Table, both for
Coolness, and to drive away the Flies. If you consider also the Sorbet,
Straw-berries, Raspherries, and all the cooling Waters used in Italy, you will
not blame me for affirming that a Rich Man may live comfortably in any Climate,
and easily avoid all the Inconveniences of excessive Heat or Cold. I need not
go farther than Malta for a convincing Proof of this Assertion; since the
violent Heat that reigns here serves only to increase the Pleasure of being
fanned, and of drinking cold Liquors, with which this Island is always furnish
d, though the Winter produces neither Snow nor Ice: For the Great Master takes
care to supply that defect, by letting out the Sale of these Commodities by way
of Farm, to a Man, who sends every Winter to Sicily for a sufficient quantity
to fill the Ice-Houses, and is oblig d to furnish the Island all the Summer,
under pain of paying a Fine of Ten Crowns a Day, in case of failure.

The Island of Malta is very populous, and reckoned to contain 15000 Men, who
are all divided into Companies. They are obliged to wear Swords, but forbidden
to draw 'em under such rigorous Penalties, that the natural Malice of the
Inhabitants is very effectually curb^d by their Fear of Punishment: Yet they
sometimes venture to execute their Fury with a little Poniard or Stiletto,
after the Italian fashion. I cannot better express the barbarity of their
Temper and Inclinations, than by telling you, that their Humor is not
different from that of the Sicilians, that, like them, they are Treacherous and
Bloody, Jealous even to Madness, and capable of attempting the most horrid
Villainies when they are animated by that cruel Passion. To convince you of the
Justness of this Character, 'twill be sufficient to relate two Accidents that
happened very lately; for the two Principle Actors are still alive, and remain
in the Churches of St. Lewis and St. John, whither they f^ed, to avoid the just
Punishment of their Crimes.

The first had a young, handsome, and loving Wife, yet (according to the Custom
of all his Countrymen, both Batchelors and married Men,) he kept a Whore, who
possessed his Heart and Soul, and was so absolutely the Mistress of his
Affection, that without regarding his Duty to his Wife, he lay every Night at
her House. This malicious Woman made use of the Power she had over him to
irritate him against his injured Wife, telling him, that he had reason to
suspect her Virtue, since he gave her so many inviting Opportunities of
repaying him in his own Coin; and his guilty Conscience prompting him to
conclude that the might be as vicious as himself, he resolved to bring her
along with him every Night, and made her lie in the same Bed with him and his
Concubine, since there was not another in the Lodging. Judge, Sir, with what
Grief and Horror this poor Creature could behold her due Benevolence
squandered away upon an impudent Doxey in her presence; and whether ever any
Woman was so barbarously treated. It Is certainly the highest and most cruel
Indignity that could be put upon a Wife; and there is no Crime so inhumane
which such a Husband would not dare to commit. Thus she lived for above a Year,
till at last her Patience being entirely exhausted, she was not able any longer
to bear the insupportable Torment of being made the Spectatour of her own Shame
and Misery; and therefore advised her Husband, since he could not overcome his
Passion, to bring the Cu^t^san home to his House, where he might enjoy his
Pleasure with more Convenience and less Charge. This Advice was so agreeable to
his Humor, that he resolved once in his Life to comply with her Desires: But
she had little reason to be satisfied with the Success of her Proposal, for she
lived in a perpetual Hell with her pityless Tormentour, and his insolent
Strumpet. But instead of making a tedious Relation of all the Affronts they put
upon her, I shall only acquaint you with the Tragical Conclusion of the Story.
He had a Son, about nine Years old, who having seen his Mother at Church
speaking to one of her Brothers, who was newly come from Italy, and whom the
Boy did not know, went immediately to tell his Father, that his Mother was
discoursing with a Stranger: And that inhumane Villain, without enquiring
farther into the Matter, or so much as accusing her of her Crime, stabbed her
with his Poniard as soon as she came home.

The other, who retired to the Church of S. Lewis, was as unmerciful to his
Whore as the former was to his Wife. He knew that she intended to Marry, and
had often with horrible Threatenings forbidden her to prosecute that Design. But
she was so weary of her infamous way of Living, that she resolved,
notwithstanding his repeated Menaces, to provide herself a Husband, and was
even actually engag^d with a certain Tradesman. Her Gallant hearing of this new
Intrigue, and having seen her two or three times talking with the young Man's
Sister, ran to her House in a Transport of Fury, and immediately told her, that
he was come to kill her. She being ignorant of the cause of his Rage, and
imagining that he only intended to laugh at her Fear, threw her Arms about his
Neck, and embracing him, And why, my Heart, said she, would thou kill me?
Because thou art an impudent Where, replied he, and would Marry in spite of
me; but I shall quickly cure thy Longing: Immediately he stabbed her in the
Breast with his Poniard, and repeated the Blow four times, till he laid her
dead upon the Spot. The Barbarity of these Murderers is so prodigiously
inhumane, that these two Instances will give you a livelier Idea of the Humor
of this People, than the most pathetic Description I could make of it.

The Number of the Curtesans is extremely great; their Trade is not at all
reputed scandalous; and when they have earned a little Money, they may Marry,
and are esteemed as honest Women as if they had kept their Maidenhead for their
Husbands. No Person whatsoever dares offer 'em the least indignity; for they
are looked upon as Public Persons that ought to be Sacred; and there are even
some Ladies of Honor who disdain not their Acquaintance and Society; so that
it is not an easy Task to distinguish those Prostitutes from Vertueus Women.
The Curtesans of Rome and Mal^^ are beholding to the same Cause for the
Advantageous Privileges they enjoy: There the Priests govern, and here the
Authority is lodged in the Knights. Both of 'em have sworn Chastity, and
neither of 'em are able to keep their Vows. (...) cannot forbear taking notice
of a pretty odd Custom in this Place, for the convenience of Strangers, who
having no Acquaintance, and for the most part staying but two or three Days in
the Island, might be sometimes obliged to leave it without tasting its most
delicious Fruit: For it is not the Fashion here to visit Strangers in their
Ships, as at Leghorn. Malta is a Land of Liberty, where Pleasure is not forced
upon any Man: But they who have a mind to divert themselves, may easily find a
Play-fellow by walking about the Streets with a Sequin in their Hand, holding
it so that it may be seen; for this is a never-failing Signal, which will
procure 'em twenty Invitations in a Moment.

The Habit of the Women in this Place is as Melancholic and Dismal when they go
abroad, as it is Wanton and Lascivious when they are at home. In the Streets you
see nothing but a long black Veil instead of a Woman, which covers 'em so
entirely from Head to Foot, that such a sight would cost a Low Briton at least
twenty Signs of the Cross: for the Women in this City look just like so many
Ghosts wrapped in Shrowds, stalking about the Streets. But if they are Ghosts in
the Street, they are Angels at home; for though the Peasants are tawny, the Women
who live in the City have the fairest Complexions in the World. I can only give
you an Account of their Summer Dress, since I never had occasion to see 'em in
the Winter. They wear a fine White Smock, plaited at the Neck like a Man's
Shirt; but the Opening is so wide, that it leaves their Shoulders and Breasts
entirely exposed to the View of the ravished Beholder: the Sleeves are very
large, and tucked up to the Neck-band of the Smock to which they are fastened
with a Pin, so that one may see their whole Arms. This Smock is almost their
entire Habit, for they wear nothing above it but a very little Pair of Boddice
about their Waste under their Breasts, which being not above a Span long,
serves only to set off the Fineness of their Shape, and rather exposes than
conceals those alluring Charms that strike the Eyes and Hearts of the Spectator
with a sweet but irresistible Violence. The Men's Habit is not different from
ours, at least they endeavor as much as they can, to imitate it.

Almost all the Maltese are served by Slaves, who are suffered to walk freely
about the Streets all day, as well as those who belong to the Order; but they
are all obliged to retire in the Evening to the public Baths, as at Leghorn,
and if any of 'em should fail to come at the time appointed, he would be put to
death as a Fugitive. The Galley-Slaves are the most miserable Wretches in the
World; yet there are some Persons here who have so little regard to their own
Happiness, as to sell themselves for a hundred Crowns to the Order: they
continue Slaves during their whole Life without any Pay, rowing naked and
chained as the rest, without any other Mark of Distinction than the Title of
Bonne Vogue, whereas the Turks are called Slaves. I know there are also some of
these voluntary Slaves at Venice, where they are called Gallioti, and even the
Republic finds less Difficulty in levying 'em than in raising Soldiers: but
they are only engaged to serve three Years on the Galleys, whereas the Bonne
Vogue at Malta are perpetual Slaves, without the least hope of recovering their
Liberty.

There are only seven Galleys belonging to the Order, which are sent every Year
under the Command of a General to assist the Venetians. The Government is
constantly employed about raising new Funds, without which they cannot increase
the Number of their Galleys.

There are Three Languages spoken in the City; the French, Spanish, and
Italian. The last of these is authorized by the Government, and used in public
Writings. The Peasants in the Country speak a corrupt Dialect of the Arabic:
and 'twou'd not be an easy Task to make 'em leave it.

The Holy Office of the Inquisition, that dreadful Tribunal, famous for its
Injustice and Cruelty, reigns more Tyrannically here than at Rome it self. I
have heard a hundred remarkable Stories of its Barbarity; but I Am too much your
Friend to disturb the Tranquillity of your Mind with such dismal Relations. And
therefore instead of entering on so Melancholic a Subject, I shall only observe
that Confessors, who in any other Country would be burnt if they should divulge
the Secrets with which they are entrusted, are obliged here to reveal 'em, as
often as the Inquisition is concerned in the Discovery. It Is true, they do not
own this Maxim, for fear of spoiling their Trade; but the Truth of it is too
well known to be called in question: In the mean time, to prevent Suspicion,
they are sometimes silent for a Year or two, after which the Inquisitor sends
for the Party accused, and asks him whether he knows the reason why he is
brought before him. Then must the poor Wretch call to mind all that ever he
said; and if he has either forgot his Fault, or refuses to own it, confiding in
the Secrecy and Fidelity of his Confessor, whom he knows to be his only
Confident, he is a dead Man, and must not entertain the least hope of Mercy: For
they strangle him in Prison, and some time after tell his Relations that they
may forbear sending him Provisions. Happy are they who are not subject to this
Yoke!

I saw a Church, the other day, in which there is a little Grotto, where it is
said S. Paul lived three Months: But it is so small, and contrived in such a
manner, that I Am much inclined to suspect the Truth of this Tradition. However,
every one that comes, carries away a piece of it, as a Preservative against the
biting of Serpents: And they pretend that by a perpetual Miracle, the Rock is
never diminished. I will not dispute the Truth of the Matter of Fact, though I
can assure you that there are visible Gaps or Notches in the Rock, and that
they still continue to break off Pieces of it: But supposing it to be as big as
ever, I see no reason why we should have recourse to a Miracle on this
Occasion, since it is generally acknowledged, that there are some Rocks which
grow naturally till they be separated from their Roots: And our Mariners, who
are no very able Philosophers, showed me one in our Voyage hither, which is
commonly called the Brothers; and why may not S. Paul^s Grotto be of the same
Nature. But this is not the only Miracle in Malta: They tell us, that there are
no Serpents in the Island, and would have us believe that this Privilege was
the Effect of a Viper's biting the same Apostle, as you may read in the Acts of
the Apostles. For my part, I must confess, I Am as little satisfied with this
Sotry as with the other; for some Persons assure me that there are Serpents in
Malta: But supposing there were none, I had occasion to mention another Island
in my last, which may boast of the same Advantage; and why should the Miracle
be greater here than at Guernsey, where it is certain there is neither Toad,
Scorpion, nor any other Venomous Creature: And, which adds to the Wonder, I
know that the Governor, who is a Curious Person, having ordered some of those
Animals to be brought to the Island, they dy^d immediately. I Am confident if
the Roman Catholics were Masters of that Island, they wou^d make some Saint
the Author of this Privilege, which might perhaps be pretended with less
improbability, to be the effect of a supernatural Cause, than at Malta, since
the Island of Jersey, which is but seven Leagues distant from Guernsey, is so
extremely pestered with Serpents and Toads, that the Houses are full of 'em,
and none of the Peasants dare lie upon the Ground. This, I doubt not will seem
strange to you; but you will be stil^ more surpised when I have told you that
it rains Toads in this Island: If you suspect the Truth of this odd
Phenomenon, you may receive a Confirmation of it from any Man that has been
upon the Place.

Nature is so Mysterious and Unsearchable in her Operations, and Men are
generally so apt to admire what they cannot comprehend, that their Inclination
to ascribe surprising Events to supernatural Causes, may be justly reckoned an
effect of their Ignorance. I Am so fully persuaded of this Truth, that I seldom
or never take Notice of those Miracles that make so great a Noise in the
Countries through which I have occasion to pass: And besides, since I have reason
to believe that such Stories would not contribute much to your Diversion: I Am
resolved to trouble you with none of 'em, unless they be either very
extraordinary, or extremely ridiculous.

I hope my next Letter shall be dated from Constantinople, for we intend to set
sail to Morrow.

I am, SIR, Your etc.
Malta, June 1690.
LETTER XII.
SIR,
WE sailed from Malta, June..., and leaving Sicily on our Left Hand, entered
the Archipelago. After a Voyage of fifteen Days, without any remarkable
Disturbance, we arrived at the Height of Troy, and our Vessel standing in to
Tenedos, both by reason of the contrary Wind, and to take in some fresh
Provisions, I took this Occasion to visit the Ruins of that famous City, which
are at present so obscure and inconsiderable, that unless a Man's Mind were
full of the Idea of it, he might view it all over without perceiving the least
reason to conclude that ever any Town stood in that place. Yet by a Curious
Search, an inquisitive Traveller may find enough to convince him, that 'twas
formerly of a prodigious Extent: And I observed some Marks of it in four or
five different Places, two of which were about twenty Miles distant. The next
Day we set sail with a favorable Wind, and entered the Canal of
Constantinople, otherwise called the Hellespont, at the Mouth of which we found
two Castles, one in Europe, and the other in Asia, separated by the Canal or
Strait, which is about a Mile and a half broad in this Place, and retains the
same breadth almost throughout. The European Castle is a Mass composed of three
great Towers, surrounded with a weak and inconsiderable Wall, after the manner
of a False-bray, at the Foot of which there are twenty Pieces of Cannon level
with the Water. It Is said that they carry a fifty Pound Ball of Stone; and
indeed their Mouths are so wide, that the very sight of 'em is terrible:
Nevertheless, I Am apt to believe that they are not fit for Service, and even
that they could not bear above one discharge, both by reason of their thinness,
and because they are not mounted on Carriages. There is a Mountain behind the
Castle that overlooks and commands it.

The other Castle, which is seated upon the Asian Shore, is of a Square Figure,
according to the Ancient manner of Building, defended only with some small
Towers joined to the Wall; and without there is a Battery of Cannons behind a
Wall, as in the other. The Captain was obliged to stop at this place, and one
of the Officers of the Custom-House came on board our Ship, and accompanied us
to Constantinople. Having passed the Canal, we entered into the Sea formerly
called the Propontis, and at present Marmora, from the Name of an Island which
contains a great quantity of very fine Marble. Twenty Miles from thence we
discovered Constantinople, and had the pleasure of viewing the finest Landscape
that ever I beheld; for it strikes all those who look upon it with Wonder and
Astonishment. Imagine you see a great City stretched along the Shore for above
six Miles, and so situated sloping toward the Sea, that you perceive at once
an infinite Number of Mosquees, adorned with little Domes covered with Lead,
and high Turrets, which altogether make one of the most lovely Prospects in the
World: Whilst the Eye is busied in contemplating this charming Variety of
Objects, it is agreeably diverted with the sight of the Castle of the Seven
Towers, and of the Seraglio, which are particularly remarkable not only for
their largeness, but for a vast Number of gilt Globes and Spires, resembling
little Steeples. The nearer I approached, I still discovered new Ornaments; and
after I had consider^d at leisure so many Wonders, I was at last agreeably
surpised with the Beauty of the Port: It Is three Miles long, and almost one
broad, clean and deep throughout, even to the Shore, the largest Ships coming
up close to the Land, so that one may go on board without making use of a Boat.
It Is strange that the Harbor is never filled up, especially near the Shore,
since all the Filth of the City is cast into it, without the Advantage of a
Tide to carry it away. At the Entrance into the Port there is a high square
Tower, commonly called The Tower of Leander, from a Person of that Name, who,
according to the Story, used to swim thither every Night to see his Mistress,
who was imprisoned in the Tower. There is a Fountain on the Rock, with some
Pieces of Cannon, which might defend the Entry in case of Necessity.

As soon as we arrived, I went with the Captain to salute the Baron de
Chasteau-neuf, Ambassador of France, who received me very civilly. He has a
good Mien, and is Master of a great deal of Wit: He was formerly Councellor in
the Parliament of Paris, and was sent to the Port about the end of the last
Year, in the room of Monsieur de Girardin, who died here. He is a Savoyard by
birth, but a very zealous Promoter of the Interests of Franee: He spares
nothing to gain the Turks; he endeavors to win 'em with Presents, Caresses,
and Entertainments; his Table is always full of 'em; but his principal Care is
to oblige those whom he knows to be the Favorites of the great Officers. I
know one among the rest, called Soliman Aga, who is extremely debauched, and
since he always finds excellent Win^ at the Ambassador^s Table, he goes thither
very often, and is still received with all imaginable Demonstrations of Love
and Kindness. After I had the Honor to Sup with the Ambassador, I went to
lodge at a Tavern, or Victualling-House. If I had resolved to have stayed long
in the Country, I would have boarded in some Family, for Strangers are very ill
accomodated in these Publick-Houses. Every Nation is permitted to have three;
so that there would be nine in all, if the English and Dutch thought fit to
make use of their Privilege: It Is still more difficult to obtain a Permission
to keep an Oven: One must procure a special Mandamus from the Sultan for that
effect, and pay a Thousand Avanies to the Bassa and Cadi; and there is only one
allowed for the use of each Nation in every Town; for the Turks are so
extremely afraid of Fire, that they suffer very few Ovens to be kept in their
Cities. They are also very careful to prevent the Exportation of Corn; for it is
a Capital Crime to carry it out of the Country, or even to sell it to private
Families: And for the more effectual Execution of these Orders, there are
certain Officers appointed to over-see the Markets, who suffer no Man to buy
above Somewhat more than 20 Quarters.
Four Muids at a time, nor even the least quantity, without a License from the
Nais. Offenses of this Nature are punished with so much Rigor, that if a
Peasant were convicted of selling his Corn to a Christian, 'twou'd cost him
more than 500 Bastinado's. But before I proceed to describe the Manners and
Customs of the Inhabitants, I shall give you a short Account of the City of
Constantinople.

It Is seated in Europe, on a Point or Tongue of Land that juts out into the Sea
of Marmora, in a Triangular Figure, six Miles long, and fourteen in compass,
two of its sides being washed by the Sea. 'Twas founded by Pausanias, King of
Sparta, who gave it the Name of Byzantium, which it retained till Constantine
the Great, resolving to make it the Metropolis of the World, ordered it to be
rebuilt with all imaginable Magnificence; after which it took the Name of
Constantinople, or Constantine's Town; but the Turks call it Stambol. The
French, in Conjunction with the Venetians, took it in 1203. and fifty Years
after *it was re-taken by the Greeks, who remained Masters of it till the Year
1453, when it fell into the Hands of Mahomet II. It Is at present the Capital
City of the Ottoman Empire, as it appears by the Grand Signior's Titles, who
styles himself, The Ruler of Kings, Distributer of Crowns, Lord of the White
and Black Seas, of Bagdat, Grand Cairo, Aleppo, etc. and particularly of the
fain City of Stambol the well-defended, which is the Desire of the Kings and
Princes of the Earth.

The Air is extremely pure, and so wholesome, that the Inhabitants are never
subject to any reigning Disease but the Plague, which visits 'em every Year,
and makes a dreadful Havoc among 'em. I Am apt to think that they would live
till they dropped into their Graves through mere Age and Weakness, if their Days
were not shortened by this Infectious Malady; and they are so little acquainted
with any other mortal Distemper, that when a Frenchman assures 'em that the
Plague is hardly known in his Country, they usually cry, What do you die of then?
The Climate is so Temperate, that the Winters are never excessively Cold, and
the Summer-Heats are usually allayed with a pleasant Brieze, besides the
drinking of cool Liquors, which, in my Opinion, is one of the greatest
Pleasures of this Life.

In the Account I have given you of the Situation and Bigness of
Constantinople, I speak only of the City which properly bears that Name; for
there are four other Towns joined together, called Cassum Pacha, Galata, Pera,
and Tophana, which may be considered as a part, or rather as the Suburbs of the
City, since they are only separated from it by the breadth of the Port, which
is so small a distance, that a Man who cries aloud, though without extending his
Voice to the utmost, may be easily heard on the other side. In these Towns, and
particularly in Pera, the Ambassadors and all the Franks live; for they are not
permitted to reside at Constantinople. And it is to be observed, that the Name
of Franks is given indifferenly to Men of all Nations who wear Hats. These four
Cities are about eight Miles in compass; so that if they, together with the
Village of Scutaret, and some other Suburbs, be added to the City of
Constantinople, and all joined together to make one vast Town, Constantinople,
in this sense, would be found to be double of Paris. But there is a great
variety of Opinions in this Case: Some comprehend all the abovementioned
places under the Name of Constantinople, others cut off the four Cities; and
there are some who include the City within the compass of its own Walls; so
that almost every Traveller gives a different Account of its Extent from all
others.

The Walls with which it is at present surrounded, are the same that were built
by Constanstine the Great, except in some places where they have been repaired.
They are double on the side next the Land, with Battlements, after the Oriental
fashion, and Towers from place to place; and besides, they are defended with a
lined but shallow Ditch: These, with the Castle of the Seven Towers, are all
the Strength of Constantinople; for the Number of its Inhabitants deserves not
to be reckoned among its Advantages, since those Turks who are never accustomed
to War, are so unfit to resist an Enemy, that they would only serve to consume
the Provisions, and hasten a Famine: And besides, I Am persuaded that Bombs
would do more execution here than in any other City in the World; for the
Houses are generally of Wood, and the Streets so narrow, that in the greatest
part of 'em two loaded Horses cannot go abreast. But this is not the greatest
inconvenience of their manner of Building; for their Houses jut out so far near
the Top, that in several places one may step from one Window to another, and
cross the Street without going down from his Chamber. This Contrivance of their
Houses does not proceed from want of Room, for the City is full of Gardens, and
large Courts, that are perfectly useless. But though I cannot acquaint you with
the reason that makes 'em so fond of this manner of Building, I can assure you
that it exposes 'em to all those fatal Inconveniences that are occasioned by
Fire, which breaks out very frequently, and proceeds with irresistible Fury,
till it meets with some Garden, or empty Place, where there are no Houses to be
burnt. Among so many Instances of this Nature, I shall only take notice of one
that happened in the Year 88, which made so terrible a Havoc in the City, that
there were above 3000 Houses laid in Ashes. But besides the dangerous
Consequences of this kind of Architecture, it is also very offensive to the Eye;
for the Streets are extremely disfigured by this Irregularity: Nor are there
any external Ornaments on the Houses to make amends for this Defect, since they
are only daub^d over with a nasty red Paint, laid upon the rough Wood, which is
neither plan'd, nor cut with any other Instrument than an Axe or Saw; so that
the Houses are all very ugly. Judge, Sir, what reason I had to be surpised,
when after I had viewed with Amazement the magnificent Prospect of the City
from the Sea of Marmora, I saw all my Expectations balked, and instead of so
many Wonders, found only some Mosques, and a few Monuments of Antiquity. Not
that I wou^d discourage any Curious Person from undertaking this Voyage; for
though the Manners and Customs of the Inhabitants ought never to be propos^d for
Imitation, they are so odd and singular, that an Inquisitive Traveller may
employ his Time and Curiosity with a great deal of Pleasure in observing 'em.
The Turks are opposite to us in almost all respects: We content our selves with
one Wife, They marry several Wives; Our Habit is short, Theirs long; We wear
our Hair long, and our Beards shaved, They shave their Hair, and suffer their
Beards to grow; We write in a straight Line from Left to Right, and They in a
crooked from Right to Left. I could easily add several other Instances of the
same Nature, since the Opposition reaches even to the meanest Actions, such as
the easing of Nature; for they crouch down to Piss, like Women, and when they
have done, rub their Privities on a Wall, which they think purifies 'em.

Two Days after our Arrival at Galata, the Captain and I went to see
Constantinople, with the French Interpreter, who accompanied us on purpose to
show us all the Curiosities. There are always so many Boats passing from one
side to another, that the Port is usually covered with 'em, and their Fare is
only an Asper. We took Boat at the Custom-House, and entered the City at the
Gate of Galata, or the next Gate to the Seraglio, which we kept on our
Left Hand, and went straight to the Besestin, which is a distinct Canton of the
City, enclosed with Gates and Walls, where all the Merchants keep Shops. This
is the finest and most regular place in Constantinople, not unlike to the
places that are appointed for the keeping of Fairs among us, such as that of S.
Germain at Paris: The Streets are divided after the same manner, and covered
above with Planks joined together upon Rafters, which form a kind of Roof,
sufficient to secure the place against all the Inconveniences of bad Weather,
though there are Holes left to let in the Light. Here all the finest and most
precious Wares of Constantinople are to be seen; for every Merchant keeps a
Shop in this Place, as it were for a Pattern of all the Goods contained in his
Warehouse; and the Shops are ranked and disposed in such excellent Order, that
the Buyer may dispatch his Business in less than a quarter of an Hour; for all
the Trades are separated, and confined to their proper places. Thus one part of
the Besestin is possess^d by the goldsmiths, whose Work, indeed, is not so
fine, nor their Shops so well furnish^d as in France or England; but I only
speak here of their Order and Regularity: Another place is set apart for the
Drapers, or those who sell Dutch, French, and English Cloth: Not far from
thence are the Sellers of Silk Stuffs, and Gold and Silver Brocado's; the
Makers of Talpo, or Head-Dresses for Women, which are very magnificent; the
Babouchi, or Shoo^-makers, the Tailors, Grocers, and all sort of Shopkeepers,
have also their distinct Streets. The Gates are shut every Evening at Ten a
Clock, by Persons who are hir^d for that purpose, and those who have occasion
to pass this way later, must give two or three Pence to the Porters, who wait
constantly at the Gates. This is the only place in Constantinople where there
are Shops; for the rest of the City consists only of little and narrow Streets,
which for the most part are so desolate that one may pass through the Town
without meeting so many Persons as Streets, unless in the Public Places, such
as the Hyppodrome, whither we went after we had viewed the Besestin. This
spacious Place was built by the Emperor Constantine, for Exercises on
Horseback, and is still called by the Turks, the Place of Horses. It Is an
Oblong Square, 400 Paces long, and about 200 broad. Toward the End opposite to
the Seraglio, there are two Obelisks; the first consisting of one Stone, is
seventy Foot high, adorned with several Hieroglyphical Figures in Relief, and
placed on a square Marble Pedestal. On one of the Faces of the Pedestal, there
is a Latin Inscription, so ancient and worn, that all that can be learned by it
is, that it was built by Theodosius: The second contains a like Inscription in
Greek: The third is adorned with the Figure of the Emperor seated on a Throne,
and accompanied with his great Officers; and in the fourth there is a
Representation of a Battle, in Memory of some Victory obtained over that
Prince's Enemies. The other Obelisk is a sharp pointed Pyramid, built of
Free-Stones, without any Inscription, and begins to decay extremely. Near these
Obelisks there is a Brazen Pillar of a considerable height, commonly called the
Serpentine Column, because it consists of three Serpents wreathed and twisted
together, with their Tails fastened in the Ground, and ending at the Top in
three gaping Heads, which seem to hiss, and threaten the three parts of the
World that were known in that Age. Some pretend that this Column is a
Hieroglyphical Representation of the united Empires of the East and West,
extending their Dominion over the whole Universe: But the most common Opinion
is, that in the time of the Emperor Leo Isaurus, who was a great Magician,
there were three Monstrous Serpents, who made so prodigious a Havoc in the
Country about Constantinople, that the People were forced to abandon their
Habitations; and that the Emperor drew these Serpents by Enchantment into a
large Ditch, which he made in the middle of the Hippodrome, where they were
killed, and covered with Earth. The Story adds, that to prevent a like
Misfortune for the future, this Column was erected by the same Prince, as a
Talisman against Serpents, of which there are at present very few in the
Country. One of these Heads wants the the Nether-Jaw, and it is said that Sultan
Morat broke it off with his Hand. The Turks boast much of the wonderful
Strength of that Emperor, as a Memorial of which, they preserve in the Castle
of Grand Cairo, ten great Bucklers pierced with a Stake, or Wooden Javelin,
which they pretend he darted at 'em; the Stake sticking still in the Bucklers,
and keeping 'em all joyn^d together.

The Story of the Serpentine Column is not the only fabulous Tradition
concerning the Emperor Leo. The Greeks, especially, who are without
Contradiction the most superstitious People in the World, and most addicted to
Miracles, take pleasure in relating a Thousand Wonders of the Life of that
Prince. For Example: They tell us that he made two Torto^ses, by Art Magic, of
a surprising bigness, which drew his Chariot, and both Eat and Drank, though they
were not natural Animals; adding, that these Tertois^s are still to be seen in
the Grand Sign^or's Garden, but that they have remained immovable ever since
his Death. They pretend also that the same Emperor made a Tree with its
Franches and Leaves so artificially contriv^d, that they seem^d to be perfectly
Natural, and that the Boughs were filled with a hundred Magical Birds of
different kinds, who upon the least breath of Wind, warbl'd out their various
Notes, and all together made a most charming Melody. These are some of the
Tales with which the Greeks are wont to talk Men asleep.

There are two other Columns in Constantinople, one called the Historical, and
the other the Burnt Column; for the last was actually burnt. Adjoining to these
we saw a large Court, appointed for the use of Archers: The Master of the Sport
presented us with a Bow, and we had the Pleasure to shoot some Arrows at the
Mark, which was fastened on a Wall, and contained several lesser Marks,
gradually decreasing, so that the least was not bigger than a Dutch Skelling;
and yet I saw several Persons who hit at every Shoot, though they stood 100 Paces
off.

In our return to Galata we passed by Sancta Sophia, which is at present the
principal Mosque of the City. There are several Doors that lead into a Portico,
which brought us immediately into the Mosque. It Is 120 Paces long, and 80
broad: The Walls are Square, but the Vault or Roof is Round, and so
artificially contrived, that so large a Structure is supported without any
Columns; for those Rows of Columns that form the two lower Portico's, serve
only for Ornament, and are so placed that they cannot be supposed to carry any
other weight than that of two Galleries; and even the greatest part of these
Columns are so old, that they are forced to bind 'em about with great Iron
Hoops, to prevent their falling. I know not what could occasion all those
Chinks that are observed in 'em, for they are built of a very hard and polished
Stone, which some think is a kind of Marble, though others believe it to be the
Serpentine Stone. There are thirty on each side, about sixteen Foot high, with
very fine Cornices: The Vault of the Mosque retains almost all its ancient
Beauty; it is enriched with a very fine Mosaic Work, consisting of little gilt
Stones so exactly joined together, that they remain almost perfectly entire
after so many Ages.

At the four Corners of the Building where the Vault begins to be round, the
four Beasts mentioned in the Apocalypse, are painted in Mosaic; only the Turks
have disfigured their Faces, as they have also done to an Image of Our Savior,
which is over the principal Door, represented after the Greek Fashion, upon a
Throne, with his Hand lifted, and two of his Fingers stretched out, to bless a
Saint, who lies prostrate before him, with his Face on the Ground, the Virgin
appearing on the other side. Over the same Door there is also a Basso-Relievo,
representing the Holy Ghost in the form of a Dove, which the Turks have not in
the least disfigured. The Tomb of Constantine remains also entire, which the
Turks hold in great Veneration; as well as the Stone on which the Virgin washed
Our Savior's Linen. This Temple is paved with very fine Marble, and the Floor
is covered with Mats; not to keep it from being foiled, for they always put off
their Babouche's, or Shoes, before they enter; but by reason of the coldness
of the Marble, which might incommode those who come to perform their Devotions
in this place, especially since they kneel or crouch down, almost after the
same manner as they sit upon their Sopha's. The Keeper of the Temple was easily
bribed to permit me to satisfy my Curiosity with a distinct view of all the
Curiosities I have described: But these Officers are not always in so good a
Humor; for sometimes they are very civil, and soon prevailed with to admit a
Stranger into the Temple; but at other times they are so Surly and Obstinate,
that one can hardly procure that Satisfaction at the rate of ten Pistoles. It Is
true, indeed, they are expressly forbidden to grant that favor to Christians;
and the permission which is sometimes given to Franks, is only an effect of
their Indulgence: For if a Greek or Jew were found in the Mosque, he would
either be immediately put to Death, or constrained to save his Life by
renouncing his Religion.

Sophia is a Greek Word, signifying Wisdom, and this Temple was so called by
the Emperor Justinian, who consecrated it to the Sovereign Wisdom. I shall
briefly acquaint you with the History of its Foundation, as I had it from the
Greeks. You may depend upon the fidelity of my Relation; but I dare not
undertake to justify the Credit of my Authors.

The Emperor Justinian being dangerously sick, his Physician, called Samson,
whose Mind was no less enlightened by the Inspirations of the Holy Ghost, than
by the Knowledge of Philosophy, and of the Art which he professed, told him,
that his Distemper was of such a Nature, that it could not be cured by the
Precepts of Physic, and that he must depend wholly upon the Assistance of
Heaven, advising him to make some Religious Vows, and encouraging him with some
Assurances that God would hear his Prayer. The Devout Prince cheerfully
embraced his Counsel, and vowed to build a Temple which should surpass all the
Churches of the World in Magnificence. God was pleased with the sincerity of
his Devotion; he rewarded his Faith, and rescued him from the Jaws of Death:
Nor was Justinian unmindful of his Duty to his Gracious Deliverer. In order to
the performanc^ of his Vow, he framed the Model of the Church of Sancta Sophia,
such as it is at present, and employed a vast Number of Workmen on the intended
Building: But he had the Misfortune to see all his Treasures exhausted before
the third part of the Work was completed; so that he could neither prosecute
his Design, nor so much as pay 50 Days Wages which he owed to the Workmen; for
Christian Emperors had not then assumed the power of imposing Taxes on their
Subjects, without an indispensable Necessity. He was so overcome with Sorrow
when he saw that he could neither finish so pious a Work, nor, do Justice to
the poor Men whom he had employed, that he burst forth into Tears, and retired
to his Closet, where he was breathing out his Complaints in the presence of his
God; when a sudden Light shone through the Room, and discovered a Youth of
incomparable Beauty, who assured the sorrowful Emperor that God had seen his
Tears, and heard his Prayers, and told him that he might quickly be happy if he
would send some of his Servants and 50 Camels along with him. Justinian's Heart
was filled with Joy at the hearing of such welcome and unexpected Tidings: He
commanded twenty of his Servants, with fifty Camels, to attend the bright
Messenger, who carried 'em out of Constantinople to a Field, where they found a
stately Palace, though there was never any Building seen in that place either
before or since. The Beauteous Youth, or rather Angel, (for so it seems he was)
opened the Gates of this Magnificent Structure, and led 'em to a Hall, where
they saw vast Heaps of Gold, Silver, and all sorts of Jewels: He orderd 'em to
load their Camels; and then both he and the Palace disappeared, only the
Treasure remained, which the Emperor received with all the Marks of a joyful
Gratitude, and employed it in building and adorning the Church of Sancta Sophia
in so admirable a manner, that the Temple of Solomon in its highest Glory, was
neither more Beautiful nor Magnificent. He built also with the same Money a
large and stately Hospital, where Persons of all Nations were charitably
entertained. And since there was still a great quantity of Treasure left, which
the Emperor's Piety would not suffer him to employ in profane Uses, he ordered
the Jewels to be samp'd to Powder, and the Gold and Silver to be melted, and
mixing 'em all together, he made the most precious Table that ever adorned a
Temple, and placed it on the High Altar, to serve at the daily Consecration of
the Sacrament, where it remained till the Venetians carried it away with those
admirable Brazen Gates, which are at present to be seen at S. Mark's. But God
would not suffer so Holy a Piece to become a Prey to those who could not
pretend any right to it; the Galley that carried it opened miraculously at the
Mouth of the Canal, in the Sea of Marmora, where it sunk, and was never
afterward found.

This, Sir, (if you have Faith enough to believe it) is the Original of Sancta
Sophia, which was formerly a Christian Church, and is now a Turkish Mosquee.
It Is at present the only Ancient Structure of that Nature in Constantinople;
for all the rest were built in this and the last Age, by the Sultans or
Sultanesses, whose Names they bear. There are seven or eight particularly
remarkable, I mean those of the Sultans Mahomet, Achmet, Solomon, and Selim,
with those of Chazadet, and Valide, and some others, built after the same
Model, and differing only in the largeness of the Structure, the Number of the
Fountains, and variety of the Painting; so that the Description of one will
give a just Idea of all the rest, and therefore I shall make choice of that of
Valide, which is the newest and most beautiful Mosque I have yet seen: 'Twas
built by the Sultaness Valide, Mother of Sultan Mahomet IV. and is seated in
the midst of a large square Court, resembling a vast Cloister, because of the
arched Roofs that inviron it in form of Portico's; under which there are many
Fountains with Cocks, where those who are polluted may wash themselves before
they enter the Mosquee. It has but one Gate, surrounded with a Portico of a
considerable height, paved with white and black Marble, and supported by sixty
four Columns of red Marble, eight of which are of Porphyrie, placed near the
Entry, but of no very regular Design, because the bigness of the Pieces is
preserved entire: The Plafond is adorned with Painting and Figures, after the
Turkish manner, of which afterward you may expect a more particular Account.
The Portico is covered with little Domes, with a very large one in the middle,
over-topping the rest; the whole Structure consisting of Mason's-Work covered
with Lead. At the four Corners of the Building there are four Turrets, called
Minarets, built of Freestone, and so small that there is just room enough
within for a little Winding-Stair-case, reaching to three fourth parts of the
Height, which the Muezans, or Marabouds, ascend every Morning and Evening, to
give the People notice of the appointed times of Prayer, shouting till they are
out of Breath, with an extremely harsh and disagreeable Tone; for they begin
with a very low Voice, and raising it by degrees, end in a very loud Shriek, so
that 'twou'd be impossible to understand 'em, if the People were not already
acquainted with what they say. As they cry, they clap their Hands upon their
Ears, and go round the Turret in a little Balcony, that their Voice may be
heard through the whole Town, repeating these Words; Allah ekber, allah ekber,
allah ekber, eschadou in la illah, illallah, hi all salla, hi all salla,
allah ekber, allah ekber, allah ekber, la illah, illallah. God is Great, God is
Great, God is Great; give testimony that there is but One God: Come yield your
selves up to his Mercy, and pray him to forgive you your Sins. God is Great,
God is Great, God is Great, there is no other God but God. These Turrets are
very high, and for the most part end in a Globe or Crescent, which is sometimes
Gilt. This is a brief Representation of the external Architecture of Valid^,
and consequently of the other Mosquees. Within they are either vaulted, or
covered with a Plafond: That of Valide is vaulted, and adorned with a great
Number of Lamps, and Globes of Glass. When they say Prayers, they turn their
Face toward a large Frame at the end of the Mosque, in the same place where
the High-Altar stands in Roman Catholic Churches. There is no Figure
represented on this Frame or Table, only the Name of GOD is written on it in
Arabic Characters; and over against it stands two Brazen Candlesticks, with a
Taper of Virgin-Wax in each, bigger than a Man's Thigh. In the Mosquees that
are founded by Emperors, there is usually a Turbe, or little Chapel, in which
they are buried. Some Sultans have built Turbe's apart, resembling little
Mosquees. Those of Amurat and Solomon I. are the finest: The Body of the last
lies in a Coffin, like those that are used in France, covered with a large
piece of Tapistry, with a Turbant on his Head, in which there are two fine
Aigrets. In the Turbe of Amurat there are Eleven of his Children placed round
him, with two of his Wives; and at the Head of the Coffin there is a little
Cupboard or Press, where his Prayer-Books are kept, which, are adorned with
Gold and Precious-Stones, appearing through a Latten Grate, and all Mussulmen are
permitted to read there, for the Repose of the Souls of the deceased. The
Keepers of the Turbe are also obliged to pray for 'em at certain Hours of the
Day. This Sepulcher is not very magnificent.

Having seen all the abovementioned places, we returned to Galata, resolving
to spend another Day in visiting the rest of the Curiosities at Constantinople,
which will furnish me with Matter for another Letter. In the mean time I am,

SIR, Your. etc.
Constantinople; July, 1690.
LETTER XIII.
SIR,
THere are so few Palaces or other remarkable Buildings in Constantinople, that
in two Days I completed my Walk through the City; and the Observations I made
are so inconsiderable, that I shall easily be able to finish, in this Letter,
the Description which I began in the last.

The Grand Signior*s Arsenal is at the End of the Port, beyond Cassum Pacha and
Galata. I found the Building better than I expected, after what I had seen in
the rest of the City; and besides, it contains a considerable extent of Ground:
The Galleys are laid up under 120 Arches, and it is said there are Arms in it
for 60000 Men. But the Magazins are inaccessible to Christians, and they are
only permitted to see the Baths where the Sultan's Slaves are shut up; the
Number of these Wretches amounts to several Thousands; and their Lodgings are
so miserable, that I repented the Curiosity that engaged me in so unpleasant a
Visit. The Captain Bassa lives in the Arsenal, with all the Officers of the
Admiralty, that they may be always ready upon the Spot to receive his Orders.

Constantinople is full of certain Houses, which the Poverty and ill Customs of
the place have rendered necessary, I mean the Hans and Karavanserais. The Hans
consist of four Sides of Building, enclosing a large square Court, in which
there is always a Fountain, either in the midst, or in some other part of it.
The Walls are very strong, and the Windows well barred, to secure the Goods
that are laid in the Warehouses. The Roof consists of little Domes covered
with Lead, like those of the Mosquees. These Houses are appointed for the
Entertainment of Foreign Merchants: They contain only two Stories, divided into
Rooms, which have not the least Communication with one another. The lower Story
is composed of Warehouses for the Goods, and the upper is divided into little
Chambers, where the Merchants Lodge, but they must take care to furnish
themselves with Beds, Pots, Dishes, etc. for they are only accommodated here
with four bare Walls; and after they have provided their Furniture, they must
buy their Meat at the Market or Bazar, and Dress it themselves, since otherwise
they might starve with their Pockets full of Money. And, in the general, the
way of Traveling in this Country is so inconvenient and troublesome, that this
Consideration alone may serve to discourage any Man that loves his Ease from
visiting it out of pure Curiosity. For in the first place you must neither
expect Coach, Wagon, Boat, Horses, nor any other convenient Carriage. If your
Affairs oblige you to undertake a Journey, though not above 100 Leagues, you must
wait three Months for a Caravan, which, after all, will not Travel above four
Leagues a day, and carry no other Provisions but Rice, Biscuit, and Salt Beef,
on which you must make a shift to live, and encamp every Night till you arrive
at your Journies end, where, if you have not the convenience of Lodging with a
particular Friend, 'twill be in vain to enquire for the King's-Head, the
White-Cross, or the Golden-Lyon: You must even creep into a Han with a hundred
Wretches, whose Brutishness is altogether insupportable, and reckon your self
happy when ye can find such a Lodging, which, after all, is better than
Encamping with the Caravan.

You will, perhaps, think it impossible to represent a more frightful Idea of
Traveling; but I can assure you, that all these Inconveniences are not
comparable to those which they who Travel to Persia, or cross the Deserts of
Arabia, must resolve to undergo. They must Travel six Months together exposed
to all the Inconveniences of bad Weather, and for the most part in burning
Sand, where there is neither a Stalk of Grass, nor a Spring to quench their
Thirst. Besides, they are perpetually in danger of being surpised by the
Arabs, who rob and kill all that come in their way. But all these Incommodities
may be either more easily avoided or supported than those terrible Distempers
that usually seize European Travelers, who are not accustomed to such hot
Climates and fatiguing Journeys. I shall take this occasion to relate a Story
of one of my Friends who returned, not long ago, from Poland, whither he went
about the beginning of the last Year by the King's Order, in the quality of an
Interpreter with Monsieur de Chateauneuf's Chancellor, called Beauchesne. He
was seized by the way with a violent Fever and Looseness, which brought him so
low, and made him so troublesome to the Caravan-Bachi, or Captain of the
Caravan, that his Companions would have left him to perish without assistance,
if that Officer had not been afraid to run the hazard of offending the
Ambassador; yet he assured me that all their respect to Monsieur Chateauneuf
could not have protected him, if the Fever had seized on his Head, and so made
him incapable of sitting on Horseback. But these are not the only disadvantages
which Travelers suffer in this Country; they are exposed to a thousand other
vexatious Accidents, and are constantly plagued with the Brutish Humors of the
Camel-drivers. We are wont to complain of the Sawciness of Carriers and
Coach-men; but I assure you they would be reckoned very mild and tractable in
this Country, where every Camel-driver is as haughty as a Lord, and the poor
Traveller must keep in his Post under pain of a Bastanado, which he must take
very patiently, for if he should offer to return the Blow, I would not ensure
his Life for all the Money in the Caravan.

I thought my self obliged to give you a faithful Account of all these
Inconveniences, which most Travelers study to conceal; that, if any of your
Friends have a mind to undertake the same Voyage, they may at least have the
advantage of knowing what they are to expect, which they could not have done if
I had only given you a view of the pleasant and bright side of a Traveller's
Entertainment. For my part, I must confess I had so strong an Inclination to
Traveling, that I know not whether I should have stopped on this side China, if
I had not met with so many discouraging Rubs: But my Curiosity is wonderfully
abated of late, and I Am so perfectly cured of my gadding Humor, that I Am
resolved to confine my self hereafter to Europe, and to Travel only in such
Places where I may find, at least, a piece of Beef, and a pair of clean Sheets
at Night.

Since I had occasion to mention Beauchesne's Journey to Poland, 'twill not be
improper to give you a short account of the cause of it.

The Turks being informed of the great Losses which the French sustained during
the Campaign of 1689. and of the ill-fortune that attended His Majesty's Arms
in Flanders, where the Marshall D' Humiere was unsuccessful in the only
attempt he made, began to give less credit to the French Ambassador's smooth
Harangues, and to desire a Peace with the Emperor. The Grand Vizier spoke of
it several times to Sir William Trumbal and Monsieur Collier, the English and
Dutch Ambassadors, and sent Orders to His Master's Envoys at Vienna to hasten
the desired Accommodation. And certainly the Grand Signior had reason to wish
for a Peace, for his Affairs were in a very hopeless condition. At the
beginning of the Campaign his Troops suffered a considerable disadvantage in
Croatia, where they lost above 2000 Men, with several Ensigns, and the Bassa
who Commanded 'em. The Prince of Baden afterward Routed 'em thrice in three
memorable Battles, and they saw themselves exposed to all the Insults of the
Imperialists, who talked of nothing less than of Besieging Constantinople.
Temeswaer, Canissa, and Waradin, the only places they possessed in Hungary, were
closely Blocked up without any hope of Relief. Thus 'twas plainly the Interest
of the Turks to accept of the Proposals that were made by their Victorious
Enemies: But the King's Interest was on this occasion directly opposite to that
of his Allies. He dreaded the fatal consequences of such a Resolution and left
no means unessay'd to prevent its taking effect. He cajoled the Grand Signior
more than ever, and flattered him with the hope of making a separate Peace with
the Polanders, since they had already entered into a Negotiation with the
Tartars, and had sent Deputies for that effect to Count Tekeli, who was to
perform the Office of a Mediator between 'em. This Stratagem produced the
desired effect, and the Turk was the more easily deluded, because he knew that
not long before there happened a sort of Quarrel between the Courts of Poland
and Vienna. For the Emperor had granted his Protection to the Moldavians, and
on that score was to receive the same Tribute which they formerly paid to the
Turks. The King of Poland pretended a right to that Province, as an ancient
Fief of his Crown: But the Emperor would not give him any satisfaction, and
even refused to answer the Polish Ambassador's Remonstrances on that subject.
In the mean time the French and Turkish Ambassadors at the Court of Poland,
were not idle Spectators of so favorable a Juncture, they endeavored to
foment the difference, and Beauchesne was dispatched thither with several
Instructions both from the King his Master, and from the Grand Vizier. But all
their Negotiations were unsuccessful, for they could not prevail with the King
of Poland to break his Confederacy with the Emperor.

I will not trouble you with an Apology for the length of this digression, into
which the way of Traveling in Turkey has insensibly engaged me. For since at
the beginning of our Correspondence I resolved to entertain you from time to
time with a familiar account, not only of my own Observations, but of what I
should learn from others; I see no reason why the prosecution of that design
should oblige me to a nice observance of an exact and regular Method.

I have already told you, that there are two sorts of Public Houses in
Constantinople; the Hans, and the Karavanserais: And I shall take this occasion
to add a short description of the Second to the larger account I gave you of
the First.

They are both built after the same manner, only the Hans are enclosed with
good thick Walls, whereas the Stone-work in the Karavanserais reaches no higher
than the first or lower Story, the second being built of Wood, and covered with
Bricks. They have only one Gate, as well as the Hans, and serve to lodge poor
Strangers, and the Servants of the Caravans; for which reason they are called
Karavanserai, or the Houses of the Caravans. All Indigent Persons resort to
'em, paying from half a Crown, to a Crown a Month, according to the fineness of
the House, or the advantages of its Situation.

After we had taken a slight view of several of these Houses, we went to the
Grand Signior's Seraglio, which I cannot describe exactly, since I was not
suffered to go further than the second Court, though I was accompanied by an Aga
of the Janisaries, to whom I had been effectually recommended, and without
whose assistance I must have contented my self with a view of the first. The
Seraglio is built on a Point of Land that juts out into the Sea, which I had
occasion to mention when I described the situation of the City. It Is surrounded
with high Walls of a greyish Stone, with a Parapet at the top, and Battlements
like those of the City. It contains a vast extent of Ground, almost four Miles
in compass, the greatest part of which is taken up with Gardens. The Structure
is irregular, and very unsuitable to the boasted Magnificence of its Master: For
it is only a vast heap of Buildings not unlike to some old Castles in
Christendom; and you see nothing on the outside but a confused medley of
Houses, adorned with those little gilt Spires and Globes I mentioned in my
last, in which all its Beauty consists. The rest of the Building is so mean,
that a Man would never imagine it to be the Seraglio, that admired Palace of
the Grand Signior. The principal Entry is near Sancta Sophia, and exactly
resembles the Gate of an old paltry Town, without either Architecture or
Ornament: Yet it is carefully guarded by the Capigi, who keep their Court of
Guard under it, and sit on Benches of Stone. This Gate led us into a large
Court, where on the right hand we observed the Apartments for the Sick, with
large Matted Sopha's along the Walls, where the Diseased Persons are placed,
and lodged as poorly as if they were in a Hospital. On the left hand are
Magazines containing Arms for a Thousand Men, that in case of necessity the
Grand Signior may arm his Domestic Servants for the security of his Person. But
notwithstanding this Precaution, Ibrahim was Strangled, Mahomet Dethroned, and
Solomon Poisoned, not to mention the Tragical Ends of so many other Princes of
the same Line, whose Guards could not protect 'em from the fury of a Seditious
Multitude. From this Court we passed into another, bordered with two large
Portico's. The Grand Signior's Kitchens are on one side, which are not kept
very hot at present, since he chooses to reside at Adrianople: Yet I observed
some Persons preparing Pilo, Pasties, and Fish, for the Women in the old
Seraglio. On the other Side are the Stables, where there is Room and
Accommodation for a hundred Horses. If your Curiosity be not satisfied with so
imperfect an Account of so famous a Place, you must consult those who were
permitted to enter farther.

Very near this Seraglio, and within the same Enclosure, there is another
Edifice, commonly called The Old Seraglio. 'Twas erected by one who was no
Lover of ill-contriv'd Structures, I mean Constantine the Great; and yet it is
certainly a very ugly Mass of Building, surrounded with Walls of an unusual
Height, without any Windows on the Outside. I will not undertake to justify
the Design of the Founder, though we may be allowed to suppose that he had some
secret Reasons for contriving it after this Manner. Besides I only saw the Back
of it, and perhaps the Front may be more regularly built. Here the reigning
Sultan shuts up the Wives of his Predecessors, who at their Entrance into this
Place may bid adieu to all the Pleasures of this Life.

The present Sultan's Wives are lodged in a Third Seraglio, which is joined so
close to that of the Grand Signior, that he may pass from one to the other
without exposing himself to the Rain. I need not tell you with what severity
they are guarded by the white and black Eunuchs, who never permit 'em to enjoy
the least Shadow of Liberty. All the Relations of Travelers are full of
Stories and Reflections on this Subject, and therefore instead of repeating the
Observations of others, I shall only add, that it is a Capital Crime to look
upon one of these Women. I saw a Turk at Galata whose Father was strangled for
so dangerous a piece of Curiosity, under the Reign of Amurath, whose Memory
will not be easily forgotten in the Places that were subject to his Dominion;
for he was certainly one of the severest and most vigilant Princes in the
World. 'Twas his daily Custom to walk in Disguise through the City, that he might
be an Eyewitness of the Care that was taken to put the Laws in Execution; and
he seldom or never walked the Rounds without leaving some headless Monuments of
his Justice: besides he frequently observed what was done in the City from his
Seraglio, by the help of some excellent Prospective-Glasses, with which the
Venetians had presented him. One day as he was making his usual. Observations,
he perceived a Man in Pera, who had also a Prospective-Glass, and was viewing
the Sultanesses, who were walking in the Garden. Immediately he called a
Capigi, and commanded him to go with four Mutes to such a House, and hang a
Man, whom he described, at the Window; which the Capigi executed, and Amurath
saw him and was satisfied.

From the Account I have given you of the Sultan's Palace, you may reasonably
conclude that the great Officers of the Empire are but meanly lodged. Most of
their Houses are enclosed in a kind of Park, which contains a Garden, and a
large Court bordered with Stables on one side, and Kitchens on the other. The
finest I have yet seen is that of Haly Bassa, Kaimacan of Constantinople,
whither I attended the Ambassador, when he received the first Audience of that
Minister, which was performed with the following Ceremonies.

First marched sixteen Livery-Men, in Red Coats, with a broad Gold Galoon on
the Seams, the Steward walking before 'em. They were followed by the The
Audience which the Caimakan of Constantinople gave to Mr. de Chateau-neuf the
French Ambassador P. 169

Valets de Chamber, Cooks, Clerks of the Office, and Commissaries of the
Chancery. After 'em walked six Interpreters, followed by as many Janisaries;
and at last came the Ambassador, accompanied with his Secretary, and
Chancellor, the most considerable Persons of the Nation marching some Paces
after him. In this Order he walked to Tophana, where he embarked with all his
Train, the Kaimacan having sent Boats to attend him, and a very fine gilt one
for himself, with twelve Rowers. There were a considerable number of French
Vessels in the Port, who saluted him with all their Guns. At his Arrival on the
other side he found his Led-Horses very richly harnass'd, with Silver Bridles,
and Embroidered Foot-Cloths trailing on the Ground. Immediately he mounted his
Horse, and all his Attendants falling into the same Order, as before, he rode
through the City to the Kaimacan's House, who sent his Kiaia, to receive him at
the Foot of the Stairs, accompanied with two other Officers, who led him under
the Arms to the Chamber of Audience, where there was a kind of Chair with a
Back, placed for him on the Sopha: Immediately after the Kaimacan entered, and
sat down upon the Sopha over against him. At first the Discourse was only
general; but after some Compliments to the Kaimacan on his late Promotion, they
began to talk of the present Posture of Affairs: and that Minister insisted
very long on the Grand Visier's happy Success in Hungary, informing the
Ambassador, that in less than two Months he made himself Master of the Cities
of Nissa, Widin, Semendria, and Belgrade it self, which he took by Storm after
a Siege of eight Days, and put the whole Garrison to the Sword, except 300 Men
who made their Escape. He related also the particular Circumstances of Count
Tekeli's Engagement with 4000 Transylvanians, who were entirely routed, scarce
200 of 'em escaping, and General Heuster himself being taken Prisoner. The
Ambassador received this agreeable News with the highest Marks of Joy, and
replied in these very Words, That it seemed there was a Sympathy between the
two Empires, since while the Emperor his Master was triumphing over their
common Enemies beyond the Rhine, he had the Pleasure to be informed of the
Glorious Success of his Highness's Arms in Hungary; adding, That this was
certainly an Effect of that entire Correspondence which had united the two
Empires for so long and uninterrupted a Series of Years. The Kaimacan answered,
That he had taken delight in making the same Observation, and that he looked
upon it as a happy Presage. Then the Ambassador took occasion to entreat him
to employ all his Interest for the Establishment and Confirmation of an Union
that was of such high Importance for the Happiness of both the Empires; for
it is plain, said he, that the Interests of both our Emperors are the same.
They cannot break the Union that links 'em together, without weakening
themselves: and it ought to be acknowledged as a Fundamental Maxim, That the
Grandeur of the Emperor my Master confirms that of his Highness, which
reciprocally contributes to the Glory and Safety of my Emperor. The Kaimacan
replied as one who was of the same Opinion; he spoke several times of an
Alliance between the two Emperors, adding, That 'twou'd not be the first time
the Ottoman and French Armies had carried on the same Design, and even obeyed
the same Orders. But the Ambassador declined to return a positive Answer,
because he could not rely upon the Fidelity of all that were present, and
perhaps I was one of those whom he doubted most, for they begin already to
suspect my Catholicism.

Then putting some odoriferous Matter into a Censer, they perfumed his Head and
Clothes, holding a large Cloth or Napkin above him to keep the Fumes from
evaporating. After this Ceremony was over, they brought Coffee, Sherbet, and at
last the usual Presents, consisting of Twenty five Vests, which were laid
before the Kaimacan. The first was for the Ambassador, and the rest for his
twenty four Attendants, who were called in Order by his Steward.

According as our Names were called, we stepped forwards to receive the Vests
from one of the Kaimacan's Officers, who first spread it before the
Ambassador, and then put it on our Shoulders. These Vests are such
inconsiderable Trifles, that the presenting of 'em seems rather an Affront than
a Mark of Esteem; for they are not worth above three Half-Crowns a-piece. They
are made of Cotton, branched with a little Silk of several Colors, after a
very odd and fantastical Manner. The Ambassadour's was not finer than the
rest, only spangl'd here and there with a little paltry Gold. I Am informed that
this Custom of presenting Vests is an usual Ceremony among the Turks,
proceeding from their extreme Desire of Presents, which is the usual Foundation
of their Kindness and Affection: for 'twou'd be reckoned as ridiculous, as it is
in vain, to endeavor to acquire their Friendship, or convince 'em of the
Sincerity of our Love by Protestations and other Marks of Affection, if they be
not accompanied with Presents. I can assure you that all my Turkish
Acquaintances are of the same Humor: and this Custom prevails so universally
that every one is obliged to comply with it.

After we had received our Vests, his Excellency retired with the Kaimacan to a
private Chamber, to discourse of secret Affairs. In the mean time we had
leisure to view the Apartments of the House, which were all opened to us; though
we might have contented our selves with the Sight of one, since there is no
difference between 'em; and therefore 'twill be an easy Task to gratify your
Curiosity with a Description of 'em. You must not expect a long Catalogue of
rare Pictures, magnificent Beds, large Looking-Glasses, silver Tables, curious
Hangings, and other rich Furniture: for there are no such Ornaments in the
House. Four bare Walls, a Plafond or Cieling, and a Sopha are all the Riches
and all the Beauty of their Rooms. It Is true their Plafonds are very fine, and
painted all over with Cochineel, Gold, and Azure: their way of designing is
peculiar to themselves, but its Oddness does not make it less pleasant; It Is a
kind of Moresco, the Figures entering into one another, and appearing the same
on all sides; and it must be acknowledged that the Turks have very fruitful
Inventions, for, I believe, there are a Million of several Sorts of Figures.
The middle of the Plafond is usually richer than the rest, both in Gilding and
Painting; but it is impossible to make you comprehend either of 'em, unless you
had seen something of a like Nature, which, I believe, you never did, since
there is not one Room in France thus adorned. The Walls are also covered with
the same sort of Paint instead of Hangings: and as for the Sopha, I cannot
represent it better than as a Bench about two Foot high, reaching from one end
of the Chamber to the other, on the Side next the Street, under the Windows,
which begin a Foot higher in the Wall: it is always between ten and eleven Foot
broad, and covered with Turkish or Persian Tapestry; besides which there are
Mats laid along the Wall, 4 or 5 foot broad, covered with Cloth or Velvet, and
over these there are large Cushions, stuffed with Hair or Wool. These Cushions
in great Men's Houses are either curiously embroidered, or made of a rich Cloth
of Gold: and it is here that the Turks sit night and day cross-legg'd like
Tailors, smoking Tobacco, and drinking Coffee, without any other Diversion
than playing with Shells, and sometimes a Game at Tric-trac, or the Goose. But
since I shall have occasion hereafter to speak of their Recreations, I shall at
present only give you an Account of their Houses.

While the Ambassador was discoursing in private with the Kaimacan, I went
down to the Garden, which is not above 100 Paces long, and 60 broad: the Walks
are gravelled, bordered in some places with Orange Trees, and in others with
Fruit Trees. The square Beds in the Garden are not cut and bordered like our
Flower-Plots, but only separated with Divisions, and filled with Flowers, of
which the Turks are very curious. In the Middle there is a pretty large Basin
of Water, from the Center of which there rises a little Marble Spire, gilt and
painted after the Turkish Manner, and casting forth Water through four Pipes.
There are also two other Basins at each End of the Garden, which are more
remarkable for the peculiar Oddness of their Structure, than for their Beauty.
They are framed almost like Sentinels wooden Boxes, only they are not quite so
deep, and there is a kind of Chapter on the Top, adorned with Gilding and
Figures. The Inside is cut into the Form of Scallop-Shells, on which the Water
falling makes a great number of little Cascades that run into a Basin, and form
another large Cascade, the Water of which is received into a Sort of Tub or
Vat, and from thence through several Holes, runs into little Canals about the
Breadth of four Fingers, cut out of a large Marble Pavement that reaches from
these Fountains to the Basin in the Middle of the Garden. The Pavement was
contrived on purpose for the Convenience of cutting out these little winding
Canals, which forming a vast number of regular and very pleasant Figures, fall
at last into the great Basin. This, Sir, is the best Account I can give you of
the Kaimacan's Garden, which may serve for all the rest I have hitherto had
occasion to see, since there is no great Difference between 'em. As for the
House, it is a great Mass of Building, the Front consisting of a high and broad
Staircase divided by two Galleries that reach from one end of the House to the
other; and the whole is daubed over very coarsly with a sort of Red and Green
Paint. Under the Staircase there is a large square Gate, that leads into a
Court surrounded with Galleries like the first, and supported with wooden
Pillars. Here the Kaimacan's Servants lodge, whose number may amount to fifty
or sixty, all clothed after the same manner, with a Cafetan or white Coat,
that covers 'em from Head to Foot. From thence I went to view the Stables,
which in this Country is usually the best furnished part of the House; and in
these I observed forty good Horses. After I had satisfied my Curiosity with a
View of all that was remarkable below, I went up again to my Companions, and
sat drinking Sherbet, till the Ambassador came out. The Kiaia accompanied him
to the Foot of the Stairs, where he received him at his coming, with the same
Officers that supported him under the Arms; but the Kaimacan came not out of
his Chamber, which in my Opinion was a little too stately for a Person of his
Character. The Ambassador did not pull off his Hat, either at his coming in or
going out: not that he slighted the Kaimacan, but out of pure Compliance to the
Manners of the Turks, who never uncover their Heads before Persons for whom
they have the least Respect. I had forgot to tell you, that when he entered the
Chamber all the Kaimacan's Servants bellowed out thrice, Is alla Malec allec is
alla: and at his Departure he was saluted with another Hollow; which is the
usual Welcome and Farewell of the Turks to Persons whom they intend to treat
with particular Marks of Honor. I am,

SIR, Your etc.
Constantinople, Aug. 1690.
LETTER XIV.
SIR,
MY unexpected stay in this City has procured me the splendid, or rather the
mortifying sight of Sultan Solyman's Triumphant Entry into Constantinople, at
the end of so successful a Campaign. The Turks are so puffed up with the
advantageous Progress of their Arms this Summer, and both their Contempt and
Hatred of the Imperialists are so extremely heightened that they look upon 'em
as dead Dogs, ripe for destruction, and flatter themselves with the Chimerical
Hope of seeing Vienna once again Besieged the next Campaign. The sight of so
great a quantity of Booty which was brought from Hungary, and is sold almost
for nothing in this City, has swollen their Pride to such a height, that they
usually treat Christians with intolerable Insolence, except the French, whom
they call their Friends and Allies. When they accidentally meet a Frank, whom
they know not, their first Question is, What Countryman are you? and if he
answers,

I Am a Frenchman.
Sono Francese, immediately they embrace him, and patting him gently on the
Shoulder, reply, We are Brothers.
Siamo Fratelli.

The Inhabitants of this City have not seen these many Years a more Magnificent
Ceremony than the late Entry of the Grand Signior, which was made in the
following Order: First marched 200 Capigi, or Keepers of the Grand Signior's
Gate, with tapering Caps, and a Cone, or sharp-pointed piece of Cloth hanging
down to their Noses; they were Commanded by the Capigi-Bachi. After 'em came
the Sorlaques, or Foot-Guards of the Body, consisting of, old picked Soldiers
who expect Preferment: They wore tucked up Gowns, carrying their Bows in their
Left Hand, and Quivers on their Shoulders: Their Caps were of Cloth, like those
of the Capigi, but instead of a Cone they were only adorned with Plumes of
Feathers. A Thousand Janisaries marched after 'em, Clad in Red, with Zercola's
on their Head, made of a large piece of Felt a Foot broad, which falls back on
their Shoulders, with a Cone or sharp point like that of the Capigi: Every one
of 'em carried a great Reed or Cane, eight foot long and three round, with an
Ivory Ball on the top, and their Aga walked before 'em.

The Janisaries were followed by 500 Chiauox's which are Horse Guards, the last
of 'em carrying the Standards and Colors that were taken from the
Imperialists. They had large Caps or Turbants above two Foot in circumference:
They were very well Mounted, and led by the Chiaoux-Bachi. After 'em marched
the Mutefaraca's, who are a sort of Officers that never go to the War, almost
like our Reformades. Next came the Kisler Aga, accompanied by the White and
Black Eunuchs, who walked on each side of him, to Guard the Sultanesses, who
rode in eight very fine Coaches, but could not be seen by reason of a piece of
Silk with which the Glasses were covered.

After them appeared the unfortunate Prince Mahomet IV. who, with his two Sons,
was placed in a Coach close barred like a Prison-Window, and guarded by twelve
Chiaoux's. Immediately after came the Sultan's Great Officers, to the number of
above 200 Persons, all richly Clothed in Embroidered Vests, and Turbants,
enriched with precious Stones: Their Horses were also adorned with Silver
Bridles, and very fine Foot Clothes, either Embroidered, or of Cloth of Gold,
trailing on the Ground.

The seven Visiers of the Bench brought up the Rear of this Magnificent Troop,
and were followed by the Mufti, who was mounted on a white Horse (but not so
stately as the rest) and attended by four Officers on Foot. Then came the
Selictar carrying the Grand Signior's Sword bare. At last the Sultan himself
appeared seated in a triumphal Chariot, open on all Sides, and covered all over
with silver-gilt Plates, enriched with counterfeit Jewels, which nevertheless
cast a great Splendor. The Chariot was drawn by Eight spotted Horses, covered
with Red Velvet, embroidered with Gold, and adorned with gilt Buckles. The
Inside of the Chariot was lined with Velvet of the same Color, embroidered
also with Gold; and in it there was a little Sopha, with a large Cushion of a
very rich Stuff, on which the Sultan sat. This place of the Chariot was
covered with a very rich Canopy, like that of a Coach, and raised so high, that
the Grand Signior might be easily seen by the Spectatours. He is about fifty
Years old, of a severe Aspect, and no very fine Shape. He wore a large Turbant,
almost like that of the Chiaoux's, adorned with two very magnificent Aigrets,
enriched with precious Stones: His Vest was of a very fine Stuff adorned with
Pearls, but much inferior to the Coat that cost Fifteen Millions, which the
King puts on when he receives Ambassadors. About and after the Chair marched a
hundred Aga's on Foot, with their Officers and Commanders; and in the last
place came Three hundred Spahi's.

At Night there were great Illuminations in the Seraglio and all the Mosquees:
and the People expressed their Joy by Feasts, Bone-fires, and repeated Shouts,
crying, without Intermission, Long live our Emperor, the Restorer of Monarchy,
and the Prophet's Darling.

Monsieur de Chateauneuf, who omits no occasion of pleasing the Turks, gave 'em
so many and so expensive Marks of the Share he took in their Joy, that his
Charge could not be much less than theirs. His Palace was almost covered with
Garlands of Myrtle; and at Night almost all the People of Constantinople
flocked thither to admire the Beauty of his Fireworks. The French Ships
signalized their Zeal and Affection to the Ottoman Interest, according to the
Orders they received from the Ambassador, both by the Illuminations of which
their Masts and Ropes were so full, that they seemed at a distance to be on
fire, and by repeated Discharges of their Artillery. Besides the Ambassador
prepared a splendid Feast for several Turkish Lords; among whom was the Prince
of Moldavia: There were two Tables for twenty Persons each, those who sat at
one being entertained by himself, and those at the other by his Secretary
Pelleran. The Guests were regaled with all imaginable Magnificence both at
Dinner and Supper; and two Fountains run Wine in the Court, all the while the
Feast lasted, whither all the Renegado's, Greeks, and Mariners, came to drink
the Healths of the Two Glorious Emperors, Lewis and Solomon, ever Great, and
ever Victorious, pronouncing the Word Vivat, according to the Custom of the
Country, with loud and repeated Acclamations, which is the same thing with the
English Huzza.

But among all those Expressions of Joy, that which scandalized me most, was a
Pyramid of Fire, forty Foot high, which burnt in the Court till the Morning.
For there was an Illumination on the Top of it representing on one Side the
Arms of France, and on the other, a Shield charged with Three fiery Crescents.
The Turks were extremely pleased to see with how much Ardour the French
espoused their Interests; and since that time have looked more favorably upon
our Countrymen than before. It Is true that they have been of late so much
obliged to France, that they might justly be reckoned the most ungrateful
People in the World, if they were not sensible of so many good Offices. For
without insisting on the powerful Diversion made by our Forces on the Rhine,
which has contributed so effectually to the Success of their Arms; they have,
to my certain Knowledge, received Supplies of Money from them, which, without
pretending to determine the precise Sums, I can assure you amount to a very
considerable Value; for it has been observed in Ships that brought 100000
Piasters, there were not 20000 for the use of the Merchants.

The Ambassador has the most convenient way that could be desired, to receive
the Sums that are designed for secret Service: for all the Money that comes
over to the Merchants must be carried to his House, where the Owners must
afterward receive it; so that People are not at all surpised, when at the
Arrival of a Ship they see Chests of Gold and Silver carried to him. And
besides, who knows whether the King sends not over Engineers, Gunners, and
Officers: I have seen several Persons of that Character here, and I my self
refused a Place which Monsieur de Chateauneuf would have given me in a Company
of French Granadiers, consisting of 200 Men, who are publicly levied in this
City.

This puts me in Mind of a remarkable Accident that happened lately at
Thessalonica. Two Engineers arrived in that Port, pretending to be French
Gentlemen, and that they traveled purely out of Curiosity: the Consul received
'em with the highest Demonstrations of Civility, and invited 'em to lodge at
his House; for it is the usual Custom of all the Consuls in the Levant to show a
great deal of Respect and Kindness to Strangers that seem to be Persons of Note
or Quality. But having other concealed Designs, they addressed themselves two
Days after their Arrival, to a Greek that wore a I^ruggoman's Cap, and prayed
him to carry 'em to the ^assa, and to interpret for 'em, without acquainting
the Consul. The Greek, who was glad of any Opportunity to earn Money, embraced
their Proposal very cheerfully, and accompanied 'em to the Bassa's House, where
they declared their Profession, and offered him their Service, but without
intimating in the least that they were willing to renounce their Religion. The
Turkish Officer received 'em very favorably, and promised to recommend 'em to
some Person at Constantinople, who would quickly procure 'em an Employment
suitable to their Inclinations. Thus they returned to the Consul's House very
well satisfied with the Bassa's Civility: but the Interpreter's Conscience not
permitting him to have a Hand in assisting the declared Enemies of his
Religion, he discovered the whole Intrigue to the Consul, without concealing
the Arguments and earnest Entreaties they used to oblige him to Secrecy.
Immediately the honest Consul believing that 'twou'd be an acceptable Piece of
Service both to God and the King, to prevent the wicked Designs of his Guests,
ordered 'em to be apprehended, and sent back to France in Fetters. It Is plain
that his Intentions were good, and that he could not be justly blamed for
taking that Course; but he quickly found, to his Cost, that they had more
potent Friends than he imagined, for after they had made their Complaints, he
received a severe Reprimand from the Marquess de Seignelay, and was in danger
of being turned out of his Office.

The Number of Deserters that come over to the Turks is almost incredible.
There are at present so many of 'em in the Service, that there might be several
complete French Regiments in the Ottoman Army. I know that such a Design has
been several times proposed to the Ambassador by the Grand Vizier, Kopergli
Oglou, but the little Regard he still preserves to the external Rules of
Decency, has hitherto to restrained him from giving his Consent. Neither do I
see any Reason why the Turks should be offended at his seeming Niceness, since
it is not at all prejudicial to their Interest: For while their main Design is
served, they may very well dispense with a needless Piece of Formality, and the
French Soldiers fight as well when they are dispersed among the Ottoman Troops,
as if they were all united in a distinct Body. That which allures 'em to come
over in such vast Numbers, is the favorable Treatment they receive at their
Arrival: about eight Days ago I saw a hundred and fifty of 'em march through this
City, with Drums beating, and Colors flying, I mean a Piece of White Cloth,
which in this Country, as well as upon the Sea, is reckoned the Banner of
France. Prisoners of all Nations, except the Germans, enjoy the same
Privileges, provided they claim his Majesty's Protection. It Is true there are
several pretended Deserters, who carry on their hidden Designs under so
specious a Disguise: Nor have the Turks yet learned Circumspection, though they
have been so often deceived. I could tell you twenty Stories of this Nature,
but I shall content my self with relating one Instance, to convince you that
the Emperor has as good Spies as the King of France.

About the End of the last Year, immediately after the Death of the Ambassador
Girardin, one Vanel came over as a Deserter to the Grand Visier's Army in
Hungary, pretending to be a French Gentleman, who was taken Prisoner on the
Rhine, and forced to serve as a Voluntier in the Emperor's Army, which he
left, as soon as he found a favorable Occasion to make his Escape. But not
contenting himself to remain as a Spy in the Army, he had the Confidence to
assume the Character of Agent of France, till the Arrival of the Ambassador
whom the King had named. The Grand Vizier seeing a Man whose very aspect seemed
to answer for his Honesty; and besides, perceiving that he made a great Figure,
was so far from suspecting him, that he owned him as Agent: So that during the
whole Winter he managed the King's Affairs with as much Authority as if he had
been empowered with a Commission from Versailles. It Is true, he seemed to be
very jealous of the Honor and Interest of the Nation; but in private he
endeavored to persuade the Grand Vizier that the only way to preserve the
Ottoman Empire, was to hasten the conclusion of a Peace with the Emperor; and
in the mean time he found out ways to acquaint the Court of Vienna with all the
Transactions at the Port.

This cunning Spy had the Art to play so difficult a Game with so much
dexterity and success, that he gained the esteem and affection both of the
Grand Vizier and Sultan, from whom he received considerable Presents. And even
the French had at last so good an Opinion of him, that they scrupled not to
address themselves to him on all occasions, as they would have done to an
Ambassador. So that he thought his Credit so well established, that he might
boldly expect the arrival of Monsieur de Chateauneuf, who was coming to
persuade the Vizier to continue the War against the Empire. Vanel went to meet
him a days Journey beyond Sophia, and told him, that since Fortune had engaged
him in the Ottoman Service, during the Vacancy of the Embassy, he thought
himself obliged by the Honor he had to be a French Gentleman, to do what
Service he could to the Nation, as he had actually done for several Months, and
was ready to give him an exact account of all his Proceedings. Afterward he
went with the Ambassador to the Vizier, who gave him so favorable a Character,
that Monsieur de Chateauneuf either did not, or seemed not to doubt of his Zeal
and Affection to the King's Service. However, it is probable, that he was not
entirely satisfied with his Conduct, and that he wrote to several Places for
better Information concerning him. For having one Evening received a Packet in
Vanel's Presence, that subtle Spy fearing that the Intelligence might concern
him, adventured to peep over the Ambassador's Shoulder, while he was reading
the Letters, and perceiving that they gave a very suspicious Account of him, he
resolved to prevent the danger that threatened him by a sudden Flight. Next
Morning he rose as soon as the day began to appear, and went immediately to one
D' Etanchot, a French Captain in Count Teckely's Troops, who was his intimate
Friend: He accosted him with a Melancholic Air, and entreated him to carry him
to Count. Teckely's Army, where he had some business to dispatch that required
all possible expedition. D' Etanchot replied, That he was ready to serve him,
and that he would immediately go along with him after he had received the
Ambassador's Orders. Vanel, who dreaded nothing more than the discovery of his
Design, conjured his Friend not to insist on that piece of Formality; and to
engage him the more effectually to comply with his Desires, he offered him 1000
Pistoles, promising to give him as much more at the end of his Journey. D'
Etanchot was extremely surpised at his Earnestness and Impatience, and
perceived by the great Offers he made him, that the business was of greater
Importance than at first he imagined: His Fidelity to his Prince was stronger
than his Affection to his Friend, and at last he told him plainly, that he
would not go with him unless he would suffer him to ask the Ambassador's
Permission before his departure. Then Vanel seeing himself discovered, and
fearing Torture more than Death, which he knew was inavoidable, lest he should
not be able to endure the extreme violence of the Pain, without divulging his
Secret, he resolved to be his own Executioner; and suffering D' Etanchot to
walk some paces before him, without speaking a Word, he pulled a Pistol out of
his Pocket, charged with three Bullets, and shot himself through the Head. His
Friend surpised at the unexpected noise, looked back, and seeing him lie
grovelling on the Ground, and wallowing in his own Blood, run immediately to
acquaint the Ambassador with the Tragical Accident, who at first could not
believe him, but afterward suspecting him to be the Murderer, ordered him to
be secured: Then he went with several of his Servants, to the place where this
unfortunate Person lay, and finding him still alive, though very weak, he asked
him, How he was; Optime, replied Vanel, for they used to discourse in Latin.
Then the Ambassador inquired, who put him in that condition, I did, answered
he: What moved you to such an act, replied the Ambassador; Because, said he, I
was weary of Life. Afterward the Ambassador asked him several Questions
concerning the place of his Birth, and his design in coming hither, but could
not obtain any satisfactory Answer; and (which is hardly credible) he endured
the most exquisitely cruel Torments they could invent, without making the least
discovery, and even was so little daunted, that while he lay under the
extremity of the Torture, It Is in vain, said he to the Ambassador, to torment
me thus, you shall never know more than I have already told you. In short, he
gave so many Marks of an invincible Courage and Resolution, that I could hardly
forbear comparing him to Socrates, or Minutius Scaevola, if I had not a natural
reluctance to praise Men of his Profession. Thus he died of his Wounds, and
left no Papers of consequence, that could discover his Intrigue: But the
Ambassador and his Men seized on ten or twelve good Horses, and above 25000
Livres in Gold that were found in his Possession.

I shall conclude this Letter with telling you, that I Am resolved to depart
with the first fair Wind for Alexandria, in a Vessel belonging to Ciotad,
Commanded by Captain Carbonneau, who is an old Seaman, and perfectly well
acquainted with all the parts of the Mediterranean. But I Am afraid he will
stand in need of all his Experience to bring us safe to our designed Harbor;
for this is the most dangerous season of the Year. However, I have stayed so
long in Constantinople, that, though the Voyage were more hazardous, I could
willingly adventure on it.

I am, SIR, Your etc.
Constantinople, Nov. 1690.
LETTER XV.
SIR,
STorms and Contrary Winds are the main, and almost the only Objects of a
Traveller's Fear at Sea: And Yet I reckon my self extremely obliged to the Bad
Weather we met with about eight days ago, since it forced our Captain to stop
at the famous Island of Scio, where we still continue.

The Greeks, and in general all the Christian Inhabitants, enjoy so many
Privileges, and retain so many Marks of their ancient Liberty, that if I did
not sometimes see a Turbant, I should almost forget that I am still in Turkey.
The whole compass of the Island does not amount to 100 Miles; yet there are
above 200 Churches in it, and at least 30 Monasteries belonging to the Greek
and Latin Christians, who perform their several Rites without the least
disturbance. They are suffered to walk in Procession about the Streets, as in
France; though there is nothing more odious to the Turks than that Ceremony: And
which is still more remarkable, the Greeks, who, in all other parts of the
Ottoman Empire are reputed Slaves, live here under the Protection of a
Magistrate, who has the Title of Consul. This Happiness, which ought to be so
much the dearer to the Greeks of this Island, because it is peculiar to
themselves, is only a continuation of the Favors bestowed on 'em by Mahomet
II. when he made himself Master of Greece. For the Sciots perceiving that
'twou'd be in vain to resist an Enemy who had lately taken Constantinople from
the Palaeologi, and was still Victorious in all his Attempts, resolved to
mitigate his Fury by a voluntary submission, and owned themselves his Subjects,
perhaps before he thought of Attaking 'em. Mahomet was so well satisfied with
this Mark of their Affection, that he granted 'em several advantageous
Privileges which they still enjoy. For the Turks are very Religious observers
of their Promises to their own Subjects; though they scruple not to violate
Treaties concluded with Neighboring Princes, especially Christians, and
Heretical Mahometans, such as the Persians, of whom the Turks have almost as
bad an Opinion as the Roman Catholics have of Protestants; because the
Persians embrace the Doctrine of one Haly, who pretended to reform the
Mohammedan Religion, as Luther and Calvin have Reformed the Christian.

At that time the Island was possessed by the Justiniani, with the Title of a
Principality, under the Protection of the Genoese, who were then Masters of
many fine Countries in Natolia, as it appears by the Escutcheons and Arms of
the Republic, which are still to be seen almost at every end of a Field.

There is but one City in the Island, and that a very small one, though it has
eight Gates. The Streets are broad enough for Coaches; and the beauty of the
old Houses is a sign of the richness and splendour of their ancient Possessors.
The Castle is not much less than the City, and Commands both that and the Port:
Yet some Years ago the Marquis Du Quesne had the Courage to attack some Pirates
who retir^d under its Walls, and fired above fifty Broad-sides into the City,
because the Bassa made a show of resisting him. This attempt caused so great a
Consternation among the Inhabitants, that their fears continue even after the
Marquiss's Death, and they still tremble when they hear his Name mentioned. The
French are very proud of this Expedition, though it is certain they have no great
reason to boast of it, since it cost the Nation 100000 Crowns, which Fabre, the
French Agent, paid to the Grand Vizier. This was, in my Opinion, a sufficient
reparation to the Turks; and there was no Honor got by so vigorous an Action,
but that which is due to the Memory of the brave Man that performed it.

It Is equally difficult to enter the Port, and to get out of it, as our Captain
has found to his cost: For the charge of maintaining the Ships Company amounts
at least to 60 Livres a day, and I believe he would willingly give 30 Louis d'
Ors to be at Sea again.

The Government of Scio is a very considerable Post, and the Bassa is
oftentimes advanced to the Dignity of Grand Vizier. It Is not above a Year since
Kopergli Oglou was removed from this place, and made Vizier after the Death of
Ismael. He has under him a Kiaia, a Kady, a Vaivoide, and a Receiver of
Customs, as all other Bassa's have. The Last of these Officers has more
Employment here than in most other places, by reason of the Mastic that grows
in this Island, better and more plentiful than in any other part of the World.
There are above a Thousand Chests of it gathered every Year, each of which
contains Three Hundred Weight, and the total Value amounts to above 200000
Crowns. But the Inhabitants are not much enriched by so considerable a Trade:
For they are not only obliged to pay one half of the Mastic by way of Tribute,
but must sell the rest at a very low rate to the Receiver of Customs. It Is a
white odoriferous Gumm, that runs in the Spring out of little holes which are
made in the Bark of a small, weak, and twining Shrub that creeps along the
Ground, as Vines would do if they were not supported.

I have not hitherto had occasion to see any remarkable Church in this Island,
but that which is called Niaomai: It Is a very ancient Building, and adorned
with a piece of Mosaic Work, like that of Sancta Sophia. I will not trouble you
with the Story of its Miraculous Image, since all these Legends are only the
same Tale, repeated with some small alterations. The Greeks believe and
maintain these Impostures with a great deal of Zeal; and even the Turks who
abhor the Christian Religion, worse than Magic, are sometimes cheated by 'em:
For when they hear that one of the Saints cures such a Distemper, they procure
Masses to be said, and present Candles with as much Devotion as the most
Superstitious Greek. I shall take this occasion to relate an accident that
happened not long ago in this place; and perhaps you will not think your time
ill employed in reading so odd and diverting a Story. You have doubtless heard
of St. Anthony of Padua, who is the Padrone Singularo of all the Italians, and
has acquired so great a Reputation of working Miracles, that though he was a
declared Papist, and more than that, a Monk of the Order of St. Francis; the
Greeks have placed him among their Tutelar Saints, and sing Kyrie Eleison's to
him with as much Devotion as to St. Polycarp himself. He has a Magnificent
Chapel in this place, and in it a Wooden Image, which is very well painted,
gilt, and crowned, and wants neither He nor She Votaries in abundance. His
Miracles are the only subject of the common Talk. Some own themselves obliged
to him for Husbands, and others for Wives; sometimes he heals a broken Leg, and
saves others from Shipwreck; and, in a word, I know not one Person here who
has not received some Marks of his Favor. It Is true, he is apt to grow sullen,
and woe be to the poor Suppliants when little St. Anthony takes the pet, for
he will even let 'em cry their Eyes out, without deigning to take notice of 'em:
However, there is no Disease without its Remedy, and a few smart Lashes about
the Shoulders usually cures him of the Spleen. But when the Distemper is very
stubborn, and the Dose of the Whip proves ineffectual, they either turn him out
of his Lodging, and make him lie abroad in the Wind and Rain, or dip him ten or
twelve times in Water, with a great Stone at his Neck, which always produces
the desired effect, and makes the little Gentleman as Complaisant as they can
wish. One of the Turks in the Castle, who had ventured all his Stock on Board a
Saique, and was afraid of losing it either by Storm or Piracy, resolved to
steal St. Anthony, of whom he had heard so many Wonders, and either by fair or
foul means to make him preserve his Goods. He waited some time for a convenient
opportunity to put his design in execution; and one day perceiving that there
were none in the Church but himself, he hid the miraculous Image under his
Vest, and carried it away undiscovered. As soon as he came home he set it in
the most honorable Place of his House, adorned it with Flowers, and kept two
Wax Candles perpetually burning before it; addreffing himself to it every day
with a great deal of Reverence, and humbly acquainting it that his whole Estate
was on board the Saique; and that the Loss of that would entirely ruin him and
his Family. Thus he continued as long as he might reasonably hope that the
Saique was safe; but when the time was expired, in which he expected to hear of
its Return, he took away the Flowers and Candles, and began to treat the Image
very roughly, beating it every day, and threatening a worse Usage, if he should
find that it had neglected his Saique. Thou infamous Christian, said he,
think thou to mock a Musulman, whose Slave thou art not worthy to be? By
Mahomet, if thou do not restore my Saique, I Will beat thee to Pieces.

In the mean time both the Greeks and Romanists were extremely grieved for the
Loss of their Saint: and their Consternation was the greater, because they
could not imagine him to be stoll'n away, since he was only made of Wood. The
Cordeliers had not the least Share in the common Affliction; but since they
have an admirable Faculty of improving every thing to the best Advantage, they
declared publicly that the Saint was not able longer to endure the Coldness of
the Peoples Devotion, and had therefore withdrawn his Presence from among 'em.
And even an old Father dreamed that S. Anthony appeared to him, and said, My
Son, I have left this City, because I was no longer able to be a Witness of the
Crimes that are daily committed in it, and the Want of Love to God, and Zeal to
his Service. The good Man related his Dream to the People, and exhorted 'em to
recall the Saint by Prayers, Vows, and above all, by a great number of Masses.
At last the Turk heard of the safe Arrival of the Saique with his Goods, so
that thinking himself obliged in Conscience to release the Saint out of his
Prison, he carried him back with a great deal of Honor, and told the whole
Story. The Image was very joyfully received by the Christians, who looked upon
this as a New Miracle; which re-kindl'd their Devotion to such a Degree, that
it can never be more ardent than it is at present: the Turk also gave 100
Piasters, as an^ Acknowledgment of the Favor he had received, and the Fathers
ordered the Money to be cast into a silver Chain, with which they fastened the
Image, to prevent its being stoll'n hereafter: for they considered that People
are always apt to follow a bad Example, and that they might perhaps miss their
Saint when they should have most need of him.

This Accident has convinced me of a Truth I could never believe before, I mean
that Superstition may bear such an absolute Sway in the Minds of those who are
under its Power, that even Turks and Christians may join together in some Rites
of Devotion. I confess I was so far from giving Credit to Relations of this
Nature, that I could hardly believe my own Eyes on a like Occasion at
Lampedusa, where we touched in our Voyage to Malta. But since I am now of
another Opinion, I shall take this Occasion to acquaint you with an Observation
I made there, which I durst not mention so long as I thought it impossible.

There is in that Island a little Chapel dedicated to the Virgin, in which
there is an Altar, and a Coffin with a Turbant laid upon it, which is usually
called Mahomet's Tomb. Both Turks and Christians have so great a Veneration for
this Chapel, that they never pass it by without leaving Money, Victuals, or
some other Offering. At our Arrival we found two large and fresh Pastaiques, a
Sequin of Gold, some silver Aspers, and small Coin of Malta, to which our
Captain added a French Piece of Threepence halfpenny. Our Pilot told me that
these Offerings were designed for the Relief of poor Slaves, who oftentimes
escaped thither from Malta and Afric; adding that the Place was so Sacred and
Miraculous that none but Slaves durst take any of these things from the Altar;
or, if they did, that they could not possibly get out of the Island. He related
also several Instances of these Miracles, but all his Arguments and Stories
could not hinder me from eating one of the Pastaiques; for the Weather was very
hot, and you know that those who are not accustomed to the Sea are usually very
desirous of Fruit. To return to Scio.

I went the other day to see a Place called the Schools of Homer, though according
to all probability there were never any Schools in it. I incline rather to
believe that 'twas formerly a Place where Sacrifices were offered to the God
Pan, or some other Rural Deity: for I saw nothing but a square Altar cut out of
a Rock, on the Shore, with some decayed Basso-Relievo's on the Sides, among
which you may distinguish the Representation of an Ox, Wolf, Sbeep, and
Rabbet, besides some other Beasts which are less distinct. Not far from thence
I saw a paltry Village, where they assured me Homer was born: but Smyrna
pretends a better Title to the Honor of being the Birthplace of that great
Man.

I observed nothing else remarkable in this Island, except their Manner of
Living, which is extremely free: for they give and receive Visits, make
Entertainments, and the Women sit at the Doors of the Houses, and walk with
Young Men to the Fields, with as much Liberty as if they were in France.
Besides they are of a very sociable Humor, and any Frenchman, who is Master of
a tolerable Stock of Wit, may quickly find a Mistress, and even sometimes an
advantageous Match in this Place. For it is the highest Ambition of the Women of
this Island to marry a Frank; both because they are naturally of a freer Temper
than the Men of the Country, and are not subject to the Grand Signior, nor
consequently pay any Avanies, Taxes, or Imposts; which are two very
considerable Advantages.

This is the only Island in the Levant, where the Custom of wearing long
Garments does not prevail: for the Sciots retained the Fashion used by the
Franks, after their Subjection to the Turks. They still use Doublets or
Wast-coats, Breeches, and Shoes; and besides they wear their Hair long: but we
have changed so many Fashions since that time, that they who have still kept
that which was then in use appear very ridiculous at present. Their Hats have
broad Brims, not cocked up, and tapering Crowns, somewhat resembling a
Sugar Loaf: the Sleeves of their Doublets are wide and open, but close at the
Wrist: their Breeches are open below, edged with Ribbons, and their Drawers
appear under 'em: their Shoes have large open Ears, and are sharp-pointed at
the Toe, as they were usually made in our Country about Twenty Years ago. The
Women's Habit is not different from that which is used by the Common People in
Bretagne, Maine, Normandy, and some other Parts of France. For they wear a kind
of short Cassock, fastened with a Lace before, and over that another of Silk
Stuff, of which there is a great deal made in the Island. This Cassock, which
the Maids of my Country would call a Waste-coat, reaches not below the Middle
of the Thigh, and the Sleeves which are not very long, are tied up a little
below the Bending of the Arm, for the Convenience of wearing Silken Gloves,
which are also made in Scio, and are not unhandsome. Besides they have a kind
of Petty-Coat, in which there are (I believe) thirty Else of Stuff, for it is
pleited quite round, except on the Forepart, and these Foldings are all of an
equal Depth, and sewed together: this Petty-coat is so short, that it hides not
above one half of their Legs: and they are always very careful to wear fine and
tight Stockins, lest that which appears should give a Man an ill Opinion of
what is concealed. In their Head-Dress they differ both from the Franks and
Levantines; for it consists only in a Piece of Cloth wrapped about their Heads.

There are in this Island several Families that pretend to Nobility, and even
some that draw their Pedigree from the Justiniani; but their Education, and Way
of Living, is so unsuitable to their high Birth, that 'twou'd seem altogether
incredible, if it were not attested by all the Inhabitants of the Island.

I am, SIR, Your etc.
Scio, December. 1690.
LETTER XVI.
SIR,
WE set said from Scio on the 20 th. of the last Month, and two Days after were
in the Height of Stanchio, a little Island, famous for the Birth of
Hippocrates, and the celebrated Apelles; and for a Tree of such prodigious
Bigness, that its Shadow is large enough to cover 150 Men. I cannot give you a
more particular Account of that Island, since we stopped not there, but kept on
our Course till we arrived at Rhodes on Christmass-Day: Instead of a large
Description of this Island, you must content your self with an Account of what
Observations I could make in the narrow space of half a Day.

The Island of Rhodes is a hundred Miles in Compass: 'Twas taken from the
Saracens by the Knights of S. John of Jerusalem, on the Day of the Virgin's
Assumption, Ann. 1309. and retaken by Solomon II. Emperor of the Turks, in the
Year 1522. by the Treachery of Andrew d' Amaral, one of the Knights, and
Chancellor of the Order; who aspiring to the Dignity of the Great Master; and
being disappointed of his Hopes to attain it, by the Election of Monsieur de
Villiers l' I Will Adam to that Office, was so enraged, that he shot an Arrow into
the Enemy's Camp, with a Letter discovering the only Place where the Town could
be successfully attacked.

The City is little, but extremely strong, both by reason of its Situation on a
Rock, and the great number of Bastions and Towers that command one another very
advantageously. The Great Masters House, and the Inns of the Seven Languages
remain still entire, and the same may be said of the Church of S. John, though
the Turks have turned it into a Mosquee, for they have not so much as defaced
the Images of our Savior and the Virgin, represented over the Door in
Bass-Relief. Though I had not known that this Island belonged formerly to the
Knights of Malta, I should have easily discovered it by the great number of
Inscriptions, and Scutcheons of the Order, that are over the Gate of the City,
and almost every where else. And besides there are so many other ancient
Monuments of the same Nature, that I never saw so vast a number of Inscriptions
in so small a Spot of Ground.

It Is related in the History of the Order, that this Island was formerly
infested by a horrible Dragon, above thirty Foot long, who abode in a Cave not
far from the City, and made such a dreadful Havoc all around, that there was
no Safety in the Country. The Story adds, that his very Breath infected all the
Neighborhood of his Cave, and that his Skin was so hard, that no Arrow could
pierce it, but that he was killed at last by a Knight of Provence, called
Dedoat de Goson. I always suspected the Credit of this Relation, but mine Eyes
have now convinced me of the Truth of it: for the Monster's Head is on one of
the Gates of the City toward the Land, and I had time to take a full View of
it. I cannot represent it better than by comparing it to the Head of a Hog;
only it is longer and bigger, and has no Ears; the Jaws are very large, and
armed with long and sharp Teeth.

Since I am not over-fond of believing any thing that seems strange and
unaccountable, I must beg leave to persist in my Incredulity, concerning the
Famous Colossus, which was formerly the Glory and Ornament of this Island.

It Is true, Strabo, Pliny, and several other Grave Writers, seem to believe
this Story: but Authors as well as other Men, take Pleasure in relating
Wonders. This was the usual Custom of the Ancients, especially Pliny and
Herodotus, who have stuffed their Writings with such lofty Fables, as the
Reader may easily perceive by a transient View of their Works. And besides when
an Author of any considerable Reputation in the Learned World relates a Matter
of Fact, it is always confirmed by the Testimony of those who follow him.
Nevertheless in this Case, the Opinions of Authors are very different; for
Chares according to some, erected the Colossus, whereas others ascribe that
Honor to Lacches: some with Strabo relate, that 'twas seventy Cubits high; and
others affirm that its Height amounted to Eighty; so that the Story is at the
best doubtful and uncertain. But to examine the Matter more narrowly, the
largest Computation of the Height of the Colossus will hardly amount to what
is required by the Circumstances of the Story: for the Breadth of the Port of
Rhodes, between the opposite Shores, where the Feet of the Colossus are said to
have been fixed, amounts to 324 measured Feet, so that the whole Figure must
have been 500 Foot high. And besides how is it possible to conceive that a Mass
of such a Prodigious Bigness could be cast. I know some pretend that 'twas
built by Pieces, and that it consisted only of Stone lined with Brass; but this
Opinion as well as the other is clogged with unsurmountable Difficulties, as
'twill appear from the following Reflections.

The tallest of the Egyptian Pyramids, which are justly reckoned among the
Wonders of the World, could not be raised above 520 Foot high; and the Tower of
Strasburgh, which has not (and perhaps never had) its equal in the World, does
not exceed 560 Feet. Now these admirable Buildings have sufficient Bases or
Foundations, to support the Weight of the Superstructure; whereas this enormous
Figure must have been four times bigger above than below, without reckoning the
Arms that hung down, or at least one of 'em which carried a Lanthorn, and (if
the Story be true) could not be made but by the Architects whom Aesop sent to
King Nectanebus. I will not insist upon the equal poising of so great a Mass,
which was both absolutely necessary, and extremely difficult in this Case; but
shall proceed to more obvious Reasons. It Is said that after this Colossus was
overthrown by an Earthquake, it remained where it fell till the Year 656, or
according to others 952, which is a new Controversy; and that the Saracens
broke it to pieces, and sold the Brass to a Jew, who carried it to Antioch. And
here we meet with another Variation in the Relations of Authors; for though most
are agreed that 900 Camels were loaded with the Brass, there are some that
reduce the Number to 800, but neither of these Opinions is well grounded.

Now, Sir, I would gladly be informed where the Colossus fell; and they who
maintain the Truth of this Story, will perhaps find this to be a more puzzling
Question than they imagine. For considering the Situation of its Legs, they
cannot pretend that it fell toward the Land, and consequently they must
acknowledge that it tumbled into the Sea, where it could not lie without
stopping the Mouth of the Harbor; nor could that be done without ruining the
Trade of the City, on which all its Riches depended. But these necessary
Consequences of this Supposition, are directly contradicted by History, which
assures us, that Rhodes was a very flourishing City, and that its Port was as
good and as much frequented, as ever, at the Arrival of the Saracens.

But this is not the only Absurdity that destroys the Credit of the Story. It Is
well known that a Camel's Burden never exceeds five or six hundred Weight,
especially when the Journey is considerably long: and how then could 900 of
those Animals carry away so prodigious a Quantity of Brass. For you will find
by Calculation, that every Foot in the Height of the Colossus, (reckoning 'em
one with another) weighed above 3000 Pounds; since it is computed that a square
Foot of that Metal, containing an Inch in Thickness, weighs above fifty Pounds.
Now it is plain, that the very encompassing of the ^ody of the Colossus would
require much more than sixty such Pieces, which according to the
above-mention^d Computation, amount to 1500 Pounds, without reckoning the
Overplus; and by the same Proportion you may guess at the Quantity of Brass
that would have been necessary for lining the whole Figure.

This Colossus puts me in mind of the extravagant Proposal made to Alexander
the Great by an Architect called Dinocrates, who undertook to build a City on
Mount Atlas, and to cut it into the Shape of a Man, with a Cup in his Hand
disgorging a River. Could ever a more ridiculous Chimaera enter into a
distempered Brain? But the Ancients could easily swallow the greatest
Absurdity, and there are still too many professed Adorers of those fabulous
Writers, who defend all their Lies and Mistakes with a stupid Obstinacy. As for
my part, I confess my Faith is so weak on such Occasions, that I cannot forbear
suspecting the Truth of the Story of the Rhodian Colossus. At least since I
have so much Complaisance to the Authors that attest it, as to keep my self
from denying it absolutely; I hope they will give me leave to think that 'twas
somewhat smaller, less wonderful, and situated in another Place, than they
imagine: for a much less incredible Bulk will suffice, if we suppose that 'twas
placed at the Mouth of the Harbor for Galleys. However I dare not venture to
assure you that I have seen the Place where the Colossus of the Sun stood, but
only where it is believed it stood: for thus I shall be sure to keep close to
the Truth, which I have always made the Standard of my Relations.

We stayed part of a Day at Rhodes, and set Sail the same Night with a fair
Wind; but a sudden Change of Weather obliged us to stand in to the Road of
Cyprus.

Cyprus is an Island almost of the same Bigness with Rhodes. The Air is so
sweet, clear, and temperate, that the Weather is perpetually fair; at least I
can assure you, that during the little time we spent in it, I could not
perceive the least Sign of Winter. It produces great Abundance of Sugar,
Cotton, and delicious Wine: besides it is the best Country in the World for
Hunting, and Provisions are so incredibly cheap, that, as the French Consul
assured me, the greatest Lover of his Belly cannot spend Forty Piasters a Year
in Eating and Drinking. The Town is neither large nor neat, inhabited by a
Medley of Turks and Christians, as all other Places under the Grand Signior's
Dominion. I saw a Man in it that had four Arms, two on each Side, one above the
other, but he could only use the lower. The 27 th. in the Morning we set Sail,
and arrived at Alexandria on the 8 th. instant toward Noon.

The Land lies so extremely low, that though the Sun shone very bright, we could
not discover the Coast, till we were very near it. At the same time we
perceived a Saique making toward us, with a Pilot and four Officers of the
Custom-House. Perhaps most of us would have willingly dispensed with the last
of our Visitants; but we stood very much in need of the Pilot's Help, for both
the Road and Harbor are extremely dangerous, by reason of the lurking Rocks
that can hardly be avoided without the Assistance of a Seaman of the Country.
At last having cast Anchor very happily, I went ashore in the Saique. As I
passed by the Custom-House, I was somewhat surpised at the unusual Exactness
of the Officers; for they searched me all over, and even thrust their Hands
into my Breeches, to know whether I had brought any Gold or Silver, which pay a
considerable Impost to the Grand Signior, commonly called Gold-Duty. But I was
much more surpised at Night, when they came to shut us up like so many
Prisoners, as they do every Night in the Week, and on Fridays at Noon; by
reason of a foolish Prophecy, that foretells the Conquest of the City by the
Franks. For since 'twou'd be very troublesome to shut as many Doors as there
are Franks in the Town, all those who bear that Name are obliged to lodge in
certain spacious Hans, called Fondies, which having but one Gate or Door, are
quickly secured. The French, English, and Dutch have each a distinct Han, where
they live, without meddling in the least with one another's business, either in
Peace or War. The Merchants who reside here are for the most part only Factors
to answer the Commissions of their Correspondents in Christendom: Nor can this
City be reckoned as a place of Commerce, unless by the bye, for no considerable
Caravans come hither, and Aleppo is properly the Seat of Trade, and Residence
of the Consuls.

The famous City of Alexandria, admired in former Ages for its Extent and
Beauty, is now a wretched heap of Cottages, that seem to have been built on
purpose to insult over the deplorable fate of the Ruins on which they are
founded. There cannot be a more lively Instance of the frailty of human
Grandeur, than those rich Fragments of Marble, Porphyry, and Granite, that are
every where to be seen mixed with Earth, Wood, and Stone. The whole City is as
it were buried under the Ruins of overturned Palaces; and it is impossible to
behold that magnificent Rubbish, without reflecting with a certain Melancholic
Pleasure on the ancient Splendour of these celebrated Structures. But since I
have reason to believe that such general Remarks would not satisfy your
Curiosity, I shall proceed to give you a more particular account of the
admirable Remains of Alexandria.

It appears by the Walls (which are not so ruinous as the Houses) that the
compass of the City amounted to Ten Miles: But they are infinitely more
remarkable for their Beauty and Magnificence, than for the largeness of their
Extent. They are 20 Foot thick throughout, and joined with a certain Cement as
hard as Stone: From space to space they are flanked with great square Towers,
which are so strong and massive that they appear like so many Castles; and
within each Tower there are Cisterns, Halls, and a sufficient number of
Chambers to lodge at least 100 Men. But, which is still more convenient and
useful, there are Casemates under the Walls round the whole City, in which,
together with the Towers, there was room enough to lodge 50000 Men, who were
always ready either to appear in Arms on the Walls in case of necessity, or to
march upon occasion to any place in the City. The Walls are also surrounded
with good False-brays, which are still entire; and if you add to these a broad,
deep, and well-lin'd Ditch, I think there could not be more desired in that
Age, for the security and defense of any City.

Among all the ruinous Beauties of Alexandria, there is none more remarkable
than Caesar's Palace. 'Twas certainly a very large Building, and if I may be
allowed to judge of the rest by the Front which remains still entire, I may
venture to assure you that 'twas a noble and complete Work. I observed also
several Columns of Pophyry and spotted Green Marble, which heightened the Idea
I had already conceived of its Magnificence. Near these stately Ruins there
are others equal to 'em in all respects, and no less rich in Porphyry and
Granite, which are said to be Fragments of the Ancient Palace of the Ptolomies:
Besides a great number of others as admirable as either of the former. But it is
so long since the City was demolished, and the confusion is so great at
present, that it is impossible for the most curious Antiquary to distinguish the
Foundations of so many Palaces and Temples. The only entire pieces that have
escaped the common Fate of the rest, are the Column of Pompey, and four
Obelisks of Granite. It Is said the first was erected by Caesar, to the Memory
of Pompey: Some think it is a kind of Marble, but others incline rather to
believe that 'twas built of melted Stone, cast in Moulds upon the place. The
latter Opinion seems most probable, for there is not the least piece of that
Stone to be found in any part of the World, and the Pillar is so prodigiously
big and high, that it could hardly be erected without a Miracle. I know it is
alleged by those who believe the Story of the Rhodian Colossus, that the
Ancients had the advantage of admirable Machines to raise such bulky Pieces:
But I should reckon my self extremely obliged to these Gentlemen, if they would
show me any probable reason why among so great a variety of Egyptian Monuments
of Antiquity there is not one of Marble, and by what an accountable accident
the Stone called Granite, which was then so common, is now grown so scarce,
that the most curious Inquirers into the Works of Nature cannot find the least
Fragment of it; that was not employed in ancient Structures. And even though I
should suppose with my Adversaries, that the Quarries out of which this Stone
was dug were by degrees so entirely exhausted, that there is not the least
Footstep of 'em left; and that Nature her self has lost so much of ancient
Vigor and Fecundity, that she is not able to produce new ones: I may still be
allowed to ask why Granite was only used in Obelisks or Columns of a prodigious
bigness: For if it were really a sort of Stone or Marble, I see no reason why
we might not find small pieces of it, as well as of Porphyry, and other
precious kinds of Marble. These reflections, in my Opinion, may serve to
confirm the Hypothesis of those who believe that all these admirable Monuments
were actually cast in a Mould: And if they would take the pains to view this
Column attentively, they would soon be convinced by the testimony of their own
Eyes, that it is only a kind of Cement, composed of Sand and calcined Stone, not
unlike to Mortar or Lime, which grew hard by degrees. I will not pretend to
determine by what Artifice those ancient Workmen kept the Cement from yielding
or sliding till the Pillar was completed; though perhaps it might be probably
alleged, that they made a Mould of Stone or Wood, besmeared on the Inside with
some fat or unctuous Substance, to hinder the Matter from sticking to its
cover; and that after the Work was finished, and the Column almost dry, they
broke the Mould that preserved the regularity of its Figure, and kept it from
falling.

This Column is 80 Foot high, and 24 in compass: It Is placed on a Marble
Pedestal eight Foot square, and crowned at the top with a Chapter of the same
Granite, of which the Pillar consists. I know not what Opinion you may have of
the Ancient Engines, but for my part I must confess, whether I consider the
weight or bulk of so vast a Mass, I find it equally impossible to conceive that
it could be raised by the strongest and best contrived Machines that ever were
Invented. The four Obelisks are also of Granite, and adorned with Hieroglyphic
Figures in Relief, like that at Rome: Some of 'em are standing, and the rest
fallen.

I cannot comprehend the reason that moved the Founders of Alexandria to choose
such an uninhabitable Country for the Seat of so stately a City. The Heat is so
insupportable in the Summer that it makes all the Inhabitants as Tawny as they
can possibly be, without being quite Black. And, which is still more
incommodious, they have no Fountains to qualify the scorching Heat of the
Climate: For the only Springs in Egypt are two that are at Cairo, of which I
may perhaps give you an account, after I have seen 'em. To supply, in some
measure, these natural defects, the Natives have contrived subterraneous
Buildings, which are no less admirable than the Palaces that formerly adorned
Alexandria. For there are vast Cisterns under Ground, Vaulted and under-prop'd
with strong Marble-Pillars that support the weight of the Houses, and of the
City, which is wholly built on these Caves. All the Cisterns are bordered with
Streets, as if they were Houses, so that they seem to form a subterraneous City.

This puts me in mind of the Roman Catacombs, though they are much inferior in
beauty to the Alexandrian Cisterns: For the former are narrow, low, and
unadorned; whereas the latter are spacious, enriched with Marble, and in some
parts with Porphyry: These Cisterns were filled with Water at the overflowing
of the Nile, by a large Canal called Khaalis, which still brings Water from the
River, for the use of those few Inhabitants that are left in the City. The
Canal is bordered with Gardens, which are not beautiful, though they contain a
vast number of very large Orange, Citron, and Limon-Trees.

If you reflect on the usual Custom of the Romans, to imitate the Egyptians in
every thing, you will find your self obliged to acknowledge that it is at least
a probable conjecture, that the Catacombs of Rome were built after the Model of
certain large Caves, without the Walls of this City toward the Palace. These
subterraneous Vaults are fifteen Foot square, and eight or ten Foot high: And
there are Tombs in the Walls cut out of the Rock, like those in the Roman
Catacombs, but more artificially contrived, and ranked in better Order, in
which there are many entire Skeletons, though it is perhaps above 2000 Years since
they were laid there. The Entry of the Caves is very low and narrow, for you
must creep into a little hole, and slide several paces downward before you come
to the Vaults.

This Country is Inhabited by a medley of several Nations; natural Turks,
Moors, Arabs, Greeks, and Jews. The Arabs are generally Free-booters, infesting
the Roads, and rifling all the Passengers without Mercy, so that it is extremely
dangerous to Travel without a numerous Company. Yet there are some of that
Nation who live in the Cities, and are more Civil than their Countrymen in the
Fields: But they all pretend to be Magicians, and are so intoxicated with such
Chimera's, that one would almost think they were seized with a sort of
Epidemical Madness. They have several ways of Divination; for some of 'em
pretend to Inspiration, others Prophecy by Visions, and there are some who
throw Beans into a Bag, and after they have counted 'em, return answers to
those who consult 'em. Among all these Fortune Tellers, those who Divine by way
of Vision, are reckoned the most skilful, and are fewest in number: As for the
rest, the Streets are full of 'em. I have heard several Instances of their
Predictions, both in Christendom, and in this Country, without giving Credit
to any of 'em, because they were for the most part only secondhand Stories: But
I Am extremely puzl'd what to think of an account I had from the Master of our
Ship, for my Author is a Man of Honor, and part of the Matter of fact is
attested by all the Frenchmen in Alexandria. The Story is this.

Captain Carbonneau, Master of the Ship, called St. Augustine, bound for this
City, was entrusted at Marseilles with a Bag of 200 Piasters of Sevil, which he
received without counting 'em, and obliged himself to make good the Sum. At
his Arrival he delivered the Bag to the Person to whom it was directed, who
told the Money immediately, and finding 50 Piasters wanting, refused to receive
it, and entered an Action against the Captain for the Overplus. In the mean time
Carbonneau made a diligent search on Board his Ship, to discover who had stolen
the 50 Piasters; for he suspected his Clerk and Surgeon as the only Persons who
had entered his Chamber: But finding that all his Inquiries were unsuccessful,
he resolved to consult an Arabian Sooth-sayer, who was of the Visionary Tribe,
and reputed very skilful. After some time spent in Ceremonious Grimaces, the
Arab told him, that he saw a Man, whose Person he described, tell 150 Piasters
into a Bag of stripped Ticking, and afterward tie it up. The Captain perceived
that these Circumstances agreed exactly to the Bag and the Person who gave it
him; but not being entirely satisfied, he entreated the Diviner to tell him
positively, whether there were only 150 Piasters put into the Bag, or 50 of 'em
afterward taken out. After some new Ceremonies, the Sooth-sayer told him, that
he saw the same Person endeavor to put 200 Piasters into the Bag, which not
being large enough to hold them all, there remained 20 that could not be put in
for want of room. It Is plain then, added he, that the complete Sum neither was
nor could be put into the Bag: And if you make the Experiment, you will be
convinced of the truth of what I say. Nor was he mistaken, for 'twas found upon
trial, that the Bag was not large enough to contain 200 Piasters, and
Carbonneau's Adversary was so honest as to put a stop to the Action. This
accident made a great noise among those of our Nation; and the Captain was so
extremely surpised at his Fortune-Teller's Skill, that some days before his
departure, he went again to consult him concerning the Success of his Voyage.
The Arab answered, that he saw neither Fight, Shipwreck, nor Arrival, but only
four Mariners, whom he described, carrying Fire in their hands; and therefore
advised him to have an Eye upon 'em, and to prevent any accidents that might
happen in his Vessel. Six days after the Captain having put out to Sea, and
intending to set Sail the next Morning, the four Seamen, whom the Arabian
represented, smoking Tobacco between the Decks, set Fire to some Bales of Wool
that were part of the Lading, and the Ship was entirely consumed.

The Arabians were formerly very Learned, especially in Medicine, and our
European Surgeons have found very useful Secrets in their Books: But at present
they apply themselves wholly to Divination, which, in their Opinion, is the
only sublime Science. They are perfect Strangers to the knowledge of Religion,
and their only Trade is to Rob Passengers: Nevertheless, it must be
acknowledged to their praise, that they kill none but Turks, and these only
when they are disobliged by the Grand Signior. They are divided into Tribes,
commanded by their particular Captains, who are all subject to a kind of Duke
or Prince, whom they call Skeick el Kebir. They Encamp in the Deserts, where
they spend their whole Lives; for when they have consumed the Grass in one
place they remove to another. They are lean and black; their Aspect is Grim and
terrible: They are usually clothed with the Skins of wild Beasts, and feed
upon Milk, Butter, Honey, and sometimes a little Camel's Flesh parched in the
Sunbeams, or Roasted in the Embers: But when they go out on Parties to Attack
Caravans, or private Travelers, they carry no other Provisions but a little
Flesh, which they lay under 'em upon their Horse's backs till it grows hot and
tender.

They have the best Horses in the World, for they are incredibly swift, and
will ride a whole day without tyring. It Is the Custom of the Arabians to Gallop
perpetually, without stopping to Dine: At Night they tie their Horses to
Stakes, and feed 'em with Milk, Flesh, and Wheat, as they do themselves. They
esteem a good Horse above all things in the World; and to prevent Deceits, they
keep their Pedigrees in Writing. When they have occasion to sell or exchange a
Horse, they produce his Genealogy, proving him to be lineally descended from
such a Stallion and Mare of illustrious Memory.

This wandering Nation owes the preservation of its Liberties to the weakness of
the Grand Signior, and of the Bassa's of Cairo and Aleppo, who not only connive
at 'em, but gratify the Sheck el Kebir with a Pension, which very much
resembles Tribute; For upon the least delay of Payment, they burn and pillage
the Country in so barbarous a manner, that I cannot give you a livelier Idea of
the havoc they make on such occasions, than by putting you in mind of the
French Campaign in the Palatinate.

I have done with the Arabians, and shall in the next place proceed to give you
a brief Account of the Turks that live in Egypt, before I finish my Letter.
They are so extremely Superstitious, that when they go abroad in the Morning,
if the first Person they meet be a Christian, they return immediately, and
having washed themselves, stay at home all the rest of the day; for they
believe that some great Misfortune would certainly befall 'em, if they should
venture to go abroad again.

Their hatred and scorn to all that profess the Faith of Christ, is extended
even to the Franks, who meet with a thousand Indignities, which the Greeks
themselves can hardly bear. For not to mention the Custom of Imprisoning us
every Night, we are not permitted to appear on Horseback in the City, but are
obliged to ride on Asses; and if a Frank were found taking a particular view of
a Fortification, 'twou'd cost him at least 500 Piasters, and he might reckon
himself very Fortunate if he escaped with so mild a Correction. It Is still a
more heinous Crime to enter into a Mosquee, and would be punished with greater
Severity: And therefore I hope you will not expect that I should acquaint you
whether the Egyptian Mosquees are different from those of Constantinople.

I have already told you, that the Men of this Country are very black; but I Am
informed, that the Women are not tanned in the least with that Color, so
careful are they to preserve their Complexions, and to keep themselves out of
the reach of the Sun. I could tell you some very diverting Stories of the
Alexandrian Women, if I were fully convinced of the truth of 'em. It Is true, my
Authors are very positive, but the Thing is so odd, that I dare hardly venture
to relate it upon their Credit; and especially in this case, I should be glad I
could speak as an Eyewitness. However, Sir, since the mentioning of the
Subject may perhaps raise your Curiosity, 'twou'd be ill Manners to take leave
of you without giving you some account of it.

I Am informed there are Schools here where Maids learn to give and receive the
Pleasures of Love with more than ordinary delight. This pretty Art is taught by
Women, who acting the part of Men, make their fair Scholars exercise the most
lascivious Postures imaginable. Maids of Quality are instructed at home, and
I Am assured that this is an Accomplishment which usually recommends young
Ladies to the most advantageous Matches.

I intend to Embark to morrow on a Tartane of Marseilles, bound for Cairo. I Am
extremely afraid of the Mouth of Damieta, for they say it is very dangerous.

I am, SIR, Your etc.
Alexandria, Jan. 1691.
LETTER XVII.
SIR,
I Cannot express my Amazement at the sight of those stately Monuments that
make Cairo the most admirable City in the World, and convince the Beholder of
so many Wonders, that the ancient Kings of Egypt were the most powerful
Monarchs in the Universe. We are usually filled with a high Idea of the Roman
Grandeur, because we view it at a less distance: But how vastly inferior are
the Pantheon, Collieseum, Capitol, and all the other celebrated Structures of
Rome, to these Magnificent Sepulchers which have for so many Ages stood firm
against all the Attacks of Time and Age, and piercing the Sky with their lofty
Tops, seem to be Copies of the Tower of Babel. At least it is plain, that the
Founders of these Egyptian Monuments were acted by the same Designs that moved
Nimrod to erect that famous Tower. They saw that all things were subject to the
irresistible Power of Fate, which destroys in a Moment the most illustrious and
potent Empires, and annihilates even the Memory of their Grandeur. Their Souls
were too elevated to submit to the common Destiny of other Mortals; and the
sublimity of their Courage inspired 'em with the noble and glorious Resolution
of making themselves Immortal in spite of Death. This was the design of those
Egyptian Hero's, and it is to their Heroical Ambition that we owe the Possession
of these Wonders of the World. How often do I wish you had been an Eyewitness
and Partaker of my Happiness, when I stood gazing on so many Beauties that are
not to be found any where else, and might justify the Curiosity of a
Traveller, though he should come from the remotest part of the Universe to admire
'em.

These Monuments are of several kinds, but there are none so admirably
magnificent as the Pyramids, which are so highly celebrated by ancient
Historians. Two of the three principal Pyramids are shut, the other which
appears biggest is open: It Is seated (I mean the last) very near the other two,
three Leagues from Cairo, if that name be confined to the New City, or two
Leagues and a half, taking in the Old. It Is a vast artificial Mountain,
composed of Free-Stones of different bigness; for we cannot suppose it
possible, that there could have been a sufficient quantity of Stones found
exactly of the same Dimensions, for the building of so prodigious a Mass; but
the smallest are a Foot thick, and two Foot long; some being three Foot thick,
six long, and four broad. Its height amounts to 520 Feet, and the breadth of
each Face to 682.

The Ascent consists of between 200 and 210 Steps. The Top appears like the
point of a Spire to those that are below; but when they go up to it, they are
surpised to find a Platform 24 Foot square; and their Wonder is still
increased, when they observe that so large a space is paved only with 12
Stones; for it is hardly conceivable how Stones of that Bulk could be raised to
so vast a height. From thence you have the Prospect of Boulac, old and new
Cairo, the Ruins of Memphis, the Mountain and the Deserts of Egypt: But he who
can look to the bottom of the Steps without Amazement, may justly boast of the
strength of his Head; for my part, I must confess I was struck with so much
horror when I cast my Eye downward, that I was hardly sensible of any Pleasure
in viewing so great a variety of Objects. There were formerly Steps on every
side, but Time that consumes all things has so wasted some of the Stones, that
in several Parts there are dreadful Precipices; and therefore Strangers dare
not venture to ascend without the assistance of Guides that are acquainted with
the safest ways. At the bottom of the Pyramid there is a heap of Sand that
reaches to the sixteenth step, where there is a little door, through which (after
you have drunk a refreshing Cup) you may enter into a sort of descending Alley,
30 paces long, about three Foot and a half high, and of equal breadth, so that
a Man cannot walk in it without bowing his Body extremely. At the end of this
Alley you must lie down upon your Belly, and creep through a little Wicket, which
is even with the Ground, and brings you into another little Alley like the
former, only in this you must ascend, whereas you descended in the other. This
Alley ends in two others; that on the Right Hand has no inclination, and leads
to a little Vaulted Chamber 18 Foot long, and 12 broad. At the entrance into
this Alley there is a very deep Pit or Well without Water: Some Travelers go
down into it, but I did not follow their Example: For I thought I had already
done enough to satisfy my Curiosity, by creeping through those Caves which are
darker than Hell it self, and in all respects a fit Habitation for the Dead.
Besides, they are so full of Bats that flutter about perpetually, and blow out
the Candles, that 'twou'd be very dangerous to venture in without a Tinder-Box.
Directly opposite to the last Alley, there is another which begins so high in
the Wall, that we were forced to climb up to it; but to make amends for that
inconveniency, it is much higher and broader than any of the rest. After I had
walked 70 Paces, still ascending, I found a sort of Hall 32 Foot long, and 16
broad, paved with nine Stones, the length of which is equal to the breadth of
the Room. The Walls are of a very fine and precious kind of Porphyry; and at
one end there is an empty Tomb of the same Porphyry, seven Foot long and three
broad.

I went afterward to take a view of the two other Pyramids, the least (and
according to all appearances the most ancient) of which was formerly over-laid
with Porphyry. It Is only 150 Foot high, and each of its Sides or Faces is 200
Foot broad. The common Opinion is, That 'twas Founded by a Young Woman called
Rhodope, who was Aesop's Fellow-Slave in Egypt; and that the Munificence of her
Lovers enabled her to build so vast a Work. The other is almost as great as the
first; for its height amounts to 510 Feet, and the breadth of each Face to 630.
These three Pyramids are of a quadrilateral Figure, and I observed the Ruins
of an ancient Temple before each of 'em; for it is not at all probable, that
there were ever any Palaces in that Place; and the huge Idol of Stone that
stands very near those decayed Structures, is, I think, an evident confirmation
of the truth of my Conjecture. The People of the Country say, that 'twas
heretofore famous for Oracles, and I believe it is no fabulous Tradition; for
there is a very deep Hole in the Head of the Idol, where the Priests might lie
concealed, and return answers to those who came to propose Questions. It Is a
Colossus cut in the Rock, representing a Woman, and is 26 Foot high, though it
scarce reaches down to her Bosom, so that it is one of the most monstrous
Figures in the World.

Three hours Journey from thence there is a Village called Sacara, in which
there are Catacombs or Sepulchral Vaults, but of a different Contrivance from
those at Rome and Alexandria. For these are distinct subterraneous Chambers,
built of Freestone, without the least Communication between one another: There
is an opening above, through which you are either let down with a Rope, as into a
Well, or must go down a Ladder, according to the various Depth of the Caves.
They were heretofore full of the Bodies of ancient Egyptians, so skilfully
embalmed, that they were preserved entire, perhaps above 4000 Years, with their
Epitaphs, Coffins, and curious and magnificent Dresses. The Coffins were
enriched with Hieroglyphics, and the Figure of the Deceased in Relievo; and
sometimes there were Idols and Jewels found in 'em. But the Curiosity of the
Franks has at last exhausted 'em; though it is thought there are some that were
never opened, and that the difficulty of finding 'em proceeds from the Avarice
of the Moors, who only know where they are, and keep the Price of such Rarities
very high. Yet I made 'em let me down into two or three, where I saw some
Pieces of Mummy, but so spoiled, that 'twas impossible to preserve any of 'em.

This Place is so full of Pyramids, that I believe there are above a hundred;
but they are not comparable to those I mentioned. Yet I observed one that would
be as big as the first, if it were finished: there are also ascending and
descending Alleys in it, at the end of which there are three Rooms in different
Places. I will not trouble you with a Description of it, since the only
remarkable Difference between it and the first, is, that this is only raised to
half the intended Height, if I may judge by its Proportion to the rest,
whereas that is completely finished.

On the other Side of the Nile, directly opposite to this Place, are the Ruins
of the ancient City of Memphis, extended along the River, till you come
overagainst Old Cairo. They are so confused at present, that I spent half a Day
in viewing 'em, without finding any thing remarkable.

I confess, Sir, that in pursuance of the Niceties of an exact Method, I should
have made you acquainted with the City of Cairo, before I had carried you to
visit the Rarities in its Neighborhood. But I could not forbear giving the
first place to that which I most admired; and besides an Account of Cairo will
be as useful and perhaps as acceptable to you at the End, as in the Beginning
of my Letter.

The Observation I made concerning the Variety of Opinions about the Extent of
Constantinople, is equally applicable to this City, which is divided into three
Parts, Boulac, and Old, and New Cairo. Some Travelers scruple to comprehend
these three Towns under one Name, because they are separated by Gardens and
Fields: but if those Gentlemen were to write to an Inhabitant of any of these
Divisions, they would certainly direct their Letters to Cairo, and not to
Boulac, etc. And it is as impertinent a Piece of Nicety to make a Distinction
between Places that are divided by so small a Distance; as 'twou'd be absurd
and improper, according to that Opinion, to give the City the Title of Grand
Cairo. But not to trouble you with more Arguments, I shall only tell you that I
think fit to join all the three Parts together; and that in this Sense Cairo
contains four large Hours Journey in Length, and twelve in Compass.

'Twas taken from the Soldans of Egypt, Ann. 1517. by Sultan Selim I. who put
to death all the Mammelucks with their Sultan: and since that it has been still
subject to the Turks, who in all probability will not be soon nor easily driven
out of it. It Is the Metropolis of Egypt, and the most considerable Bassaship in
Turkey: and since it is a City of a vast Extent, the three Parts that compose it
are differently situated. Boulac is the Port of Cairo on the Nile, and is alone
as large as Rennes in Bretagne, or the Hague in Holland. The New City lies
further in the Country, at the Foot of a great Hill, and the Old Cairo a little
beyond it, on the Banks of the Nile. Thus the New City is deprived of the
advantageous Neighborhood of the River, and receives all its Water by a
Khaalis or Canal, like that of Alexandria. All the rest of the Cities of Egypt
are also furnished with such Aqueducts, without which they wou^d be wholly
destitute of Water. This is the Inconveniency, or rather the Misery of the
Country; for the Heat is very troublesome during the Summer: and so much the
more insupportable, because all the Ground is covered with Sand, which grows
burning hot, and makes the Air so sultry, that one can scarce breathe in it.
Judge, Sir, what a Pleasure 'twou'd be in that Season, to drink a Cup of cold
and fresh Water; and yet the poor Inhabitants must content themselves with the
nasty Puddle that has stood about a Year in the Cisterns, or (which is almost
as bad) with the Water that is carried about the Streets to be sold in Pitchers
made of Goats Skins, by the Moors. For the Khaalis is dry for the Space of six
Months, and begins not to be filled till the Month of August, when the Nile is
almost come to its greatest Height. Then they cut the Dam or Bank, that kept
out the Water, which immediately gushes into the Canal, and continues to flow
during the Increase of the River, that is, till near the End of October, after
which it decreases by degrees. The Day of the Opening of the Khaalis is
observed in this City as a Festival, with extraordinary Marks of Joy: but since
I have neither seen, nor am like to see that Ceremony, you may consult some
other Travelers for an Account of it. The Khaalis passes through the New City,
and fills a vast number of Cisterns and Basins for Gardens. The Inundation of
the Nile is the only Cause of the Fruitfulness of Egypt; for without that
'twou'd be one vast Desert, as those Parts are, which are deprived of that
Advantage by reason of their Distance from the River. These Floods, which are
occasioned by the Melting of the Snow in the Mountains, fatten the Soil more
effectually than the best Dung in the World could possibly do: and indeed those
Spots of Ground that are washed by the Inundation are admirably fertile. I
cannot leave this Subject without taking Notice of the Vulgar Error, That it
never rains in this Country; for during the little time I have spent in it, I
have observed some Showers; though I must confess it rains not so frequently here
as in other Countries.

The Nile is very near as broad as the Rhine: it crosses the whole Country of
Egypt; and during the time of its Inundation, it overflows for the space of two
Months, all the neighboring Fields, which only are inhabited, the rest of the
Land being covered with dry and burning Sands. It falls into the Mediterranean
by two Mouths, about 80 Miles distant. It Is famous over all the World for its
Crocodiles, and it must be acknowledged that it contains a great number of very
large ones, but they are neither venomous, nor so terrible as they are usually
represented.

If I should tell you that there are 23000 Mosquees in this City, you would
certainly laugh at my Credulity, that could swallow such a monstrous Fable.
However, Sir, it is held by all the Inhabitants as a most certain Truth; and
they are no less firmly persuaded that there are as many distinct Quarters or
Wards, containing several Streets each, according to which Computation there
are at least 100000 Streets in the City. It Is true, they are extremely small
and narrow, but I dare not positively assure you that there is such a
prodigious Number of 'em, especially since I never counted 'em. It Is also said
that when the Plague rages in this Place, it sweeps away 10000 Persons a day;
nor do I think this Story so incredible as the other: for the City is extremely
populous, and there is as great a Concourse of People at the Bazar or Market
every Thursday, as at the most crowded Fairs in Europe. This Bazar is the only
to lerable Street in Cairo, and the Besestin at one of the Ends of it is at
least as fine and rich as that of Constantinople. At the other End there is a
Market of Slaves, where a Man may be always accommodated with a pretty Girl, at
the Rate of 100 or 150 Piasters. All the Houses are of Wood, with Platforms on
the Top, after the Turkish Fashion: The Outside is as mean, as the Inside is
said to be beautiful. It Is true, I never viewed 'em within, and therefore will
not desire you to believe that they deserve the last part of that Character;
for it depends entirely upon the Testimony of the Franks, who are guilty of an
unaccountable Prejudice, in magnifying the Turkish Magnificence. This is
certainly a very great and inexcusable Weakness; and I know not whether it is
more unreasonable to admire all things or nothing. We ought indeed to do
Justice to every thing that is either Good or Beautiful: but I know no Reason
that obliges us to extol the most ordinary Beauty, or rather Deformity it
self, especially in a Place that may justly boast of so many incomparable
Wonders, among which I may venture to reckon the ancient and vast Castle of
Cairo. It Is true, it may be said to be a mere Heap of inhabited Ruins: but
these Ruins are extremely Magnificent, and suitable to the Glory and Power of
Pharaoh, who is reputed to be the Founder both of this Structure, and of the
great open Pyramid. It stands directly in the Middle of the City, between the
Old and New Town, on so large and steep a Rock, that one would think it was
purposely framed by Nature to secure and command Grand Cairo. It Is above two
Miles in Compass, and was formerly surrounded with thick Walls, like those of
Alexandria; flanked at the end of every hundred Paces with great and very
strong Towers. It has four Gates which lead into a fine open Place, and from
thence to several Streets; so that it seems rather to be a Town than a Castle.
The Turks have profaned these venerable Monuments, by disfiguring 'em with
their Cottages, which look like so many Rats-Nests. Some Parts of Pharaoh's
Palace remain still to be seen: The Room called Joseph's Hall, is enriched with
Gold and Azure, and adorned with thirty fine Columns of Porphyry. That of his
Steward or Intendant, is not so entire, and is only remarkable for twelve
Columns of Thebaic Marble, which are not much inferior to the former in
Beauty. But the entirest and most admirable Work in this Place, is the
celebrated Well of Joseph. It Is cut or hollowed in the hard Rock, a hundred and
six Foot deep, of a square Figure, each Side containing eleven Feet, without
reckn'ning the Staircase, which is seven Foot broad, and cut out of the same
Rock. It turns round the Well, and consists of twelve several Windings, six of
which contain eighteen Steps a-piece, and the other six, nineteen; so that the
total Number of the Steps amounts to to Two hundred twenty two. The Stairs are
so easy and commodious, that they make two Oxen go down every day to the
Bottom of the Well, which is dry, and from thence to a little square Room,
where there is a Spring, out of which they draw Water continually, by a certain
Contrivance of Wheels hung round with Buckets, that discharge the Water into a
Basin or Cistern in the midst of the dry Pit or Well; from whence it is raised
up in Buckets fastened to Ropes, that are let down and drawn up again by the
turning of other Wheels. Round the Staircase on the Inside there are Walls
that serve instead of Rails, and secure those that go down from falling. At the
Bottom of the Well there is a Door on the Right Hand, and another on the Left,
both cut out of the Rock: and it is commonly believed that one of 'em leads to
the Red Sea, and the other to the Pyramids. The first is impossible, for the
Sea is above thirty Leagues distant: but the second is not at all improbable,
considering the great Works that were undertaken and performed by the ancient
Egyptians, and the Care they took to dig subterraneous Passages to secure their
Retreat in case of Necessity. It Is true, the Greatness of the Distance, and
Hardness of the Rock could not but make this Attempt very difficult; but after
all it is not near so vast a Work as the Pyramids, and there must be some
Passage that begins at this Place: for though the Doors are at present walled up,
it is plain they were designed for some Use. You will not be surpised at the
Magnificence of this Well, nor wonder what made the Egyptians bestow so much
Time, Pains and Cost on the digging of it, if you consider how precious and
valuable Water is in this Country. For (as I told you in my last) there are but
two Springs in all Egypt, This, and That of Maltharea, of which I shall give
you some Account before I finish my Letter. And it seems the Egyptian Monarchs
were afraid that these two Fountains should at last be dried up; for they took
care to bring Water from the Nile in a very fine Aqueduct, beginning betwixt
Old Cairo and Boulac, and reaching as far as the Castle. Not far from Joseph's
Palace there is a dreadful Prison, consisting of several Dungeons cut out of
the Rock. It bears the Name of the same Patriarch, because 'twas here,
according to the common Opinion, where he interpreted the Dreams of the Bu^ler
and Baker: if this Tradition be true, it must be acknowledged, that he was in a
lamentable Condition, for this is certainly a very dismal Place.

Maltharea is a Place about a large League distant from the City, whither the
Franks often walk to enjoy the pleasant Shade of its fine Orange Trees, and
refresh themselves with its delicious Water. There is also a little Chapel in
the same place, which, it is said, the Blessed Virgin chose for her Abode, when
she fled to Egypt with her Son Jesus; but the Circumstances of the Story are so
improbable, that it seems to be of the same Stamp with other fabulous Legends.
For they pretend that while she lived in that little House, perceiving at a
great distance the Men whom Herod had sent after her, and, not knowing where to
flee, an old Sycamore burst open to receive her and the little Jesus, and
closing again secured 'em from the Rage of their Enemies. As Soon as the Danger
was over the miraculous Tree let 'em forth, and remained open ever afterward;
but it is extremely decayed at present, and part of it is fallen away. However I
spent two Hours near it with a great deal of Pleasure; for the Sun shone very
bright that Day, and the Verdure of the Myrtle, Orange, and Limon-Trees was
extremely agreeable.

There is another little Chapel in Old Cairo, where the Virgin resided for some
time: and near that there are large Storehouses for Corn, which are thought to
be the same that Joseph built when he laid up Provisions against the seven
Years of Famine.

Thus, Sir, I have entertained you with an Account of some of the Egyptian
Rarities. It Is true, there are many other remarkable Monuments in this Country,
that are worthy of a Traveller's Curiosity; but the very Sight of those howling
Deserts deterr me from undertaking a Journey that would expose me to so many
Dangers and Inconveniences. Besides 'twou'd require a great deal of Money, and
I begin already to perceive that I must take more than ordinary care to Husband
my Stock. I find also that the same consideration will not suffer me to
prosecute my design of visiting the Holy Land, though it is not without an extreme
reluctance that I Am forced to deprive my self of the fight of a place which the
Savior of the World hallowed with his presence. But the Journey is
prodigiously chargeable, and I Am resolved to deny my self that satisfaction
rather than to put my self in a condition that might oblige me to return to
France. I intend then to Embark on a Greek Saique, which in few days will set
Sail for Smyrna, where, I hope, I may easily find an occasion for Venice.

I am, SIR, Your etc.
Cairo, Feb. 1691.
LETTER XVIII.
SIR,
AFter a very troublesome Voyage that lasted a whole Month, I arrived at
Smyrna, a City of Natolia, a hundred Miles from Scio, where you may remember I
stayed so long that I found Matter enough for a whole Letter.

Smyrna was formerly seated on two Mountains, separated by a pleasant Valley
that divided the City into two Parts, one of which was not above a quarter of a
League distant from the Sea. This Mountain is so high that you could not go up
or rather climb the steep ascent in less than a full quarter of an hour: And on
the top of it was a large Castle fortified both by Nature and Art; for besides
the advantages of its Situation, 'twas surrounded with high and thick Walls, on
which there was a Parapet embattel'd after the Oriental fashion; and certainly
it is not easily conceivable how so many Stones could be carried up so high. The
Gate of the Castle is defended by two round Towers joined to the Wall: And in
the Stone-work of the Tower that stands on the right hand as you enter, there
is a Figure of a Woman's Head and Neck, a Foot and a half high, which is said
to represent a certain Amazon called Smyrna, who having Conquered the City,
called it by her own Name, and built the Castle. The inside is a mere heap of
Ruins, among which I observed a very fair Cistern twenty Paces long and twelve
broad, Vaulted and supported by six fine square Pillars which are all entire.
Besides, there is a little Chapel built like a Mosquee, but it seems not to be
very ancient. This Castle commanded the City on one side, and the Port on the
other; and from thence you have an unobstructed Prospect of the Sea. It Is at
present only Inhabited by a Turk with his Wife and Daughter, who is obliged to
keep Watch, and give notice to the Merchants when he discovers a Vessel.
Descending from thence we saw the Ruins of an Amphitheater, about which there
are Ditches where the Lions were kept; and somewhat higher are the Niches where
the Magistrates sat. 'Twas here that S. Polycarp, the first Archbishop of
Smyrna was crowned with Martyrdom. He was one of St. John's Disciples, and yet
even then the Schism of the Greek Church was begun; for he was sent to the Pope
to Negotiate an Accommodation, though with very little Success. The City was
heretofore very large, as it appears by the compass of its Walls; for if any
Man will give himself the trouble to take an exact view of their Ruins, as I
have done, he will be quickly convinced, that 'twas above twelve Miles about:
And the Error of those who contract its Dimensions, is only an effect of their
Carelessness.

There is a very fine Aqueduct still to be seen, which brought Water to the
part of the City next the Sea. It reaches from one Hill to the other, and
contains 300 Paces in length. In the same part of the Town there are very
ancient Burying-places, which at present belong to the Jews: And adjoining to
these are the Burying-places of the English and Dutch, where there are very
magnificent Marble Tombs, enriched with fine Relievo's. This Place is called
St. Veneranda, from the Name of a Greek Church, near which there is a Spring,
famed for curing Fevers miraculously; though I Am confident its Virtue consists
only in quenching the Thirst, which it does very effectually, for it is
extremely cold and clear, and may for that reason be reckoned one of the
Rarities of Smyrna, where the Water is generally bad.

This City was ruined in the time of Mark Anthony, who caused it to be rebuilt
at the foot of the Hill on the Seaside, where it stands at present, stretching
in length about two short Miles, and a little above one Mile in breadth. This
situation is more convenient for Trade than the former, and besides, the Heat
of the Summer is agreeably tempered by a cool Breeze that blows every day. But
these Advantages are counter-balanc'd by the Earthquakes that happen so
frequently in this place, and make such a terrible havoc that the Inhabitants
oftentimes wish that their Town were placed again on the Hill, where they think
the danger would not be so great. For it is generally believed, that the
Earthquakes are occasioned by the vast and deep Concavities made by the
subterraneous Streams that fall from the Mountain, where the Wind and Vapors
being pent up, and endeavoring to break forth impetuously, cause those
dreadful Jolts that are felt here so often. However I can assure you, that the
Hill is much less subject to Earthquakes than the place where the City stands
at present: For since I came hither there happened four in one day, and all of
'em strong and violent enough to strike a Terror into those that are not
accustomed to 'em. Nor does their frequency make 'em less dreadful to the
Inhabitants of this place; for as soon as they perceive the least shaking of
the Earth they run out of their Houses with all the signs of Fear and
Amazement, and call upon God, every one according to the Rites of his Religion.
Nor can this be justly called a Panic Terror, for they were so roughly handled
by an Earthquake three Years ago, that I I wonder how any of 'em durst
afterward venture to repair their ruined Habitations. About Noon, when they
were all at Dinner, the Earth began to shake so furiously as if the whole
Machine of the Universe had been falling to pieces. A thousand Houses were
over-turn'd in an Instant with a hideous dinn, and 3000 Persons were buried
under the Ruins. The rest who had the good Fortune to escape, were seized with
a terrible Consternation, and ran wildly about, not knowing whither to flee,
nor where to hide themselves; for they were still alarmed with repeated Jolts.
And besides, the lurking Fires that lay hid among the Ruins were fanned and
blown up so violently by a strong Gale, which accompanied the Earthquake, that
the Flame could not be extinguished for the space of two days, till the very
Rubbish of the Houses was consumed. Add to this dismal Spectacle the howlings
of those Wretches that were not quite killed by the fall of the Houses, and
you will find your self obliged to acknowledge, that never any accident produced
a more lamentable Scene of Misery. At last the Seamen that were on Board the
Vessels in the Port, came ashore, and found above 500 Persons alive under the
Ruins, some with broken Legs, and others with broken Arms; some were bruised
all over, and all in general were Objects of Pity and Compassion. The Captains
of the Ships carried those who were Hurt or Wounded on Board, with the most
considerable Persons of their respective Nations: But the rest of the
Inhabitants were forced to lie abroad till they had prepared new Lodgings,
which were only some paltry Huts of Straw. That part of the City where the
Franks live was most violently shaken, so that they were all Sufferers, and
most of 'em lost in one day the fruit of many Years Labor. Some that had
stripped themselves to the very Shirt to enjoy with greater Pleasure the
Coolness of the Wind, were reduced to the necessity of begging Coats to cover
their Nakedness. As for the Societies of Merchants, though they were considerable
Sharers in the common Calamity, the greatness of their Stocks kept 'em from
falling into such an excess of Misery. The English and Dutch particularly are
so rich, that they can easily support the loss of 50000 Livres: But every Man
suffered proportionably to his Estate, and it may be said that the Poor lost
more than the Rich, because they were deprived of their All.

Monsieur Fabre the French Consul perished under the Ruins, notwithstanding
all the Endeavors that were used to save him; and several Rich Merchants had
the same Fate. Next Year the Plague broke forth among those whom the Fire and
the Earthquake had spared; and the last Year may be reckoned as Calamitous as
either of the former, by reason of the horrible Disorders that were committed
here by the Algerines and Barbarians. Thus, within the compass of Three Years,
this City has suffered Four of the severest Judgments that are usually
inflicted by Heaven. These Misfortunes would have ruined a poor Town, but there
are hardly any Footsteps of 'em left in this; for it is almost quite Rebuilt
already, and the Street where the Franks live is fairer than 'twas before.

This is the most considerable seat of Commerce in the Levant, and the Dignity
of the Consuls who reside here is next to that of Ambassadors. Their
Jurisdiction is extended over Natolia, Scio, Metelin, and several other Islands
of the Archipelago, in which they appoint Vice-Consuls, who govern under their
Authority. This is a very Honorable Employment, and those who are possessed of
it are much respected, even by the Turks, who have as great a Veneration for
Consuls as for Ambassadors, and receive 'em at Audiences with the same
Ceremonies. When they go through the Streets, the Turks draw up in Files, and
open a Passage for 'em, as for a Bassa: Nor do they ever walk abroad without
two Interpreters, and as many Janisaries, who march before 'em, and serve
instead of a Lifeguard; and besides, they are accompanied with two or three
Merchants, and followed by their Servants in Livery. But on the days of
Audience their Train is more numerous and splendid, for they are always
preceded by six Interpreters, and a like number of Janisaries, with Zercola's
on their Heads; and followed by all the most considerable Persons of the
Nation, whose number sometimes amounts to above forty. Nor does the Grandeur of
this Post consist merely in external Pomp; for their Power is as considerable
as their State, and their Authority over their respective Nations exceeds that
of ordinary Governors, so much the more as they are farther distant from the
Court. It Is true, that in the management of Affairs that merely regard Trade,
they are obliged to call a Meeting of the Principal Merchants, who decide the
Matter by plurality of Voices, and the Consul is only President of the
Assembly. But in all cases that relate to the administration of Justice or the
Government of a City, he represents the Person of the Sovereign, and is as
exactly obeyed. He is the absolute Judge of all Suits or Actions, whether
Criminal or Civil; and has under him a Chancellor, who performs the Office of a
Clerk and Notary, a Secretary, and a Treasurer, who receives all the Money that
is sent either on the public Account, or by way of private Commission. The
Dignity of his Function is also conspicuous in the Church, where he sits in an
armed Chair, with a Cushion of Crimson Velvet to kneel upon. But the main
advantage of this Office is in my Opinion the largeness of its Revenue, which
seldom or never amounts to less than 18000 French Livres. All Franks are
obliged at their Arrival to address themselves to their respective Consuls, and
desire their Protection, or otherwise must expect to be seized, and sent back
to their own Country. Yet, without any regard to that Custom, I have put my
self under the Protection of Monsieur de Hochepied, the Dutch Consul: For when
I went to see him, and acquainted him with my design, he offered me that Favor
with so much Generosity, that I neither could, nor was willing, to refuse it.
Nor did his Civility stop there, for he obliged me to accept of a Lodging in
his fine House, where I need not be afraid of my Countrymen's Indignation.
However, to avoid any accident that might happen, I seldom or never go abroad
but in his Company, though, considering the kindness he expresses to me on all
occasions, I believe I might walk alone without any danger. For he is so much
honored, respected, and beloved by all the Nations who reside here, and even
by the French themselves, that there is not one Person, small or great, who
would not run to Japan, rather than disoblige him. He is usually called, The
Consul, without any Addition, as if he were the only Person in Smyrna who could
pretend to that Character: The rest of the Consuls are known by the Names of
their respective Nations, but he is The Consul by way of Eminency. And, to give
you a better Idea of him, I can assure you that so universal a Love and Esteem
is purely the effect of his Merit; for he is Master of a vast Wit, his Temper
is sweet, civil, and obliging, and in one world he is a complete Person, which
I think is the justest and most expressive Account I can give you of him. There
are so many Perfections required to make a Man worthy of that Character, that a
Complete Man is certainly one of the greatest Rarities of this Age: But all
these Qualifications are united in him. He is descended of a Noble and Ancient
Family in Holland, which can boast of an uninterrupted Succession for above 300
Years, and is Allied to the Principal Houses in the Netherlands. Among the rest
I shall only mention its late Alliance with the most ancient Family of the
Collier's, which is originally of Scotland: Their Advance.
Device is the finest that ever I saw, nor do they bear it in vain. For they
have upon all occasions signalized their Courage in Military Achievements; and
there are at present three of that Family in the King's Service, who seem to
make Valor their Favorite Virtue, and are known and esteemed by the whole
Army, both for that and a thousand other no less glorious Endowments.

Madam de Hochepied is the Sister of the present, and Daughter of the late
Dutch Ambassador. She Is a finished Beauty, and has the Air of a Princess; and
besides (which is as true as it seems incredible) she is absolutely Mistress of
Seven of the most difficult and opposite Languages in the World. For besides
the Dutch, which is her natural Tongue, she speaks the French, Italian, Greek,
Russian, Turkish, and Arabian Languages, and speaks 'em all so perfectly well,
that I have often heard her explaining to Interpreters the true sense of
certain hard Words, of which they were ignorant before. In short, she is in all
respects an admirable Person. Judge, Sir, whether I can think the time tedious
which I spend in such agreeable Company, and in a House where I Am so kindly
entertained; and whether you can blame me for not hastening my departure. I Am
resolved to expect an occasion for Venice, and I believe 'twill be a long time
before I can find one; because the Venetian Vessels never venture to appear in
this part of the Sea, till the Turkish Fleet be laid up, though they have no
great reason to dread it, since the Grand Signior, for all his Grandeur, is
Master only of Eleven Ships of War. It Is true, if all his Galleys would put to
Sea, their number might at least amount to 200; but as Affairs are managed at
present, his Navy makes no great Figure. You may expect a more particular
Account of these things in my next. In the mean time,

I am, SIR, Your etc. Smyrna, Apr. 1691.
LETTER XIX.
SIR,
YOU might justly accuse me of Laziness, or want of Complaisance, if I should
not employ the leisure I enjoy at present in recollecting my Observations
concerning the Government, Religion, Manners, and Customs of the Turks. I shall
endeavor therefore to satisfy your Curiosity, by entertaining you with a
short account of these Subjects, avoiding all impertinent Repetitions of those
obvious and common Remarks that are to be met with in almost every Book of
Voyages. And I hope the Points I propose to handle will furnish me with
sufficient Matter for Three Letters; the first of which shall treat of the
Government, the second of the Religion, and the third of the Manners and
Customs of the Turks.

The Turkish Empire, according to the primitive and fundamental Constitution of
the Government, is absolutely and entirely Despotic; that is, a Supreme and
Arbitrary Power is lodg^d in the Person of the Emperor, whose Will is the only
Law by which he Rules, and who acknowledges no other Maxim of Government than
Sic volo, sic jubeo. He is not curbed by any written Law or Custom, and those
whom he Oppresses have not so much as a right to Complain. He may take away any
Man's Estate, and either keep it, or give it to another. Sometimes he passes by
the most ancient Bassa's, and in one day advances a simple Chiaux, or even a
Cook, to the Dignity of Grand Vizier. He sends for the Heads of those whom he
has a Mind to be rid of, who are Murdered without any Trial or Form of Justice,
and even without knowing the Reason of his Displeasure. In one Word, his
Pleasure is the supreme and uncontrollable Law. This unlimited Power of the
Sultan is founded on the Mohammedan Religion, which enjoins a blind Obedience to
all his Commands under Pain of Damnation. But the Turks of late have rendered
their Slavery more tolerable; for though they have made no Alteration in the
Constitution of the Government, their Practices are very different from what
they were heretofore.

The Grand Vizier is the Chief Minister of State, and is called King by the
Turks, to show how much the Sultans slight and undervalue that Title, in
Imitation of the Old Roman Emperors, who bestowed Kingdoms on their
Favorites. This is the Reason why the Grand Signior styles himself The
Protector of Persecuted Kings, and the Distributer of Crowns; though he wears
none himself, not even on the Day of his Public Inauguration, for the only
Badge of his Imperial Dignity is a magnificent Sabre, enriched with precious
Stones, which the Mufti girds to his Side. The Grand Vizier is entrusted with
the whole Management of Affairs, and his Power is almost equal to the Sultan's.
He is in a great measure the Arbiter of Peace and War, and creates the Fortune
of all the Great Officers in the Empire. It Is true, he ought not to do any
thing without the Advice of a Council, composed of seven Bassa's, called the
Visiers of the Bench: but they have only a Shadow of Authority, which scarce
deserves to be mentioned.

The next in Order, are the Bassa's, who are a sort of Viceroys in the
Provinces. Their Office is to administer Justice exactly, and to keep the
People in Subjection to the Government. They are also obliged to pay a yearly
Tribute to the Grand Signior, both of Money and Slaves, without reckoning the
Carache, Customs, and other Imposts that are usually exacted. This is the
utmost Extent of the Legal Authority of the Bassa's; but they commonly abuse
their Power, and are more arbitrary Tyrants than the Grand Signior himself.
Their principal Aim is to raise their Fortune speedily; and in order to that
they rob the Widow and Orphan, and fill the Land with Spoil and Oppression,
never scrupling to commit a gainful Crime, though attended with the basest
Circumstances. The Sultan is forced to dissemble his Knowledge of these
Disorders, for want of Power to suppress 'em: for every Bassa maintains some
standing Forces at his own Charge, whose Assistance he may command upon all
Occasions, if their Payment be not wholly neglected. Whereas the Sultan, who
for the most part wants Money to pay his Army, and perhaps does not show
himself twice in his Life to the Soldiers, is so far from being Master of 'em,
that he is almost always constrained to submit to their Authority. This is the
fatal Source of all those Seditions that have so often shaken, and will at last
overturn the Empire. For how can we suppose that Subjects will either love or
fear a lazy Prince, that takes no Share in the Business of State or War: a
Prince, that contents himself with a Chimerical Show of Grandeur and Power, and
seems rather to be a Mock-King in a Farce than a Ruler of Kingdoms? It Is plain
both from Reason and Experience, that a great Monarch, who would be the
absolute Master of his Subjects, ought to apply himself to the Execution and
Reformation of the Laws, and above all, to gain the Esteem and Affection of his
Soldiers, whom he ought to look upon as the surest Prop and Support of his
Authority. An Army in a State cannot remain indifferent; they must and will
have a Master; and will either continue faithful to the Crown, or espouse the
Interest of some designing Subject: And therefore it ought to be the Prince's
Care to discover their Inclinations, and to act accordingly. Kings are as
feeble Creatures as other Men, and as unable to perform any Great Action by
their own Power: but when they are at the Head of 100000 Men, all devoted to
their Interest, it is then they become the Terror of the World, and their Power
is almost as boundless as their Ambition. The Fate of Monarchs depends on their
Armies, and without these neither Alexander, Caesar, nor Lewis XIV. could have
gained one Inch of Ground. This is so evident and certain a Truth, that never
any Person had the Confidence to controvert it: and I believe the Ottoman
Emperors are of the same Opinion, though all their Actions seem to be grounded
on very different, and even opposite Maxims. A Prince that would secure the
Loyalty of his Forces, must take care of 'em himself, visit 'em often, give out
all Orders, prefer Men of known Merit, keep both the Officers and Soldiers
under an exact Discipline, and pay 'em as punctually as he can. The Grand
Signior observes not one of these Maxims, and therefore he may blame himself
for the Unruliness of his Army. But the Government is guilty of another
Blunder, which, in my Opinion, is no less fatal than the former; I mean the
usual way of appeasing Seditions, which break forth oftener than once a Year.
For every Tumult that shakes the Sultan's Throne, costs him the Heads of a
hundred of his Principal Officers: The Grand Vizier is commonly made the first
Sacrifice, and afterward that important Charge is entrusted to some young and
unexperienced Person, as if a Minister of State could spring up in a Night like
a Mushroom. This Custom is directly opposite to common Sense, which teaches us
that no Man ought to be advanced to so high a Post, but one that has been long
accustomed to State-Business, and has spent his whole Life in fitting himself
for the Management of so great a Trust. These Considerations give me an Idea of
the Turkish Empire, which I cannot express better than by comparing it to a
Coach drawn by a Set of ungovernable Horses, each of which pulls a contrary
Way.

If we descend lower, and take a more particular View of the Government, we
shall every where find the dismal Effects of these Disorders. The Distempers of
the Head are usually communicated to the Inferior Members: And I never saw a
Country, where Justice is so often and so impudently perverted, by those who
are entrusted with the Execution of it. I know it is the Custom of some
Travelers to magnify the Turkish way of administering Justice: but such a
groundless Conceit is only the Effect of the powerful Inclination most Men have
to admire every thing that is unusual or extraordinary. And I Am confident that
a bare Account of their Method of Judging Civil and Criminal Causes, will give
you a very different Notion of their boasted Justice; You, I say, who are not
tainted with those common Prejudices, but are always wont to judge of things as
they are in themselves, without considering whether they are rare or common.

They have no written Laws but what are contained in the Alcoran, which they
hold to be the Rule of Faith, and Standard of Justice, and every thing that it
forbids is esteemed unlawful and punishable. Nevertheless the Bassa's and
Cadi's judge as they please, for the Book is very short, and besides a great
deal fuller of Dreams and Absurdities than of Laws or Moral Precepts; and those
few it contains are so ambiguously expressed, and delivered in so loose a
Manner, that these greedy Officers cannot desire a more favorable Opportunity
to satisfy their Avarice. Besides they judge without Appeal, and cause the
Sentence to be executed upon the Spot. It Is true, some highly injured Persons
have recourse to the Grand Signior's Divan; but then the Injustice must be very
plain and inexcusable, or it is in vain to expect Satisfaction; and that is so
seldom obtained, that few prudent Men will venture on so troublesome and
expensive a Journey: for since it is not the Custom to record either the
Pleadings, or the Sentence, the Judge may easily elude all the Arguments of his
Accusers. It Is true, the Number of the Plaintiffs is usually so great, and the
Informations of other Officers so positive, that the Truth is at last
discovered, and the Offenders are punished. But though few Cadi's leave the
Office with Honor, there is not the least Care taken to repair the Losses of
those whom they have ruined. For, besides what I intimated before, that their
Proceedings are not registered, the new Cadi is usually as great a Rogue as his
Predecessor; so that the poor oppressed People must bear their Misfortunes as
patiently as they can, without the least hope of Redress.

The Cadi's are mere Beggars when they are first advanced to that gainful
Post, and their Commission lasts but a Year: yet in less than three Months
these tattered Scoundrels exchange their Rags for gaudy Habits, and a
magnificent Equipage, and at the End of the Year are Masters of vast Estates.
We exclaim against our Lawyers in France, and will not suffer those who have
spend 20 or 30 Years in a perpetual Hurry of Business, to enjoy the Fruit of
their Labors in Peace, though the Fortunes they acquire are for the most part so
small, that they can hardly subsist without Employment. But I Am confident a
little Acquaintance with the Customs of this Country would quickly stop the
Mouths of our Grumblers: for if the Cadi of a considerable City were permitted
to hold his Office Ten Years, he would be richer than a President au Mortier.
He that went last from Smyrna gained above 40000 Crowns; and you may easily
judge how miserably the Inhabitants were oppressed by a Judge that could in one
Year heap up so great a Treasure. It Is true he durst not expect the Coming of
his Successor, but marched off eight days before, without staying to take
leave of his Friends, according to the prudent Custom of his Brother-Rogues.
For they are obliged to give an Account of their Administration to the
succeeding Cadi's, who make a Report to the Grand Signior's Divan, and even
secure their Persons when the Comlaints against 'em are very numerous and
grievous. But they are too conscious of their Guilt, to stand a Trial which
they know would infallibly ruin 'em; and therefore to avoid so terrible a
Danger, they go immediately to their Patron at the Port, who receives his Share
in the Booty, and grants 'em his Protection, without which they would be
punished without Mercy. Yet some of 'em choose rather to buy their Peace of the
new Cadi, who, for 8 or 10 Purses, which amounts to 12 or 15000 Livres, gives
'em as favorable a Certificate as they can desire.

All Civil Affairs are judged by the Cadi according to the Deposition of
Witnesses, without any regard to Writings. For suppose you had lent 1000
Piasters to a Man upon his Note or Bond, if he can but suborn two Men to affirm
that they saw him pay you such a Sum, you must infallibly lose your Money.
This Custom gives a fair Opportunity to Men of dishonest Principles to abuse
their Creditors; since they may easily find Witnesses to prove any thing, and
even without giving themselves the trouble to enquire after 'em. One word, or a
Sign to the Cadi is sufficient, who always keeps a Score of Knights of the Post
ready to serve him or any of his Friends on such Occasions. After the two
contending Parties have pleaded their own Cause as well as they can, for there
are no Barristers in Turkey, one of 'em clutches his right Fist, and stretches
out one, two, or three of his Fingers, signifying, that he intends to present
the Cadi with a like number of Purses: Then his Adversary makes the same Sign,
and offers more or less, as he thinks fit. At Night the Cadi sends for the
highest Bidder, and having received his Present, requites his Compliment very
civilly the next Day, with a favorable Sentence; after which he that is cast
must either pay the Debt immediately, or go to Prison. And (which is still more
unjust) if you are not able to maintain him, and pay the Fees of those who
arrested him, you must resign the third Part of your Debt; in Consideration of
which the poor Wretch is kept rotting in the Gaol, till an exact Enquiry be
made into his Estate. And if it be found that the Debt exceeds the Value of his
Goods and Possessions, the Payment is changed to a Corporal Punishment, and he
receives as many Bastinadoes on the Soals of his Feet as he owes Piast^rs,
unless the Sum exceed 500; for they stop there, because the strongest Man
could not endure a greater number of Blows without manifest Danger of his Life.

The Judgment of Criminal Affairs belongs to the Bassa, who proceeds after the
same manner: for Money clears the most barbarous Malefactor, and without that,
Justice degenerates to Cruelty. The Stake and the Gibbet seem to be only made
for poor Villains; nor can there be a greater Sign of Poverty, than when a Man
is prosecuted for Murder or Robbery: for since the Bassa and Vaivode are always
sure of 40000 Aspers, the usual Price of Blood, which they exact of those
before whose Doors the Murder was committed; they seldom or never take care to
execute Justice on the Murderer. I have seen a Janisary, who had killed above
30 Men, walk through the Streets unmolested, and with as much Confidence as the
most innocent Person in Town. Nor are these corrupt Tribunals less favorable
to the Robbers that infest the Country, and commit such frequent Disorders,
that no wise Man will venture to travel one day's Journey without being
completely armed, and extremely well accompanied. It Is true, the Grand Signior
from time to time sends superior Bassa's, attended with some Companies of
Soldiers, to search after unpunished Malefactors. It Is not above two Months
since one of 'em came to this City, and put to Death about 20 Criminals: but
after all, these Great Inquisitors are only terrible to those who are unable to
buy their Favor, and even he whom I mentioned had above fifty Customers of
this Sort. Among the rest I shall only take notice of one Instance of his
mercenary Clemency; and I hope I shall easily obtain your Pardon for a
Digression which will not only divert you, but give you a clearer Idea of the
Genius of the Turkish Officers of Justice.

A Man that used to work in a Dutch Merchant's Garden, was seized for a Murder,
which he had committed 7 or 8 Years before, and finding himself to be in a very
hopeless Condition, sent to beg the Merchant's Assistance, who was too generous
to suffer one that had served him to be hanged for wan^ of 2 or 300 Piasters.
The poor Man relying upon his Master's promised Kindness, began immediately to
treat with the Bassa for his Ransom, which at last was fixed at 100 Turkish
Pieces of Gold, commonly called Scherifi, worth 2 1/4 Piasters each. The
Bargain being thus concluded, the Merchant gave the hundred Scherifi to the
Bassa's Kiaia, who delivered but ninety to the Treasurer, having kept the other
ten for himself. Now you must know that there are in Turkey a sort of Men who
pretend to be Mahomet's Kinsmen, and are highly reverenced by all Persons: They
wear green Turbants, and are called Scherifi, which (you may remember I told
you) is the Name of the Pieces of Gold. When the Trial came on, after the
Witnesses were examined, the Bassa perceiving that there were Ten Pieces
wanting of the promised Sum, and imagining that Defect to be a designed Breach
of the Agreement, seemed to be very nice and inexorable, and protested that he
could not acquit a Man who was positively charged with Murder by so many
Witnesses. But the Secretary, who by good Fortune was acquainted with the whole
Transaction, told him, That though these Witnesses declared him Guilty, there
were 100 Scherifi arrived, who asserted his Innocencey, and that their
Testimony was much more convincing. I thought, said the Bassa, I saw but 90;
It Is true, replied the Secretary, but there were Ten more, who by reason of
their great Age, could not come up to your Presence, and therefore staid below
with the Kiaia. The Bassa, who was neither Deaf nor Dull, understood the
Meaning of those Expressions, and declared the accused Person innocent.

There are several sorts of Punishments inflicted on Malefactors in this
Country; such as Beheading, Drowning, Hanging, Strangling, Burning, Impaling,
and the Strappado. The two last are the most Cruel, and are appointed only for
Turks that renounce the Mohammedan Faith, or Renegado's that return to the
Profession of the Christian Religion, or for those who are convicted of some
very enormous Crimes. Robbers and Murderers are hanged, Women are drowned,
those who are found guilty of Rebellion or Sedition are beheaded, and Burning
is the Punishment of Christians for blaspheming against Mahomet or the Alcoran,
or for lying with a Turkish Woman. Not long ago an English Merchant at
Constantinople very narrowly escaped Suffering for the last of these Crimes. He
kept a fair Turk with all imaginable Secrecy, and never saw her at his own
House. To prevent Suspicion, he procured a very pretty Yacht, in which he went
with her almost every day, to take the Air on the Sea of Marmora, or in the
Canal of the Black Sea, and usually staid abroad till Night. But at last the
whole Intrigue was discovered by the Indiscretion of a Servant; and they were
both apprehended by an Order from the Grand Vizier, who at first threatened to
burn the Merchant, but was afterward prevailed with to accept a Fine of 10000
Piasters, which he paid upon the Spot. Several Travelers have particularly
described the Punishments called Impaling, and the Strappado, as well as the
Manner of giving the Bastonnado; and therefore I shall forbear troubling you
with an Account of what I suppose you know already.

The Government of the Cities is managed by Five Kinds of Officers, the Bassa,
Sub-Bassa, Vaivode, Cadi, and Receiver of the Customs. The Bassa is properly
the Governor, and judges criminal Causes; and the Sub-Bassa is as it were his
Deputy. The Vaivode takes care of regulating Affairs in the City; he walks the
Round twice a-week, to examine the Weights and Measures, to observe whether
unlicens'd Tipling-Houses are kept, to punish Drunken Persons, and all those in
the general who commit any Disorders in the City. Those who are found guilty of
these or any other Abuses, must immediately submit to the Bastonnado,
especially Drunkards, who are always very roughly handled. The Function of the
Sub-Bassa is not much different. The Cadi is the Judge of all Civil Suits; and
the Receiver of the Customs, who in France is only a private Person without any
Authority, is in this Country empowered to take Cognizance of all fraudulent
Practices relating to Pecuniary Duties, in all which Cases he is both Judge and
Party.

The Jealousy that reigns among these Officers is so furious and extravagant,
that they make it their principal Business to discredit and ruin one another.
It Is a Pleasure to hear the Characters which they mutually give of each other;
and as soon as they are acquainted with a Man, they begin to entertain him with
a Harangue on that Subject. The Vaivode of this Place, with whom I have
contracted a sort of Friendship, has told me a thousand Stories of the Bassa's
and Cadi's, which, as diverting as they are, I shall rather choose to relate,
than to write to you: and therefore you must even content your self at present
with one, for a Taste of the pleasant Entertainment you may expect at our next
Meeting.

One who had as little Money as Honesty, that is, none at all, was sent in the
Quality of a Cadi, to a certain Town, where he hoped the Wranglings of the
Inhabitants would quickly supply all his Wants. But, as ill Luck would have it,
his Predecessors had quite spoiled his Market; and Oppression, which makes some
wise Men mad, had made these Fools, wise. They heard he was a very hungry
Devil, and they resolved to starve him outright; wisely considering that 'twas
both their Duty and Interest to live in Peace, or at least to refer all their
Differences to the Arbitration of honest Friends, rather than by tearing out
their own Bowels to feed their Greedy Devourer. And it seems they showed as
much Firmness in pursuing, as Wisdom in making so advantageous a Resolution:
for the Cadi spent six Weeks or two Months after his Arrival, without any
Employment but Fretting, Cursing, and biting his Thumbs out of mere Spite,
because he could find nothing else to exercise his Teeth upon. One day as he
was walking in the Streets, meditating no doubt on his wretched Fate, he
perceived a Baker, who was drawing a good Fat Goose out of his Oven; and the
savoury Vapors assaulting his Nose, raised a furious Commotion in his empty
Stomach: his Mouth watered at the delicious Obj^ct, and his Guts began to
rumble with a more than ordinary Violence. In a Word, he was so little Master
of himself, that he could not forbear begging a Piece; but the Baker told him
that the Goose belonged to one of his Neighbors, who had sent it to him to be
baked. Come, replied the Cadi, take my Advice: We'll eat the Goose, and when
the Man comes to fetch it, tell him that as thou were bringing it out to see
whether 'twas ready, a Flock of Geese happened to fly by the Door, and that his
Goose perceiving its old Companions, would not be persuaded to stay behind 'em.
If he will not be satisfied with so fair an Answer, let him even take his
Course; for he must bring thee before me, and I Will find a Way to save thee
harmless. There was no need of more Arguments, for the Baker's Stomach was on
the Cadi's Side, and his Conscience made no long Resistance: and therefore
as soon as he had signified his Consent, the Cadi began to bestir his Chaps so
vigorously, that by the Assistance of his Friend the Business was dispatch^d in
an Instant. Two Hours after the Man came for his Goose, and the Baker repeated
his Lesson very gravely: but the Jest was somewhat too gross, and the Man was
so offended at the Baker^s Insolency, that he took him immediately by the Neck,
and told him that he must either restore his Goose, or go before the Cadi; for
there are no Sergeants or Bailiffs in this Country. These Threatenings made no
great Impression upon the Baker, since he knew that he was to be judged by his
Fellow-Rogue; so that he was as free from Fear, as the other was full of Anger
and Revenge and walked very peaceably along with his Accuser. But they had not
gone far when they were stopped by the Lamentations of a poor Mule-Driver,
whose Mule was fallen under her Load, and lay sprawling on the Ground. The
Baker was moved with Compassion at the poor Man's Misfortune, who came to beg
his Assistance, and took hold of the Mule's Tail, while the Man himself
endeavored t^ raise her Head: but the Load was so heavy, tha^ the Baker
finding more Resistance than he expected, and pulling with all the Force of a
Brawny Arm, at last plucked the Tail off at the Root. The Owner of the Mule was
so enraged at this unlucky Accident, which made him incapable of following his
usual Occupation, that not regarding the Baker's charitable Intention, he
seized him by the Collar, and helped the other Man to hale him along, for he
was so far from going willingly as before, that considering the Cadi was not at
all concerned in this Affair, and not daring to rely too much on his
Friendship, lest he should be obliged to pay the Price of the Mule, he made a
shift to get loose; and thinking to make his Lscape, ran into a House not far
from the place where he met the Mule-Driver. But, as Mischances never come
single, it happened that there was a Woman six Months gone with Child, standing
in the Court of the House where he thought to secure himself, who was so
terrified at the sight of a Man running, with two others pursuing him furiously
at his Heels, that she miscarried immediately. Thus the poor Baker had the
Mortification to see the Number of his Enemies increased; for the Woman's
Husband joined with the other Two, and all together carried him before the
Cadi, whom they acquainted with the Reason of their Coming, expressing their
several Complaints in a very mournful Tone, to move their Judge to Compassion.

I Am a very poor Man, said he who had received the first Injury, and all the
Town knows that I had but one Goose, which I intended to eat with my Wife and
Children, in Peace and Joy, as I hope for the Blessing of the Prophet. But
alas! this wicked Man has stoll'n her from me, and would put me off with a
ridiculous Story: he has the Impudence to tell me that ^y Goose after she was
baked, spied a Flock of other Geese, and flew away with 'em.

I had but one Mule, cried the Second, which maintained me and all my Family; I
had but one, and now, alas! I may say I have none: for the poor Creature had
the Misfortune to fall under her Burden, and this Man happened to pass by as I
was endeavoring in vain to relieve her. I entreated him to help me, but
instead of raising her up, he plucked off her Tail.

Ah! Would I had no more Reason to complain than either of the rest, said the
Third. I have but one Wife, and that a very bad one. We have been married these
three Years, and I have toil^d Night and Day to get her with Child: At last, by
the Blessing of the Prophet I did the Feat, and in a little time expected to
see the Fruit of my Labors. But that Traitor has this Day destroyed what I
could hardly get in three Years: he put my Wife into such a Fright, that she
miscarried three Months before the Time.

Judge, Sir, with what Impatience and Fear the Baker expected his Doom, and how
the Cadi was puzzled to bring him off in Spite of so many clamorous Accusers.
Yet the Difficulty of the Case served only to show the Dexterity of the Judge,
as you will easily perceive by his Answers to the Three Plaintiffs.

I cannot, said he to the First, oblige a Man to restore a Goose, which, he
affirms, flew out of his hands. I confess the Story is very surprising and
improbable, but we must always give credit to an honest Man's Word: And
therefore since thou can produce no Witnesses to disprove it, thou must even
resolve to bear thy Mifortune patiently.

As for thee, said he to the Second, it is another Case: He has plucked off thy
Mule's Tail, and made her unfit for Service. And therefore it is just that be
should be obliged to keep her at his own Charge till her Rump be healed.

But thou, poor Man, said he, turning to the Third* art more to be pitied than
either of the rest. Thou say (and I believe thee) that it cost thee three
Years Labor to get a Child: and after all thy Toil, this Man by an unlucky
Accident has made thy Wife cast her Bantling three Months before the Time. I
condemn the Rogue to take her home with him, to ^ill her Belly again, and to
keep her till she be in the same Condition, and the Child as old as when he
made her miscarry.

I will not ask your Opinion of this Story, till you have heard both Parties:
for the Cadi thinks himself as honest a Man, and as worthy of your Audience as
the Vaivode; and therefore you must even be satisfied to hear his Tale next.

A very Rich Man died, and left his Son Heir to his whole Estate, except 1000
Piasters, which he bequeathed to the Tyrant of the Country. Now you must know
that the Turks are very religious Observers of the Last-Wills of their
Relations: and this Young Man it seems was very nice in that Point. His
Ignorance of his Father's Meaning made him extremely uneasy; for he concluded
that if he should detain another Man's Right, against his Father's positive
Command, 'twou'd certainly bring the Curse of the Prophet upon him. After he
had spent some time in considering where to bestow the Legacy, he resolved to
carry it to the Bassa, whom he addressed thus: Sir, My Father ordered me by his
Last-Will, to give 1000 Piasters to the Tyrant of the Country, without
mentioning the Name of any particular Person. I was extremely troubled at the
Obscurity of these Words, and not being able to unriddle the Mystery, I thought
my self obliged to bring the Money to you not as to a Tyrant, but as to the
most powerful Person in the Country. The Bassa, who by chance was an honest
Man, replied very calmly, My Son, I neither am, nor will be a Tyrant, carry the
Money to the Cadi, for he has more Right to it than I. The Young Man perceiving
that 'twou'd be in vain to urge him to accept it, went according to his Advice,
and made the same Complement to the Cadi, whom he found to be as generous as
the Bassa; for he told him he could not take it without injuring the Person for
whom it was designed, and desired him to carry it to the Receiver of the
Customs. But that Officer was as jealous of his Honor as either of the rest,
and sent the young Heir to the Vaivode, who hearing that he had been with the
other three, and what Answers he had received from 'em, told him that as his
Conscience obliged him to ease a Neighbor of a Burden that seemed to be so
troublesome to him, so it would not permit him to receive it absolutely gratis.
Let us, added he, make a feigned Bargain; you shall buy all the Snow in my
Court for 1000 Piasters, and then I can take the Money with a safe Conscience.
The Young Man, who had been bandy'd about so often, and was glad to be rid of
the Money on any Terms, consented immediately to the Proposal. As soon as the
Bargain was concluded, and the Deed of Conveyance written, the Vaivode's
Secretary demanded his Fees; for in this Country the Purchaser must always pay
for the Contract. The Young Man was both vexed and surpised at the Impudence
of these Blood-suckers, and upbraided 'em with their Injustice and Barbarity;
adding, That he did not expect to be troubled with their litigious Tricks after
he had freely presented 'em with so considerable a Sum: But neither his Anger
nor Arguments could prevail, for he was forced at last to give the Secretary
Ten Piasters more; after which he went home with a Resolution to return no more
to a place where he had been so ill treated. But three Days after the Vaivode
sent to acquaint him that 'twas time for him to remove his Commodity. The Young
Man imagining that they intended only to put a Jest upon him for his foolish
Bargain, bid the Messenger tell his Master, that he might keep both the Goods
and the Money. But he was quickly convinced, that he had bestowed the Legacy on
the Man who had the best right to it: For the Vaivode forced him to remove all
the Snow that was in his Court.

I know not whether you can read these Stories without Sleeping: But I durst
almost lay a Wager, that if I should add a Third, you would throw away my
Letter without staying to hear that

I am, SIR, Your etc.
Smyrna, 1691.
LETTER XX.
SIR,
IN pursuance of the Method I proposed in my last, I shall in this Letter give
you a brief Account of the Turkish Religion, which, in the Opinion of those who
profess it, is a New Law, Instituted by GOD, in the room of the Christian
Religion.

GOD, they say, has sent Four Prophets to reveal his Will to Mankind, and
instruct us in the way to Salvation. The first was Enoch, who Preached and
Propheci'd, but did not commit his Doctrine to Writing. For, in those Days, GOD
communicated Himself to Mankind in so sensible a manner, that there was no need
of a Written-Law. After this Prophet had executed his Commission, he was taken
up into Heaven, both Soul and Body. In the mean time, GOD seeing that Men
perverted their Ways, and made the want of a Written-Law, a Cloak and Pretext
for their Transgressions, sent Moses, who brought the Children of Israel out of
Egypt, and gave 'em the Law which he had received from GOD. This was the second
Prophet, whose Dispensation was to continue till the coming of JESUS CHRIST,
whom they call the Breath of God, acknowledging, that he was Conceived by
Divine Operation, in the Womb of his Mother, who remained a Virgin, even after
his Birth. He altered and reformed the Law, according to the Power with which
God had entrusted him, and for that reason incurred the hatred of the Jews, who
sought to put him to Death, and hired the Traitor Judas to betray him. But when
he came to the Oliv^-Garden, they were seized with so strange an Illusion, that
they Crucified Judas instead of his Master, who was, in the mean time,
translated to Heaven, where he remains with the two former Prophets. They say,
this Opinion serves much better to display the Glory of CHRIST, than the
Christian Doctrine; and brand us with Folly and Impiety for believing that He
whom we adore as God, was shamefully Crucified. The very sight of a Crucifix
fills 'em with Anger and Rage, pretending that it is a horrid Injury to CHRIST,
to represent him in a State of Ignominy and Suffering. They believe also that
He will come to judge the World at the last Day; but that He will first Reign
upon the Earth, and Marry, and beget Children. They affirm, that He was a Holy
Man, and a chosen Vessel; but they will not be persuaded to acknowledge a
Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, saying, That such an Opinion would
absolutely destroy the Unity of that Sovereign Being, without which He could
not be GOD.

CHRIST was succeeded by Mahomet, after whom there shall come no other Prophet.
'Twou'd be an endless Task to reckon up all the Glorious Titles they bestow
upon him.

They differ not much from us in their Opinions concerning the Divine
Attributes. Only they have such a peculiar Fondness for Predestination, that
they extend it even to the most Indifferent Actions, yet with some Limitations
and Circumstances which 'twou'd be very difficult to explain, and which they
themselves do not well understand. Thus they are firmly persuaded, that under
the Reign of such an Emperor, the State will infallibly and perpetually have
either a disast'rous or happy Fate: And it is this Persuasion that makes 'em so
inclinable to dethrone their Sultans.

They believe, that there is an infinite number of Angels, some Good and others
Bad. The first are called White, and the others Black Angels or Devils. They
imagine that every Man has two Angels that attend him continually, and that one
of 'em writes down all his Good, and the other all his Bad Actions. They
address their Prayers to the Black Angels as well as to the White, that they
may secure the Friendship both of the Inhabitants of Paradise and Hell, though,
in their Opinion, the Souls of the Damned enter not into the last of these
Places till the Day of Judgment. For it is an Article of the Turkish Faith, that
the Spirits of the Wicked remain in their Graves, where they are tormented by
the Black Angels till the last Day, when they shall be sent to Hell, together
with their Bodies, and suffer very cruel Punishments, for the space of One or
Two Thousand Years, according to the Crimes they committed in this Life; after
which they shall be released, and admitted into Paradise, where they shall
enjoy the same Happiness that is appointed for the Souls of Good Men. They
think it is inconsistent with the Divine Goodness, and blame us for believing
that GOD will punish a Man Eternally for the Offenses of so short a Life: Yet,
since they are extremely afraid of Hell, they pray very devoutly to the Black
Angels that they would be pleased not to write down all their Ill Actions.

Since you will doubtless look upon their Opinion, of the Soul's resting in the
Grave after Death, to be very Absurd and Ridiculous, I shall endeavor to give
you a clearer Idea of their Thoughts on that Subject.

They differ from us in the account they give of the manner how the Soul
Informs and Animates the Body. For whereas we believe, that these two
Substances are Hypostatically united, and that Death consists in their
Separation; they imagine that the Soul and Body have no dependence on one
another, and that the absence of the Spirit (which, for Example, may take a
Journey to Paradise) is not necessarily attended with the Destruction of the
Corporeal Machine; though they acknowledge that the Body is always deprived of
Reason, during its Separation from the Soul. Thus they believe, that the only
reason why a Fool or Idiot acts and speaks absurdly, is because his Soul (and
consequently his Reason) has forsaken him. As for Lunatic and Hypochondriacal
Persons, who have some lucid Intervals, and are only deprived of their Reason
by Fits, they endeavor to solve the Difficulty, by maintaining, that the Soul
leaves her Mansion at certain times, and returns again after a short Absence:
And this, they say, is an effect of Providence, either for the Punishment of
the Distempered Person, or for some other hidden Design. When a Christian tells
'em, that these Fits of Madness proceed from the Disorder and Indisposition of
the Organs, which hinders the Soul from performing her Functions, they upbraid
him with the absurdity of his Opinion; for, say they, the Soul of Man is a
Spirit, and therefore cannot be stopped or obstructed in the exercise of her
Faculties by Matter, which is a Substance of another, and absolutely different
Nature. From this Principle they infer, that neither the Presence nor Absence
of the Soul can produce any alteration in the Machinal course of the Body,
which is only moved by Springs: And that when one of the principal Springs
fails, or is spoiled, the Soul cannot prevent the Ruin of the whole Engine.
This, they pretend, is an obvious Truth, and confirmed by daily Experience: And
therefore we must not be surpised, that a dead Body neither Walks, Breathes,
nor performs any Operation, though the Soul be still lodged in it: For since she
is not the Author of the Machine which she Inhabits, it is beyond her Power
either to keep it entire, or to repair it after it falls to decay. GOD alone,
who made and contrived it, can restore it, and renew its motion, as he will do
at the last Day. To confirm this Hypothesis, they cite, with a great deal of
Confidence, what Pliny relates of a Man whose Soul and Body were wont to be
separated every day, so that the Body remained without any appearance of Life
or Motion, till the return of the Soul, which afterward used to give an
Account of all the wonderful things she had seen in the remotest Countries.
This, you know, is one of that Author's fabulous Stories, and yet the Turks
pretend to draw from thence an evident and irrefutable Proof of their Opinion.
Besides, they give the Soul a Figure exactly like that of the Body, and upon
this Principle maintain, that the Souls of the Damned are beaten in the Grave,
and suffer Torments, which a pure Spirit seems incapable of feeling. They
believe also, that the Beasts shall not be deprived of the benefit of the
Resurrection, and that at the Day of Judgment they will give an Account before
CHRIST, of all the Kindnesses and Injuries they have received from Men. And
this Conceit makes 'em so charitable to Irrational Creatures, that some of 'em
buy little Birds and live Fishes, that they may afterward set 'em at liberty.

They fancy themselves polluted by several Things, such as Sleeping, the
touching of a Woman, and of all sorts of Excrements; and therefore after any
such Accident, they perform their Ablution or Abdest, washing their Face,
Hands, Ears, and Feet, and looking toward Mecca. In the Day they content
themselves with washing their Mouth, which they repeat as often as they have
occasion to obey the necessities of Nature: But after Copulation their
Ablutions are much more Ceremonious, for they wash their whole Body in a Bath,
as they do also when a drop of Wine falls upon their Garments. I have seen some
of 'em so extremely Superstitious, that they would never afterward wear a Vest
that was pulluted with Wine; though there are others of less scrupulous Tempers
who never refuse to taste that spirituous Liquor, and even some that continue
Tippling till they have quite lost their Senses.

They Pray five times a Day, in the Morning at the break of Day, at Noon, at
Three a Clock in the Afternoon, at Six in the Evening, and an hour after the
close of the Evening. But they go only twice to the Mosquee, to the Sabah in
the Morning, and to the Quindy at Three in the Afternoon: And even many of 'em
perform their public Devotions only on Friday, which is their Festival-Day, as
Sunday is ours. On that day an Iman, or Priest of the Law, says a Prayer, and
delivers a kind of Sermon or Exhortation to the Hearers: But the Men are too
jealous to suffer any of the Fair Sex to come to the Public Places of Worship.

The Turkish Lent is shorter, but much more severe than that which the
Catholics observe; for they neither Eat, Drink, nor Smoke Tobacco while the
Day lasts; so that this may be justly reckoned a very mortifying Season,
especially when it happens to fall out it Summer, considering the violent Heat
that reigns throughout all Asia. This Fast is called Ramadan, and lasts Thirty
Days, during which time the Turks are obliged by the Alchoran to begin their
Fast every Morning as soon as they can discern a Black Thread from a White, and
to continue their Abstinence till the same Hour at Night, which is proclaimed
by the Muezins and Marabouts from the top of the Minare^s. Then they let loose
the Reins to their wild Desires, spending the whole Night in Gluttony and
Drunkenness, and roaming about the Streets: For during this Month they turn the
Day into Night, and the Night into Day, and greedily hunt after all sorts of
Pleasures, to allay the severity of the Fast, which, notwithstanding all the
Pains they take to sweeten it, is very disagreeable to Flesh and Blood. It ends
with the Moon, and every one is so impatient to see the New Mood that releases
'em from this loathed Constraint, that they run up to the Tops of Houses and
Mountains to see their Deliverer rise, and as soon as they perceive her gilding
the Horizon, they salute her with several Bows, and the Castles proclaim the
glad Tidings with repeated Discharges of their Artillery. The Three succeeding
Days are spent in Mirth and Jollity; every Man puts on his best Clothes, and
entertains his Friends. This is properly the Turkish Easter, and is called the
Great Bairam, to distinguish it from several Feasts or Bairams of less
consequence, such as that of the Birth of Mahomet, etc.

'Twou'd be needless to tell you, that they neither eat Hog's-Flesh, nor drink
Wine, and that they cannot endure Images; for these are things so commonly
known, and so often repeated by all the Crowd of Travelers, that I cannot
suppose you to be ignoront of 'em. But, perhaps, you have not so distinct an
Idea of the Charity that reigns among 'em. Since they believe Alms to be the
surest Atonement for Sins, they neglect no occasion of buying their future
Peace. It Is this Principle that excites 'em to leave considerable Legacies at
their Death, which, according to the Will of the Deceased, are employed in
repairing public Fountains, building Bridges, or paying the Portions of
Indigent Maidens. I have already told you, that their Charity extends even to
Beasts; and I shall take this occasion to add, that they are particularly kind
to Dogs, though naturally they do not love 'em, and keep none in their Houses.
Yet the Cities are full of 'em, where they wander about the Streets, and
perpetuate their Kind like Wild Beasts. They are so mangy, lean, and miserable,
that one would think they could not live a day; and I have seen some of 'em at
Constantinople so near Starving, that they would jump into the Sea for some
Bits of Carrion which they perceived at the bottom. However, since they could
not possibly live on what they find in the Streets, the richer sort of Turks
buy Provisions for 'em, and feed 'em every Morning at their Doors with
Eleemosinary Bread and Flesh. They reckon it a heinous Crime to kill a Dog,
Cat, Horse, or any other Creature that is not appointed for the Food and
Nourishment of Mankind: For they pretend that since Man is not the Author of
their Life, he ought not to deprive 'em of it.

I shall take this occasion to relate the Story of an Accident that happened in
this place, not above eight days ago. There was a Dog that used always to howl,
when he heard the Muezin calling the People to Prayers from the Minaret. The
Turks, who are Superstitious, even beyond Imagination, could not behold their
most Holy Rites profaned by an Impudent Cur, without an extreme Indignation:
Yet they durst not kill him for fear of offending GOD. However, they found out
a way to chastise the daring Criminal, without provoking the Wrath of Heaven:
For notwithstanding all their Veneration for his Person, they were loath to
allow him greater Privileges than they claim for themselves. After mature
deliberation on such a weighty and important Case, they ventured at last to
seize him, and carry him before the Cadi, where they Indicted him as a
Dgiahour, or Christian, who derided the Law of the Prophet. The Evidence was so
plain, that after a full Hearing poor Towzer was condemned to be Cudgel'd to
Death, and the Sentence was immediately executed. Perhaps the oddness of this
Relation may make you suspect my Veracity so far as to imagine, that I Invented
it on purpose to divert you: But, in short, you must either believe it, or in
plain Terms give me the Lie. It Is true, I dare not warrant the truth of the
Story I Am going to tell you, but since it relates to the same Subject, you must
even be content to read it.

Besides the ordinary Dogs that wander about the Streets, there are others
called Jaccals, or Chacaly, that run in the Fields, where they make a hideous
noise every Night. They do not Bark like other Dogs, but have a kind of sharp
or yelling Cry, peculiar to themselves.

Now (if you will believe the Turks) the Chacaly or Wild-Dogs, in ancient Times,
Inhabited the Cities, and the other Dogs lived in the Fields. They were
perpetual and irreconcilable Enemies to each other, and fought many bloody
Battles, in one of which the Chacaly were Victorious, and the Forces of the
Dogs were so shattered that they were obliged to beg a Peace, which was granted
by their Generous Enemies on these favorable Terms; That the Dogs might stay
in the City till their Wounds were healed, during which time the Chacaly should
retire to the Country; but that afterward both Parties should return to their
former Habitations. These Conditions were punctually performed by the Chacaly,
but the Dogs growing lusty and strong, resolved to maintain their Post, and
have ever since remained in the City. It Is the remembrance of this Injury that
makes the Chacaly call to the Dogs every Night in their yelling Language, and
summon 'em to resign a Place which they usurped so unjustly; and they answer as
they Bark, crying still, Yock, Yock, which, in the Turkish Language signifies
No, no. But, instead of insisting longer on these insipid Fables, I shall
return to the Turkish Religion, which is little less absurd and ridiculous.

They are so besotted with their Conceits about Predestination, that they use
no manner of precaution to preserve themselves from Infectious Distempers, and
are offended at the Christians for taking care of their Health on such
occasions. A Frenchman told me the other Day, that during the time of a very
violent Contagion, he perceived at a distance some Turks in the Street, who
were carrying the Body of a Man that died of the Plague to his Grave. As he was
turning another way on purpose to avoid meeting 'em, one of the Company ran
after him, and clasped him in his Arms, rubbing his Body upon him several
times; after which opening his Vest, and showing him a large Plague Sore under
his right Pap, Learn, said he, not to forsake dead and dying Men. And indeed,
if we reflect seriously on the little care they take to stop that raging
Disease, we may reasonably conclude, that none of 'em could escape without a
kind of Miracle, if the Distemper were as Contagious as it is generally thought
to be. For they never avoid the Converse of those who come from an infected
Place, and there are few Ports where there are not some Vessels that left the
Plague reigning in the Towns from whence they came. Yet this neglect of the
Cautions used by other Nations on such occasions, is never attended with the
least ill-consequence, unless when the disposition of the Air has a sort of
natural tendency to promote and spread the Contagion, for then it bursts forth
impetuously like Gunpowder set on Fire. But this is not the Opinion of the
Turks, for they absolutely deny that the Infection depends either on the
Constitution of the Air, or of humane Bodies, pretending that it proceeds
wholly from a supernatural Cause, and that when GOD designs to execute the fury
of his Vengeance on obstinate Sinners, he sends an Army of black Angels to
destroy 'em. They add, that every Angel receives of Bow and two sorts of
Arrows, to inflict either Death or Sickness, with orders to shoot their mortal
Arrows at those whom they find under the Power of Sin, and to direct the others
at such who are only tainted with some Pollution. It Is then that Men stand most
in need of the Protection of their White Angels, who intercede for 'em, and do
what they can toward the Blows that are aimed against 'em, sometimes covering a
Man entirely, when they perceive a great number of Enemies ready to attack him.
Yet notwithstanding all their Care, their Assistance proves oftentimes
ineffectual; and therefore it is the Interest of every Man that regards his own
Safety, to secure himself against the Vengeance of those destroying Spirits, by
leading a sinless Life. The Turks pretend, that they infallibly perceive the
Blow, when the Arrow pierces 'em: And even some Franks who have been two or
three times seized with the Plague, assure me, that they felt a certain
Pricking in the place where the Carbuncles break forth; which is not at all
improbable, since it is usual for such a troublesome Sensation to accompany all
sorts of Tumors. But to conclude this Subject with my Letter, I shall only add,
that the Plague which rages so often in these Oriental Countries, and sweeps
away such vast numbers of the Inhabitants, is in some measure necessary for
their Preservation. For the number of the People is augmented Yearly by at
least a fifth Part, and you will be the less inclined to look upon this as a
Paradox, if you consider that they are allowed to marry four Wives, and to keep
several Concubines, and that there are 50000 Slaves brought every Year into
Turkey. So that the Country would be quickly over-stock'd with Inhabitants, and
in all probability, the People would be in danger of Starving, if their numbers
were not lessened by Pestilential Distempers. And notwithstanding the terrible
Havoc it makes, the Land is still so full of People, that a Man would think
their own Interest should make 'em forbid the Exportation of Corn, especially
since they have none to spare.

I am, SIR, Your, etc.
Smyrna, May, 1691.
LETTER XXI.
SIR,
I Proceed now to give you an account of the Manners and Customs of the Turks,
which (you may remember) was the last of the three Subjects I undertook to
Discourse of. I told you once before, and I shall take this occasion to repeat
it as an undoubted Truth, that they are opposite to us almost in every thing:
And this Opposition appears in nothing more plainly, than in their obstinate
adhering to their ancient Customs. In our Country we are never at rest till we
have Invented some new fashion; and Beauty it self would hardly please us
without the Charms of Novelty. Hence the Turks accuse the Franks of Fickleness
and Inconstancy, and boast of their own strength of Mind that fixes steddily on
solid Enjoyments, without deigning to take notice of Trifles. I confess I was
at first somewhat surpised at the difference I observed between their Temper
and ours, but after I had taken all possible care to free my self of those
Prejudices that are wont in such cases to put a biass upon the Judgment, and
seriously considered the Genius of that Nation; I found that what they call
Strength of Mind, Constancy, or Solidity, is at the bottom nothing else but a
pure insensibility, and a Weakness that is altogether inexcusable in any
reasonable Creature. And you will certainly be of the same Opinion when I have
told you, that they are so far from studying to improve their Understandings,
that in a manner they profess and glory in their Ignorance; and that their
Curiosity is confined within so narrow a compass, that they never undertake a
Voyage without some covetous or sordid Design. Besides, their Indifference and
Unconcern'dness for the Public Interest; the almost Monastical Solitariness of
their Life, and the Laziness of their Temper are convincing Proofs of the truth
of my Assertion. It Is true indeed, this Character must not be extended so far
as to comprehend the Principal Officers of State, or those who are engaged in
Court-Intrigues: But as for all the rest, they scarce ever look beyond the
Sphere of their own Families: And provided their Wives be handsome, their
Horses well Curry'd, and their Servants Submissive and Respectful, they never
give themselves the trouble of enquiring after the Affairs of the rest of the
World. Contented with their Lot, they sit whole Days on a Sopha, without any
other Occupation than drinking Coffee, smoking Tobacco, or caressing their
Wives: So that their whole Life is a continual Revolution of Eating, Drinking,
and Sleeping, intermixed with some dull Recreations. Yet they cannot be accused
of Luxury in Eating, for a Hen boiled with Rice, Coriander-seed, and Sugar is
the best Dish that comes before a Man of 20000 Livres a Year, and it is this
they call Pilo. The rest of the Meal is made up with a Dish of Fish, and some
Sweetmeats, in which there is always more Honey than Sugar. When the Hour of
Dinner comes, they lay upon the Sopha an Octangular or Hexagonal Table of
Olive-Wood or Walnut-Tree, inlaid with Ivory, etc. and usually not above a Foot
and a half in Diameter. Then having laid the Cloth, they serve up all the
Dishes one after another: There are no Napkins laid upon the Table, but a
Servant spreads 'em on his Master's-Knees', and stands behind him to cut his
Meat; for it is beneath the Turkish Grandeur to do any thing for themselves. All
their Vessels are of Earth; only the Great Men use Porcelain: For they reckon
it a very heinous Sin to eat in Silver, though the Trappings of their Horses are
usually of that Metal. They never drink at Meals, though they are wont to sit a
considerable while; but as soon as the Table is removed, the Servants bring a
Cup of Sorbet, and then Coffee, and Tobacco, with which they divert themselves
all the rest of the Day, unless they take a fancy to go to the Women's
Apartment, or to play at Shells with one of their Servants, who must always
suffer himself to be beaten, as he would avoid a worse Beating with a Cudgel.
At Night there is a Mat brought, with Sheets and a Coverlet; and they Sleep all
Night in the same place where they Eat, Drunk, Played, and Doz'd all the Day:
For they are altogether ignorant of the use of dark Alcoves, and Beds with
double Curtains. This is their constant manner of Living, after they cease to
be Youths; for betwixt the Years of Fifteen and Twenty, they spend their Time
in Riding, Archery, throwing Darts, and other Exercises of that nature in which
they usually attain to a great Perfection. I do not think that we have any
Grooms or Jockeys in Europe that exceed 'em, though if you saw 'em on Horseback,
you would think they could not sit a moment. For their Stirrups are so short,
that they must almost bend their Legs as much as when they sit upon a Sopha:
Their Boots are of Spanish or Goat's-Leather, so wide and ill-made, that
nothing can be more troublesome to a Horseman: and all the Furniture of their
Horses is still more incommodious. Their Saddles are as large and high as a
Pack-saddle, especially before, and fastened on the Horse's back, with a broad
Girth or Surcingle drawn over it, without which 'twou'd be impossible to keep
it from falling off, by reason of its weight. Instead of Bridles they use
Snaffles that would be thought bad enough for a Cart-Horse in France, if they
were not richly gilded. Judge, Sir, what a Figure a Man can make on the back of
a Horse Trapp'd after such a manner, and what Command he can have over him. Yet
I assure you the Turks rule their Horses as they please, without either Spur or
Whip, instead of which they only use a Stick or Batoon three Foot long, and as
big as a very large Cane, which they hold in the middle, striking the Horse
sometimes with one end, and sometimes with the other, according as they would
have him turn to either side. I never saw Horses run so fast as these, nor
stretch their Bodies to so great a length, for their Belly almost touches the
Ground. The Turks have an admirable dexterity at throwing Darts on Horseback;
for riding at a full Gallop, they Dart their Sticks at a Turbant, which is set
up as a Mark, without once missing their Aim. And which is still more
surprising, they throw their Batoon as far before 'em as they can, then putting
their Horse to the swiftest Gallop they take it up with their Hand without
stopping. You will easily perceive the extraordinary difficulty of stooping so
low to take the Stick from the Ground, if you remember what I told you of the
extraordinary height of their Saddles and lowness of their Stirrups. None but
Turks are able to perform this Feat of Activity, for the Franks are so far from
being capable of Learning it, that they can hardly ride the Horses of this
Country. One of our Merchants, newly come to this place, met with an Accident
the other Day, that confirms the truth of what I was saying; for his Horse ran
away with him so furiously, that he could not possibly pull in his Head; and I
believe he would have certainly broke his Neck, if he had not been stopped by a
Greek who happened to meet him. This proceeded from his Ignorance of the way of
stopping a Horse in this Country; for when a Horse runs away with a Man, he
must never pull the Bridle, since that would only make him go the faster; but
take hold of one of the Reins, and turn his Head to the Right Hand, striking
him with the Rod on the other side.

It Is none of the least Conveniences of this Country, that the Keeping of a
Horse is so cheap, that the Charge of one does not amount to above 30 Piasters
a Year: It Is true they must be very carefully tended, and the Turks make it
their principal Business to look after 'em. They visit 'em very often, and when
they find 'em in a good Condition, the Sais is always rewarded with some
Caresses; but if there be any thing amiss, he may certainly expect the
Bastonnado.

Nor are their Servants more chargeable to 'em than their Horses. Their Valets
de Chamber cost 'em not above 40 Piasters a year, for Wages, besides their
Entertainment, which is inconsiderable: and the Servants without the House,
such as the Sais, Porters, and Gardeners, have but 25. As for their
Entertainment, the Rate of their Board-Wages is fixed at a Paras a day, besides
Bread. The Paras is a small Piece of course Silver, not exceeding the Value of
five Dutch Liards: and yet some of 'em are such admirable Husbands, that they
make a shift to save part of so poor an Allowance.

I shall in the next place proceed to give you an Account of the usual Habit of
the Men. Their Breeches are long and wide, reaching down to their Heels, and
close both behind and before, with leathern Stockings or Socks fastened to the
lower part of 'em: and all this is called the Chascir. Their Shirts are of very
fine Cotton Cloth, made exactly like a Woman's Smock, only they are much wider,
especially at the Sleeves, which are always left open. Over this, instead of a
Wast-Coat, they wear a Cafetan, which is a kind of a long Cassock with narrow
Sleeves, buttoned at the Wrists, like the Sleeves of our Doublets. In the
Summer the Cafetans are made of very white Cotton Cloth, and in Winter of Silk
Stuff quilted with Cotton. Besides, they are girt about the Waste with a Silken
Scarf, resembling Brocard, that serves to hang their Gangiare or Poniard, the
Handle of which is pretty large, and oftentimes made of Ivory, the Teeth of a
certain Fish, or Silver, and enriched with Jewels either true or counterfeit.
They never appear with a Sword or Sabre, but when they go into the Country: nor
are the Franks suffered to wear one, except the Ambassadors and Consuls.

Their upper Habit is a Cloth Gown, which they call a Vest. In Summer it is only
lined with Taffeta; but in Winter it is furred with a Skin, called Samour, which
is so costly that Great Persons have some that are worth 1000 Crowns a piece.
The Hair of it is black, fine, and so long, that one may hide an Egg in it; I
speak only of the best sort; for there are some of all Prices. Besides they
sometimes furr their Vests with Ermins, or with the Skin of a bluish sort of
Weasel, or of the Muscovia Fox; and the poorer sort with Kid, Foine, or Lambs
Skin. They never put any Gold or Silver on their Clothes, unless on Days of
Ceremony, such as the Grand Signior's public Entry, their Wedding Day, or some
such Solemnity: and even then it is the peculiar Privilege of the Bassa's and
Grandees of the Port, to wear Ornaments of that Nature. You see what a
Difference there is between the Customs of this Place, and of France, where
even the Footmen are gilt all over from Head to Foot.

Beauty is the Object of the reigning Passion of the Turks: and when they speak
of a handsome Woman they seem to be all transport and ecstasy. Yet they are
obliged to court their Mistresses by Proxy, and even must be contented to take
a Character of 'em from (...) Continency, are forced to make use of the
Privilege of Keeping Concubines, or buying Slaves. For a Man must not expect to
live upon Charity here, though the Women are not at all guilty of Cruelty: but
want of Opportunity hinders 'em from bestowing their Favors, and it is
impossible for a Gallant to thrive among such cautious Husbands. There is no
Slavery equal to that of the Turkish Women; for a Servant may live Twenty Years
in a Family without seeing the Face of his Mistress. The Door of the Women's
Apartment is a Ne plus ultra for every thing that looks like a Man, and the
utmost Limit of the Women's Liberty; I mean Women of Quality, who have Baths in
their Houses; for the meaner Sort must go to the public Baths at least once a
Week. Notwithstanding this close Confinement, I Am informed that they sometimes
venture upon a little Recreation; but they are seldom so bold, and the Motion
must always proceed from themselves. When they are in the Humor, and have
chosen a promising Play-fellow, they send him a Declaration of Love by some old
Confident. But would you not be surpised instead of a Billet-doux to find
nothing but Bits of Charcoal, Scarlet Cloth, Saffron, Ashes, and such like
Trash, wrapped up in a Piece of Paper. It Is true these are as significant as the
most passionate Words; but it is a Mystical Language that cannot be understood
without a Turkish Interpreter. I know a Frank that once received such an
Invitation, and was extremely puzzled to know the Meaning of it. After several
successless Trials to unriddle the Mystery, he entrusted the Secret to one of
the Ambassadour's Interpreters, who told him that such a Bassa's Wife desired
him to visit her such a day, when her Husband would be gone from home, and that
the Woman who brought him the Message would introduce him to her Apartment. At
the same time he advised him not to go, and used all the Arguments that his
Experience or Prudence could suggest to dissuade him from exposing himself to
so terrible and unavoidable a Danger. But the Frank had such a longing desire
to taste so delicious a Bit as he fansi'd his Unknown Mistress to be, that he
resolved to sacrifice all to the Dear Expectation, and went boldly to the
Bassa's House at the time appointed, where he really found a kind and beautiful
Lady, who put him in possession of his expected Delight, and entertained him
with all the Joys of Love, for two days; at the end of which his Strength being
quite exhausted by the laborious Pleasure, and finding himself altogether unfit
for the Service, he asked leave to be gone, and was extremely surpised when
his Request was denied, in a very harsh and uncivil Manner. Then beginning to
reflect on the Interpreter's wise Admonition; he walked about the whole
Apartment, searching in every Corner for a place where he might escape
unperceived. At last he came to the Laundry or Washing-House, where he found a
Woman-Slave, who perceiving his Melancholy, and guessing the Cause of it, began
to condole his Misfortune in a manner that made him utterly despair of Relief.
For she told him that 'twas her Mistress's constant Practice to secure her own
Reputation by the Death of her Lovers; adding, that to her certain Knowledge
above Twenty of 'em had been strangled since she came into the Family, and that
he could not reasonably expect a milder Treatment than his Predecessors had met
with before him. Yet, said she, since we are both Christians, I Will endeavor to
save your Life, if you do not force me to hate you by refusing to grant me one
Favor. I have been shut up in this place these Twenty Years, and in all that
time have not seen the Face of a Man: Oblige me but once, and afterward I
shall find a way to set you at Liberty. The Terms were somewhat hard for a Man
in his Condition; but since his Life was at stake, he made a Virtue of
Necessity, and performed as well as he could. The poor Woman, who had been a
Stranger so long to the Pleasure of Love, was ravished with the unaccustomed
Delight; and having given him a thousand Blessings, helped him to make his
Escape through the Chimney, which brought him to a Platform, from whence he
leaped into the Street, and has never since found the least Inclination to make
Love to a Turkish Lady; which is certainly the most dangerous Recreation that a
Frank can choose. The Turks require so much Modesty and Discretion in their
Wives, that they would never pardon 'em if they should suffer a Man to see 'em,
or speak to 'em: and I shall never forget what an Aga once said to Monsieur de
Chateauneuf's Secretary. This Gentleman was telling the Aga after the French
way, that is very indiscreetly, that he had seen and spoken with one of Mahomet
the Fourth's Odalische's, who was turned out of the Seraglio after that
Prince's Misfortune. The Turk, who could not hear him longer with Patience,
replied very angrily, that she was a base Woman, and unworthy of her former
Dignity. Then the Secretary endeavored to persuade him that she had no ill
Design in what she did, and that 'twas only an innocent Curiosity that made her
willing to be informed of the French Customs, of the Beauty of the Ladies in
that Country, and of their Way of Living. But the Aga, instead of being
pacified, continued to rail again the Odalische so vehemently, that the
Secretary began to repent his Freedom, and to swear and protest that she was
one of the most virtuous Persons in the World, and that she was not guilty of
the least criminal Thought. At last the Aga, losing all Patience, replied in a
Rage; Sir, All that you have said signifies nothing. If she had been honest,
she would never have suffered you to see her, much less to speak to her. If a
Man should put his Hand into your Pocket, would you excuse him for saying that
he did it out of pure Curiosity.

Since I have had occasion so often to mention the Turkish Women, 'twill not be
improper to give you some Account of their Habit, which is not much different
from that of the Men, only it is a great deal richer. They wear a Cafetan of
Gold-Brocard, fastened before with large Pearls, or little Knots of Diamonds.
It covers their Shoulders entirely, but it is cut so deep before, that their
whole Breasts would remain naked, if their Smock, and a little fort of
Waste-Coat that comes over it, did not hide a part of 'em. This Waste-Coat sits
very close to the Body, and keeps up the Breasts, which is a great Convenience
to those whose Breasts are naturally loose and swagging: so that all Defects
are concealed, and the most curious Eye can perceive nothing but enchanting
Beauties. Above the Cafetan they wear a Leathern Girdle, covered with Plates
and Studs of Gold and Silver, and enriched with precious Stones that cast a
great Luster. Their Smock is always of the finest flowered Silk, and hangs over
their Chacsir, which in Summer is only made of the same Silk, by reason of the
excessive Heat. Every prudent Christian ought to keep his Eyes from glancing
that way; if it be possible for any Man to preserve his Reason at the Sight of
the enflaming Object, for this Stuff, which is no thicker than Tiffany or
Gawze, gives the ravished Beholder an almost unclouded View of all the most
charming Beauties that are so carefully concealed by our Ladies. Their upper
Vest is either of Cloth or Velvet embroidered, or of some rich sort of Cloth of
Gold: In Summer it is furred with Ermin, and in Winter with Samour. Their
Head-Dress is so magnificent and becoming, that you can hardly form a suitable
Idea of it unless you had seen it; though the following Description may in some
measure satisfy your Curiosity. Their Talpo is a pretty long Velvet-Cap, made
of Eight Pieces, the outward Circle being just large enough to receive the
Head; but it widens by degrees toward the Top, not unlike to a close Crown.
It Is adorned with the richest Embroidery of Gold, Silver, and Pearls: and is so
long, that it would fall back upon the Shoulders, if it were not very
artificially raised above the Head, where they pleit and fold it with as much
Care as our Ladies do their Fontanges and Top-Knots. It Is also enriched with
long Strings of Pearls curiously interwoven, and strewn with Diamonds, Rubies,
and all sorts of Jewels, besides one or two Aigrets of Diamonds. To keep it up
they bind it about the Head with a Frontlet, about two Fingers breadth broad,
and so rich, that it may be fitly called a Diadem; for it is covered all over
with Gold and Precious Stones. Round this Frontlet there are little Gold
Chains, with a Diamond hanging at one, an Emerald at another, etc. which dangle
upon the Forehead, and on both sides of the Face. I need not tell you that such
magnificent Dresses are only used by Bassa's Wives, for though Jewels are cheaper
here than in Europe, they are still so chargeable, that it requires a very
considerable Estate to make so great a Figure. However I can assure you that
every Woman, according to her Ability, decks her self to the best Advantage;
and the whole Dowry, or the Money that is given by the Father, is laid out on
Ornaments for the Bride. But when a Woman's Portion is not sufficient to
purchase so many Jewels, she must content her self with a plain Frontlet of
Gold, or Silver-gilt; and some that cannot reach so high, only tie an
embroidered Handkerchief about their Talpo's, which is the Dress of the poorest
Sort, and even the meanest Cobler's Wife will not appear without it. As for
their Hair, they make it up into a long Tress, about the breadth of four
Fingers, that falls backward, and sometimes reaches to their Heels; and they
whose Hair is not becoming, endeavor to supply that Defect, by mixing false
Hair among it. Besides, there is a little Curl on each side of the Forehead,
that runs along the Face: And they are very careful to keep these Curls in
Order, and to dye 'em Black with a certain Composition, that serves also to dye
their Brows, which are always extremely handsome: For they take care to have
'em shaped with a Razor, and afterward apply to the shaved Parts a certain
Paste, called Pilo, which hinders the Hair from growing.

In Turkey, as well as in Europe, the Women generally Paint; for though they are
ashamed to acknowledge it, I met with a Greekish Woman, who scrupled not to
confess that few of her Sex abstain from that Custom. Their White Paint is a
sort of very thick Grease, which I cannot describe, since I had not the
Curiosity to enquire how they make it. But as for their Red Paint, it is nothing
else but Cochineel, prepared with Cream of Tartar, and boiled so long till
there remains only a Tenth Part of the Composition. They use it with so much
Success, that I believe it might serve for Spanish Vermilion, and even is, in
my Opinion, more natural. They also Paint their Nails Red, but not with
Cochineel.

The Turkish Women are the most charming Creatures in the World: They seem to
be made for Love; their Actions, Gestures, Discourse, and Looks are all
Amorous, and admirably well fitted to kindle a soft and lasting Passion. Since
they have nothing else to do, they make it their only Business to Please; which
they do so successfully, and in so natural and easy a Manner, that few
Husbands take the benefit of the Law, that allows 'em to divorce their Wives
when they please. This seems so strange and surprising, that I cannot forbear
reckoning it a sort of Prodigy, when I reflect on the Genius of all other
Nations: For Men are usually quite cloyed with the Pleasures of Matrimony in
three or four Years; and if a Maid had nothing else but her Person to recommend
her to a Husband, she might even despair of ever tasting the lawful Joys of the
Bed. Whereas in this Country, instead of enriching or maintaining their
Husbands, they put 'em to so prodigious a Charge, that none but Persons of high
Quality are able to keep four Wives. The extreme Neatness of the Turkish Women
is none of their least considerable Charms; and this extraordinary Cleanness is
an effect of their Bathing at least once a Week; for the nicer sort bathe
twice. I think I told you before that Women of Quality have the convenience of
Bathing at Home; and that the rest go to the common Baths. I must now add, that
the Virtue, and even the Modesty of a Woman is as secure in the Public, as in
the Private Baths; for Men are forbidden to enter into these Sacred Places
under pain of Death. These Baths are large Halls built of Marble, and covered
with vaulted Roofs in form of Domes; on the Top of which there are
Glass-Windows to let in the Light, without suffering the Heat to evaporate.
There are no Windows in the Walls, that the Women may undress themselves
without fear of exposing their Naked Beauties to the Observation of some
Curious Enquirer into the Works of Nature; and besides, they take care to cover
their Distinguishing Parts with a Cloth wrapped about their Belly, and tied on
the Back. Then they Sweat a quarter of an Hour or longer; and for the
Convenience of those who are desirous to bathe in Water, there is in the same
Place a Va^ or Bathing-Tub, which they fill with hot Water by turning a Cock,
tempering and allaying it when it is excessively hot, by turning another Cock
that lets in cold Water. There are Waiting-Women always ready to attend those
who come to bathe, who for a small Reward crack all the Joints of their Arms,
Legs, and Thighs. At the same time they anoint the hairy Parts of the Body with
Pilo, which makes the Hair fall off, and leaves the Skin extremely white and
smooth. The Men have their Baths apart, and are served after the same manner.

There are three sorts of Recreations used by the Turks; Gaming, Music, and
Dancing. You may perceive by the Account I gave you of their Games, that they
are neither Pleasant nor Ingenious: And I shall take this occasion to tell you,
that their Music is rather a hideous Dinn than a regular Harmony, and
resembles exactly the howling Shrieks of a tortured Wretch. The first time I
heard a Turk sing, I could not forbear stopping to look upon him, concluding
that he was certainly Mad: For I could not imagine that a Man who had the use
of his Reason, would take pleasure in distorting his Body, and rolling his Eyes
in so odd and extravagant a manner; though they pretend that all those unusual
Motions are only the Marks and Effects of a tender and violent Passion. Their
Musical Instruments are extremely suitable to the Nature of their Harmony: For
they have a kind of Violin with three Strings, a Neck as long as a Man's Arm,
and a great Belly like the Block of a Hat; some ill-contriv'd Flutes; little
Timbrels about the bigness of one's Fist, a Drum, some paultry Hautbois, and
several little Brazen Targets, which they hold in their Hands, and knock
against one another. Judge, Sir, what a mad Consort they make with the confused
jangling of so many inharmonious Instruments. The only tolerable Instrument
they have is the Psalterion, which is covered with Latten Strings, stretched as
upon a Harpsical; and they strike upon 'em with little Sticks, which they hold
betwixt their two Fingers. All the Women play admirably well on this
Instrument, for it is their usual Diversion in their Chambers, especially the
Greeks, whose Music may be heard with Pleasure, since it is a great deal more
agreeable than that of the Turks. I shall only add on this Subject, that
neither of 'em sing the Notes without the Words; and our way of singing Tunes
seems so ridiculous to 'em, that they usually laugh at the Franks, and ask 'em
what their Tartara lera signifies.

Their Dances are also of different kinds. Those which are used by Persons of
Quality are taught by Masters and Mistresses, the first being appointed to
teach Men, and the others Women. Though they are all very grave, there is a great
deal of Action required in the Hands and Arms; and the finest part of the Dance
consists in the graceful and dexterous Motions of those Parts: For the Beauty
and Niceness of the Step cannot be well distinguished by reason of those
troublesome Chacsirs that hide the whole Legs. The Turks never give any Balls,
for they always Dance single; and the Dancing of two Persons together would be
reckoned a Crime, or at least an indecency among 'em. Thus after one Person has
entertained the Company for some time, the Spectators express their Approbation
by repeated clapping of Hands. Besides it is to be observed, that the Women
never Dance but when they are invited to the Wedding of some of their
Relations, or when they make a familiar Visit to some of their She-Friends,
which happens very unfrequently. Yet there are some Public Dancing-Women, who
go to Private Families when they are called, and Dance before 'em in the most
Lascivious manner imaginable: For they wriggle their Backs, roll their Eyes,
seem to swoo^ The Turkish Dancing P. 276

away, and put their Bodies into a Thousand obscene Postures, which the most
shameless Strumpets in Europe would hardly be persuaded to imitate.

Dancing is most in use among the Peasants, who without pretending to Art, or
learning any regular Steps, put their Bodies into such odd and extravagant
Postures, that the nimblest Dancing Master would be extremely puzl'd to
imitate. They seem to be actually possessed with a Devil, and from Time to Time
break forth into such loud and furious Shouts, that one would certainly
conclude 'em to be acted by some Demon, if he did not know that all these
Motions are only feigned Transports. They usually hold a great Stick in their
Hands, with which they beat the Walls and Ground in a furious and terrible
Manner, and continue those violent Agitations of their Feet, Hands, and Head,
till their Weariness and want of Strength oblige them to give over; and even
sometimes they Dance till they fall down in a sort of Ecstasy or Fit of
Dizziness. I had the Pleasure to see all those various kinds of Dances at
Constantinople, in Monsieur de Chateauneuf's House, on the Day appointed to
solemnize the Public Joy for the advantageous Success of the Campaign against
the Christians. And these Diversions were succeeded by a certain odd kind of
Show, performed by the Jews. Since all sorts of Figures are an abomination to
the Turks, there were Puppets represented in Shadows on the Wall, which Danced
and Sung to the Satisfaction of all the Company, as it appeared by their
Laughing and pleasant Humor. I could not understand the Words of their Songs,
but if I may be allowed to judge of their Expressions by their Postures, they
were certainly very obscene; for I never saw any thing so brutish as the
Representations of those Shadows. Nor will this appear strange to those who
consider that the Turks are more addicted to that infamous Vice for which Sodom
and Gomorrha were destroyed, than any other Nation in the World; and that the
Advancement of one half of the great Officers in the Empire, is an Effect of
their base Complaisance to their beastly Patrons. Thus the Turkish Songs are
doubly naufeous to the Franks, who are not accustomed to such horrid Impurities.

The Puppet-Show was followed by another of almost the same Nature. Four Jews
tied certain Sticks cross-wise to their Wrists and Feet, and clothing them like
Men and Women, placed themselves all under one Covering; then the first
stretching out one of his Arms, made the half Figures Dance and Sing; after him
came another; then a third; and at last the eight Arms of the four Jews
performed several extravagant Motions on the Covering, accompanied with a
confused Din; after which they stood upon their Heads, and discovering eight
larger Figures that were fastened to their Feet, entertained the Company with
another Show exactly like the former.

I had occasion in some of my former Letters to mention the rest of the Turkish
Customs; and you may conclude that what I have omitted is either
inconsiderable, or very particularly described by other Travelers. And
therefore I shall conclude this Subject after I have added one or two
Observations concerning their Civility. They seldom make any Visits, but when
they come to treat of Business; and those who do are always entertained with
Perfumes, Coffee, and Sherbet, as in the Account I gave you of Monsieur de
Chasteauneuf's Reception at the Caimacan's House. The Left Hand is reckoned the
Place of Honor, because it is next the Heart; and when they salute, instead of
pulling off their Turbants, they lay their Hands upon their Breast, and at the
same time bow their Bodies, which they repeat several times when they would
express a more than ordinary Affection to the Person whom they salute. This is
the whole Ceremony of a simple Salutation; but when they intend to show a
profound Respect, they must not only lay their Hand upon their Breast, but make
several low Bows, and with all the signs of Humility kiss the lower part of the
Person's Vest; after which they stand upright, and continue still to keep their
Hand upon their Breast, or even sometimes both Hands, while they are in the
presence of him whom they would respect. When he goes abroad, they must make a
Lane for him, as they see his Servants do, and salute him with a low Bow as he
passes by. Besides, in the Absence of the Servants, they usually present their
Hands to hold him under the Arms when he goes up or down Stairs, or Mounts his
Horse, and on some other Occasions of the same Nature; But when his Servants
are present, it is their Office to offer their Assistance to their Master. When
a Frank makes a Visit to his Turkish Friends, they still present him with a
Pipe after his Coffee; which is a very troublesome piece of Civility to those
who have so strong an Aversion to Tobacco as I have, especially considering the
peremptory Stiffness of the Turks, who will not admit of the most reasonable
Excuse. Some great Persons smoke a sort of perfumed Tobacco, like that of which
Spanish Snuff is made; but our Franks never use any of that kind.

I have had occasion five or six times to speak of their Persons of Quality,
without acquainting you with the Nature of their Grandeur and Nobility; and
therefore I shall conclude this Letter with a short Account of it. You must not
imagine that these are Persons of an Ancient and Noble Extraction; for though
there may be some of 'em that are honorably descended, the greatest part of
'em owe their Advancement merely to Fortune, or are the Creatures of some
Bassa; and their first Preferments are only the Rewards of their Service. Thus
we frequently see that a poor Slave is advanced by degrees to the highest
Dignities in the Empire; and it may be said in the general, that Riches are the
Fountain of Honor in Turkey. This Reflection puts me in Mind of a blunt
Repartee that was made to the Marquess de la Marzelliere by one of these
Pretenders to Nobility. This Marquess was descended of one of the most
illustrious Families in Bretaigne, and yet scrupled not to marry a Citizen's
Daughter of St. Malo's, who brought him a Portion of Two hundred thousand
Pounds. However, it seems, her Brother, whose Fortune was equal to hers, did
not think himself much honored by this Alliance; for imagining that the Luster
of his Gold was bright enough to make amends for the Obscurity of his Birth, he
would never be persuaded to show the least respect to his Brother-in-Law. One
Day as they were disputing about some Points of Honor, after several angry
Replies, he told the Marquess he knew no Reason why he should be so proud of a
Title, and at last added, that he was as good a Marquess as himself. Marquess
of what? said Monsieur de la Marzelliere; Of what? replied he, I Am Marquess of
Two Hundred Thousand Crowns in good Lewis d'Ors.

I have made it my Business to be acquainted with the Archbishop of this
Place, who is a Person of Wit and Merit, and has given me a particular Account
of the principal Differences between the Grecian and Romish Religions; which I
intend shall be the Subject of my next Letter.

I am, SIR, Your etc.
Smyrna, June 1691.
LETTER XXII.
SIR,
AFter the general Idea I have given you of the Religion and Customs of the
Turks, you will perhaps expect an Account of their Christian Subjects, the
Greeks, and read with pleasure some Remarks on a Subject of which I have often
observed that even the more inquisitive part of our European World have but a
very slight and confused Notion.

The present Condition of this Nation is so miserable, and so apt to produce
all the most tender Motions of Compassion in those who seriously reflect upon
it, that 'twou'd be needless to heighten the Gloominess of the Prospect by
comparing it with their former Glory, which after a long and fatal Eclipse, was
restored to its ancient Splendour by Constantine the Great, whose Memory will
last till the final Period of the World. But the Empire of the East, which he
founded, and united to that of the West, was divided again after his Death, and
continued in a declining Condition till the final Overthrow of the Palaeologi
by the Turks, in the Fifteenth Age; since which time the Greeks have still been
Slaves in a Country of which they were formerly Sovereigns; and to redeem
themselves from the Yoke under which they are born, they are forced to pay a
yearly Tribute, called the Carache, which is only imposed upon them, and their
Fellow-Slaves the Jews. The Carache is a perpetual Poll-Tax, and exceeds not
four Piasters a Man; and yet since it is a Mark of their Bondage, they have left
no Means unessay'd to deliver themselves from it, and have even offered to
raise more considerable Sums another way. Besides, there are oftentimes large
Avanies imposed upon 'em, which they levy among themselves, according to the
proportion of their Estates. All their Patriarchs, Bishops, and Abbots are also
obliged to pay for their Patents; and the Prices that are exacted of 'em cannot
but amount to a very considerable Sum, since there are above five Thousand
Archbishops and Bishops in the Turkish Empire, who, reckoning one with
another, pay above two Thousand Piasters a-piece, as a Fine to the Grand
Signior. The Greeks are naturally Proud, and lovers of Pomp and Magnificence:
Most of 'em spend higher than their Estates will bear, and are very fond of the
Title of Chelety or Lord. Yet even the richest of 'em, of which there is a
considerable Number, are looked upon as Objects of Scorn and Contempt by the
Turks. It Is true, they are not insensible of their Slavery, and perhaps would
willingly shake off the insupportable Yoke of their Domineering Masters; but
the Natural Impatience of their Temper is more than sufficiently curbed by
their Weakness, and want of Power; and they must even content themselves with
repining in secret at the resistless Tyranny of their Oppressors: For they are
seldom or never able to obtain Satisfaction for the Injuries they receive from
the Turks, if the Offenders are not wholly destitute both of Friends and Money.

The Habit of the Greeks is very different from that of the Turks. They are not
permitted to wear a white Turbant; nor must their Turbants be of the same
bigness with those that are used by the Turks, nor folded after the same
manner: For they only wrap a little piece of Course Cloth, either blue or
stripped with blue, two or three times about their Caps; and even usually they
wear none at all, but content themselves with a little red Cap which is not
large enough to cover their Ears. Instead of a Vest they have only a plain
Wast-coat, which is very short, and open before; and over that they wear
another that meets on the side. Neither ought they to wear a Chacsir after the
Turkish Fashion; for their Breeches are very short, and reach not below the
Knee. And besides, they are distinguished from the Turks by their red
Babouches; for those that are used by the Turks are yellow. Thus I have given
you a short Account of the Habit of the Greeks; but though most of 'em do, and
all of 'em are obliged to wear it, some of the richer sort are so far from
observing these Regulations, that they can scarce be distinguished from the
Turks but by their Turbants: And even all Persons of Note, whether Franks or
Greeks, put on white Turbants when they go out of the City, as I have had
occasion to see above fifty times. The Turks have of late connived at those
Innovations; but they have still such a veneration for Green, that the Greeks
dare not presume to wear it: nor would it be safe for Franks to wear Green in
the midst of Constantinople, though I have often seen 'em make bold with that
sacred Color. Since the Women are generally invisible, they are not obliged to
observe these Marks of Distinction; and the only difference between their Habit
and way of Dressing, and that of the Turks, is that they must, as well as the
Men, abstain from wearing Green. Nor is there a less Resemblance between 'em in
their Manners and Customs, and in their solitary way of living; though they find
so much sweetness in the Freedom that prevails among us, that they whose
Husbands or Fathers have frequent Occasions to converse with Franks, are easily
disposed to renounce their wonted Severity. They are lovers of Pleasures,
Dancing, and magnificent Habits; and will fix a Passion upon a Man whether he
will or not. But the poor Frank that suffers himself to be noos'd, must resolve
either to be Hen-peck'd, or a Cuckold: He must adore his Grecian Spouse; he
must furnish her with the richest Habits, and keep a numerous Train of Slaves
to attend her; or, if any of these things be wanting, 'Ware Horns. For the
Franks have an excellent Faculty at curing a handsome Lady of the grumbling
Disease, and are always ready to do a kind Office to a Country-man's Wife.

The Greek Dances are extremely pleasant, and full of Mirth. They are of two
kinds: The first is a sort of Country-Dance or Couranto, danced by Pairs; and
the second a kind of Gavote or Branle, in which the Men and Women are mingled,
as at Passepied in France; only you must hold in your right hand the Left Hand
of your Left Hand Woman, and in your Left the Right Hand of he^ that is on your
Right Hand. The Man who lead^ the Dance holds the Corner of a Handkerchi^^ and
gives the other to his Lady, that he may have room enough to take his Measures,
and to giv^ the Dance what Figure or Turn he pleases. A^ first they begin very
gravely with a Saraband-Ste^ two Steps forwards and three backwards: The^
mending their pace by degrees, they begin to le^^ and run, yet still observing
the Rules of a Harmo^ nious Motion; so that the Dance becomes very Gay and
Amorous: For the Women leaping on^ Step forwards, draw their Bodies backwards
with a certain pretty Turn that cannot be called immodest, yet gives a Man
occasion to think of something more than he sees. And besides, the Music
contributes very much to the pleasantness of their Dances, for their Tunes are
extremely Brisk and Airy.

The Dancing of the Greeks P. 284



The fittest time to take the pleasure of viewing their way of Dancing, is when
they are met at a Wedding; for on such Occasions they give themselves up to Joy
and Pleasure, drinking, eating, and sporting, and indulging themselves in all
manner of Diversions. The next Morning the young Woman's Relations make a Visit
to the newmarry'd Couple, and examine the Bridegroom concerning his Wife's
Virginity: Then they take the Bride's Bloody Smock, and expose it to the View
of all the Company, as if it were some rare Curiosity. The Jews observe the
same Custom at the Marriage of a Maid, and are even nicer and more scrupulous
in this Point than the Greeks; for if the Bride's Honesty be not confirmed by
the Blood that appears on her Smock, her Reputation is irrecoverably lost, and
she is immediately divorced from her Husband. They unanimously agree in
believing that this is an infallible Mark of Virginity: And this Opinion is so
generally received through all Asia and Africa, that if a Man should endeavor to
contradict it, he would expose himself to the Laughter and Derision of all that
should hear him. The Italians are also persuaded of the Certainty of this
Experiment, though they abstain from making a Show of the Bloody Smock, for fear
of exposing their own Shame; but the Husband examines his Bride very narrowly,
and if he finds her not such as he expects and desires, it is in vain for her to
endeavor by the most solemn Protestations to convince him of her Innocence.
Nevertheless this way of trying the Chastity of a Maid is esteemed uncertain
and ridiculous by the French, and even by Surgeons; nor can I reflect
without a certain Wonder and Astonishment on this Diversity of Opinions
concerning a Question that one would think might have been fully decided by so
many repeated Experiments; for I see no reason to believe that our
Country-Women are framed after another manner than the rest of their Sex. But
leaving this Controversy to be decided by others who are better acquainted
with the Works of Nature, I shall proceed in the Account I promised to give you
of the most remarkable Grecian Customs, among which I cannot forbear taking
notice of one that seems to be peculiar to this Nation. On Easter Day, and
during the three following Weeks, they salute one another with three Kisses,
one on the Mouth, and one on each Cheek, at the same time repeating these
Words, Christos anesti, that is, Christ is risen. At other times their familiar
Salutation is the same with that which is used by the Turks: But when they
design to show a more than ordinary Respect to a Man, they kiss his Hand, and
then lay it upon their Heads. They observe the same Custom when they receive a
Present, if it be not either too heavy or bulky: For this Ceremony of laying a
Man's Hand upon their Head, is a Mark both of their Respect and Gratitude. When
a Woman accompanies her Husband in a Visit to a Person of Quality, such as a
Consul, whether they come to treat of Business, or only out of Civility, she
stands directly behind her Husband; and when the Visiter brings his Daughters
along with him, they place themselves at one another's Back behind their
Mother; so that the Husband standing in the Front of the File, hides all his
Female Train; and when they intend to go out, they make a half-Turn to the
Right, and the Daughters march out first, to avoid the Indecency of appearing
in a Stranger's Presence.

In pursuance of the Method I proposed to follow, I shall in the next place
consider their Religion. I Am obliged to my Friend, the Archbishop, for the
following Account, which perhaps will give you a clearer Idea of this Subject
than you can draw from the Relations of others. For there are some who pretend
that the Greeks are only Schismatics, or bare Separatists from the Romish
Church; whereas others stretch the Point too far on the other side, and make
their Differences in matter of Doctrine appear greater and more irreconcilable
than they really are.

They acknowledge only One visible Church of God, without which there is no
Salvation, unless in the Case of a sudden Conversion at the Hour of Death.

They believe that the Apostles instituted five Patriarchs to govern the Church
upon the Earth, who were seated at Rome, Alexandria, Constantinople, Antioch,
and Jerusalem, and under them several Archbishops, Bishops, and inferior
Pastors. All the Members of this Hierarchy have a Right to exercise a Spiritual
Jurisdiction over those that are subordinate to 'em, and to inflict
Ecclesiastical Censures. But the Patriarchs can only admonish one another, and
can neither be punished nor deposed for their Offenses but by the Sentence of a
General Council. Yet their Power does not extend so far as to enable 'em to
introduce new Laws into the Church, and they would be laughed at if they should
attempt to grant Indulgencies. The Bishop of Rome is the first of the
Patriarchs; nor do any of the rest pretend to dispute with him for Precedence:
But they refuse to submit to that absolute Power he has assumed in the West, by
taking Advantage of the Superstition and Simplicity of the People, and the
Connivance of the Princes. It Is plain that the Greek Bishops had Reason to
refuse their Consent to the Introduction and Establishment of a Tyrannical
Power in the Church, since they could not but foresee that it would produce
very fatal and pernicious Consequences: And yet this is the only Cause that
made the Pope discharge his Thunders against 'em, and declare 'em Schismatics;
thus violently breaking the sacred Union of the Church, for the Preservation of
which he ought to have spent the last Drop of his Blood. For this reason the
Greeks are not contented with returning the Charge of Schism upon the Roman
Church, but pretend that they never actually separated from the Communion of
Rome, since they have not established a Fifth Patriarch, and still acknowledge
the Pope to be the first Bishop in the World, and that therefore they cannot
with the least Shadow of Justice be blamed for the Fault of another, or said to
separate from a Church which has violently driven 'em out of her Communion. I
know not whether this is the Opinion of the whole Greek Church; though I cannot
reasonably decline giving Credit to a Thing which I have heard so often
confirmed with repeated Protestations by the Archbishop of Smyrna, who is
esteemed one of the most learned Doctors of that Church in this Age. However, I
took the Liberty to ask him why they did not send their Bishops to the last
Councils that were held in the West, in which all their Differences might have
been amicably terminated. He replied, that their Absence would be easily
excused by those who consider the Severity of the Yoke under which they groan;
and that the sending of Deputies to the Councils would have given a terrible
Umbrage to the Grand Signior, who would have been apt to suspect that these
Bishops were sent to contrive a Rebellion against him, and to plot the Ruin of
his Empire; and to deliver himself from the danger of a Revolt, might have been
easily persuaded to have put the whole Nation under Military Execution. This
Answer seemed so reasonable, and agreeable to the Truth, that I was obliged to
acknowledge my self entirely satisfied. Thus I have given a short Account of
the Occasion of the fatal Breach that divides the Eastern and Western Churches,
and of the Reasons alleged by the Greeks to free themselves of the Imputation
of Schism. I shall in the next Place examine the Points of Doctrine in which
they differ from the Romans.

The Difference between these Churches may be reduced to five Articles, of
which only two are Fundamentals: For though the other three are of considerable
Moment, they would not be sufficient to excuse a Separation. The first is the
Procession of the Holy Ghost, who in their Opinion proceeds not from the Son,
but only from the Father. To illustrate and confirm this Doctrine, the
Archbishop told me, that the Three Persons of the Trinity were only
distinguished by their different Operations and Attributes; That the Property
of the Father was to beget without being begotten; That of the Son, to be
eternally begotten, without begetting; and that of the Holy Ghost to inspire
and sanctify our Hearts. I replied, That it did not necessarily follow,
because the Son was begotten, that he could not cooperate with the Father in
the Procession of the Holy Ghost: But he would not acknowledge the force of
this Reason, pretending that we could not ascribe to the Son the Attribute of
Generation, that belongs only to the Father, without overturning the Order, and
confounding the Persons of the Trinity. Then he repeated what he had said
before, that the Persons were only distinguished by their Attributes; from
whence he concluded that the latter could not be confounded without confounding
the former. And for a farther Confirmation of his Opinion, he showed me a large
Volume of S. Athanasius, printed at Venice, with the Latin on one side, and the
Greek on the other, and made me take Notice of two Passages, which I
transcribed, but have unhappily lost the Paper. However, though I cannot at
present call to Mind the very Words of the Author. I remember that in the first
Passage he spoke of the Holy Ghost's proceeding from the Father, without
mentioning the Son. I replied, that the Question was not whether the Holy Ghost
proceeded from the Father; and that the Author whom he cited did not deny his
Procession from the Son. But I was obliged to acknowledge that the same Answer
would not serve to elude the positive Authority of another Passage which he
showed me in the Nicene Creed, where it is expressly said, a solo Patre
procedens. Thus my Mouth was stopped on this Subject, as well as on the former;
and I must leave the Decision of this Controversy to those whose Profession
obliges 'em to search into these Mysteries.

The second difference between the Romish and Greek Churches, is concerning the
Doctrine of Purgatory, which the latter expressly denies, affirming, with us,
that it is absolutely injurious to the Merit and Satisfaction of Christ: Yet
they pretend there is a certain Baptismal Fire, through which every one must
pass before he can be admitted into Paradise. They believe that the Souls of
Just Persons at their Separation from the Body, go into a Third Place, of the
same Nature with the Romish Limbo's, where they must remain till the Day of
Judgment, at which Time a sudden Fire shall dissolve the World in an Instant,
and purify the Souls of the Righteous, who after their final Judgment, shall
be received into everlasting Glory. To confirm this Doctrine, they allege that
Passage of the Scripture which speaks of the Souls that rest under the Altar:
But after all, this Opinion seems not to be so well grounded as the former; for
if the Dead are not in a suffering Condition, I know not what Reason they can
give to justify their praying for 'em.

The third Point is the Communion under both kinds: for they give the Sacrament
to the People in a Spoon, in which the Bread and Wine are mixed together.

The Fourth is concerning Leavened Bread, which they use in the Consecration of
the Sacrament.

The Fifth and last Point in which they differ from those of the Romish
Persuasion is the Celibacy of the Clergy: For a simple Priest is allowed to
marry once, but must never proceed to a second Marriage. The Priests wear the
Violet-colour'd Habit of a Bishop, and a Cap of the same Color, with a little
blue Turbant; and behind their Cap there hangs a piece of Cloth of the same
Color about half a Foot long and broad, which falls back on their Shoulders.
Besides these Priests, there are certain Religious Persons under a Vow of
Chastity; and out of their Number the Bishops, and even the Pastors, are
chosen, whom they call Papa's: They eat no Flesh, and wear long Hair, without
ever touching it with Scissors: They also suffer their Beards to grow without
shaving or clipping 'em, which disfigures their Faces, and makes 'em seem very
ugly. They wear a large black Gown or Robe, not much different from our
Night-Gowns; only their Sleeves are wider, and buttoned before; and the Neck is
like that of a Cassock. Their Caps are made of Felt, flat beneath like the
Block of a Hat, and would be very deep, if they were not cut before; so that
the whole Face appears, but the Ears and hinderpart of the Head are covered.
Over this they wear a Kerchief of black Serge, which hangs over their
Shoulders. This Habit is generally used by all religious Persons, Pastors,
Bishops, and Archbishops, without any Mark of Distinction; only the Bishops
carry in their Hands a Pastoral Staff of Ebony, eight Foot long, with an Ivory
Ball on the Top. The Bishops are not usually rich, but they are no less
respected by their Clergy than our French Prelates are by theirs. Their
Churches are built after the manner of ours, but without the least appearance
of Pomp or Grandeur. They have a Quire where the Priests place themselves, with
those that come to confess; and a Place for the Churchwardens, with a
Crucifix, or a Saint, to which every one presents an Offering. The Bishops do
not observe so much State as in France; for my Curiosity having one Day carried
me to see 'em Officiate, the Archbishop rose up to salute me, and made me sit
down by him on one of the Seats in the Quire, whither a Priest conducted me by
his Order; after which they brought me some Frankincense, as they do to all
Persons of Note of their own Nation. Their Pontifical Habit is so singular and
odly contrived, that 'twou'd be a hard Task to represent it distinctly; and
therefore I will neither undertake the Description of that, nor of their
Ceremonies and Rites of Worship. I shall only add, that when they enter the
Church, they take some Holy Water, and make five large Signs of the Cross, at
each of which they make a very low Bow, repeating the same Ceremony when they
go out, to commemorate the five Wounds of our Savior.

It has been so positively asserted by so many celebrated Divines, that the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation is not acknowledged by the Greek Church, that I
dare hardly venture to contradict 'em. However, since neither Interest not
Authority ought to deterr us from owning the Truth, I Am resolved at all
Adventures to undeceive you of so vulgar an Error. It Is plain that the Authors
of those Relations, on whose Credit that Opinion is grounded, were either
deceived themselves, or intended to deceive their Readers; unless perhaps to
soften the harshness of that Censure you had rather believe that they speak of
some obscure Sect, which is not known in thi^ Country: For I can assure you
that the Greeks at Constantinople and Smyrna are as firmly persuaded of the
truth of that Doctrine as the most zealous Romanists; and the only reason why
they do not kneel at the Elevation of the Host, is because their manner of
Adoration is different from ours. Nor do they worship the Sacrament less
devoutly by bowing their Body, and smiting their Breast, though they stand all
the while on their Feet, than we do by prostrating our selves on the Ground;
and therefore we ought rather to consider the Intention of their Mind than the
Posture of their Body. But this is not all; for they have a Custom which may
serve for a convincing Proof of their Belief of that Opinion. On Good Friday
they walk in Procession to the French Church, to adore the Sacrament which is
exposed there, and even pay five hundred Piasters to the Turks that they may be
suffered to perform their Devotions there on that Occasion: So true it is that
they are not willing to be separated from the Church of Rome. You may depend
upon the Certainty of this Story; for I can assure you of the Truth of it on
the Faith of an Eyewitness.

They have a great Number of Images; and their Devotion to 'em is not at all
inferior to that which prevails in the Church of Rome. But I must confess there
is a great Difference in the Structure and Workmanship of the Images; for
whereas in our Country they may, for the most part, be reckoned so many
Masterpieces of Art, whether we consider the Regularity of the Design, the
Disposition of the Lights and Shades, or the Beauty of the Colors. The Greeks
are of Opinion, and scruple not to say, that the Pictures of the Saints, as
they are represented in the Roman Churches are more proper to raise Criminal
Desires, than to inspire the Minds of the Spectators with Devotion. And
therefore to avoid the dangerous Consequences of that Abuse, they confine
themselves to a certain Antic way of Painting, which is extremely unnatural,
especially in their Figures of Virgins, who are almost all represented black,
and so muffled up in Kerchiefs and Gowns, that you can scarce distinguish their
Faces. And their Painters are so ignorant, and so little acquainted with the
Beauties of the Art they profess, that they cannot so much as copy a Head. Nor
am I at all surpised at the Unskillfulness of these pretended Artists; for
their Method is directly opposite to that of our Painters: First they lay on
the Shades, and design the entire Figure, after which they proceed to the
Disposition of the Light; which is the most preposterous Method could be
imagined.

The Armenians are not so scrupulous in this Point, though they profess almost
the same Articles of Faith; for they make use of the modern way of Painting;
and there is at present on their High Altar an Image of the Virgin, made by a
Frenchman, which shows so much of her Breasts that I should be almost Jealous
if my Mistress were painted after that Manner. Nevertheless you must not
suspect them of Libertinism; for I never heard of any Religious Order, except
the Monks of Trape, that observe such mortifying Fasts. They keep four Lents,
which lasts one half of the Year, like those that are observed by the Greeks:.
But the Armen^^ns do not allow themselves so much Liberty as the (...) of their
Fellow Christians; for they abstain from eating Flesh, Fish, and even
Shellfish, Butter, Milk, Cheese, and every thing that has or ever had Life;
which may be justly reckoned a very severe piece of Mortification. Their Bishop
has put himself under the Protection of France, to deliver himself from the
insupportable Exactions of the Turks; and it is but a very little while ago
since he was freed from Prison, where he had lain six Months. He is a very
honest and civil Person, and diligent in performing the Duties of his Function.
His Habit is almost the same with that of the Greek Bishop, only he wears a
Hood or Cawle at the Neck of his Gown, and carries in his Hand a Cross, like
that which is used by the Roman Bishops, only it is made of Wood. This puts me
in Mind of what a certain Author said concerning the Ancients, That they were
Golden Bishops though they wore Wooden Crosses; and I may safely venture to apply
that Saying to this Prelate.

To return to the Greeks; I had almost forgot to take Notice of one of their
Opinions in which they differ from those of the Romish Persuasion. You have
doubtless observed that the Romanists have an extreme Veneration for those
Persons whose Bodies remain free from Putrefaction after their Death; and that
the Incorruption of the Body is reckoned a convincing Mark of the Holiness of
the Deceased, and is one of the most considerable Proofs that can be offered
for the Canonization of the Saint; whereas the Greeks pretend that it is only an
Effect of Excommunication; and when they find a Body in that Condition, they
never leave praying for the Soul of the dead Person, till his Body be putrefy'd
and corrupted.

The Interrment of dead Bodies is performed with almost the same Ceremonies
that are observed in the Church of Rome. All the Clergy meet together, and sing
the de profundis, and Prayers for the Soul of the Deceased. Several Persons
march before with lighted Candles, after whom the Body is carried in an open
Coffin, dressed in its finest Clothes, with a little Cotton in its Mouth; so that
oftentimes the Person seems to be alive. Then comes the Husband or Wife,
accompanied with the Children and Slaves of the Deceased, all bellowing out
their Grief in so dismal and terrible a Manner, that one would conclude they
thought themselves irrecoverably ruined. The Women especially signalize their
Love by all the wildest Marks of Despair, tossing their Bodies so furiously
from side to side, that they would certainly break their Necks if they were not
supported by two Persons who are appointed to attend 'em. Their usual Song is
Hai agamimont, hai mathiamont; Ab my Eyes! ah my Love! And the Slaves echo back
the howling Music with so hideous a Noise, that one would think they designed
to scare the Devil. Those who have not a sufficient Number of Slaves to make a
Noise suitable to the Quality of the Deceased, may supply that Defect by hiring
Weeping-Women, who for an Jsallote, which is worth about forty Pence, howl and
cry, as if they were acted by the most furious Transports of Rage and Despair.
It Is true, the Frace is too gross and visible; for there is something so moving
in true Sorrow that it can never be counterfeited; neither is it possible for
the most dextrous Mimick to imitate the tender Motions of Nature. And even when
those pretended Mourners seem to be transported with Fury and Despair, running
about like Mad-Women, with dishevelled Hair, the Artifice is easily
discernible. And particularly I observed, that when they pretend to tear their
Hair, they hold it fast with one Hand near the Roots, and then pull as hard as
they can with the other. To conclude, an unconcerned Spectator would be tempted
to imagine that all this Mummery is acted in derision to the deceased; for as
soon as he is interred, they make a Feast on his Grave at his own Charge; and
his Wife and Children take care that nothing be wanting to the Company, who eat
and drink and laugh, as if they were carousing in a Tippling House. This is
certainly a very extravagant way of expressing their Affection to their dead
Friends; nor could they treat a Man worse whose Memory they designed to
affront. I have also had occasion to see the Funeral Solemnities of the Jews,
which in my Opinion are less inconsistent with the Rules of Decency; for though
they use those Affected Howlings as well as the Greeks, their Design is to
Mourn and not to Feast. Among the Ceremonies that are used by the Jews at the
Death of their Relations, I took notice of one which seems to be very
Troublesome and Inconvenient, I mean their keeping of the Dead Body Three Days
unbury'd: And I leave you to judge what a sad Companion that must be to the
Widow and Children, who are obliged to weep without Intermission till the Body
be interred.

Since the Description of the Greekish Funerals has given me an Occasion to
mention the Jews, I shall conclude this Letter with a brief Account of that
Nation. 'Twou'd be needless to entertain you with an Abridgement of their
Ancient History, and therefore I shall only observe, that after the Romans
became Masters of Palestine, these unhappy Fugitives were dispersed, and
scattered through the whole World, and have lived ever since like hated
Vagabonds, without King or Head, expecting the Messiah with an Impatience that
has frequently made 'em give Credit to Impostors. About Thirty Years ago there
arose a false Prophet or Messiah in this Country, called Sabatai Sevi, who was
very learned, and had diligently studied the Cabala, by which means, 'twas
thought, he came to the Knowledge of certain Magical Secrets, which he
afterward made Use of to abuse the Credulity of his Followers. I have heard a
Thousand Stories of him, but shall content my self with telling you that he
managed the Cheat with so much De^terity and Success, that he was followed by a
great Multitude of People, and began to exercise so great an Authority over the
Jews, that the Grand Signior himself, growing jealous of his Power and Credit,
ordered him to be apprehended, and brought in Chains to Constantinople, where
this pretended Messiah turned Turk to save his Life. The Scandal of this
Example, which ought to have taught the Jews more Caution for the future, could
not keep 'em from falling not long after into another Error of the same Nature.
You must know that during the Feast of Tabernacles, the young Women of that
Nation are obliged to lie abroad under Tents in a place appointed for that
purpose; and they have an old Tradition that the Messiah shall be conceived in
the Womb of a Virgin during that Festival. Now it happened that a certain Maid,
who it seems was weary of that Denomination, resolved to make use of so
favorable an Opportunity of tasting the forbidden Delight, and to conceal her
Fault, spread abroad a Report that God came to visit her every Night, and that
she was to be the Mother of the Messiah. These acceptable News were received
with Joy by the whole Synagogue, who appointed several Days of Solemn
Thanksgiving to be kept with all imaginable Secrecy, for fear of offending the
Turks. But their Joy was at last turned into Shame and Confusion, when instead
of their expected Deliverer, the pretended Virgin was brought to B^d of a
Daughter.

The Levantine Jews are extremely Cunning and Deceitful, and so dextrous in the
Art of Wheedling, that those who deal with 'em ought to be always upon their
Guard. Cheating is the Trade by which they live, as others do by Labor or
Traffic; and it is usually said here, that a Jew never eats his Breakfast till
he has cheated a Christian. However, it is certain that he who trusts 'em must
either betray his Ignorance or Imprudence; for by a modest Computation, I may
venture to assure you, that among Twenty Jews there are always Nineteen Knaves.
There cannot be a more convincing Argument to prove that Religion is not always
attended with Honesty; for if it were, the Jews would be the honestest Men in
the World. They observe the Precepts of their Law with an incredible exactness;
and would not do the least Work on the Sabbath to prevent the Ruin of the
Universe. It Is not yet a Fortnight since we had an eminent Instance of the
Power of Superstition, on occasion of a Fire which broke forth in the Jews
Quarter in this City on the Sabbath Day; for they suffered it to consume their
Houses without endeavoring to quench it; and one among the rest seeing his
Child just ready to be devoured by the Flames, contented himself with tearing
his Hair, instead of breaking the Window of his House, though there was no other
Way to save the Life of his miserable Infant, which would have been certainly
burnt alive, if it had not been seasonably rescued by some Greeks, whose
Compassion drew 'em to its Assistance. This Fire made a prodigious Havoc, for
it destroyed above a Hundred Houses, in the greatest part of which there were
Warehouses.

The Jews are no less jealous of their Wives than the Turks, and are very
careful in keeping 'em under a close Confinement. It Is true, they are permitted
to see and visit one another; but if a Woman should walk a Quarter of a League
out of the City without her Husband or Brother, she would infallibly be
divorced.

They wear a large Gown of black Cloth, made almost like that of the Papa's;
and their Shoes are of a Violet Color. Their Caps are of Felt, covered with
Violet-colour'd Cloth, and resemble a long Block of a Hat. Round their Caps
they tie a small stripped or Violet-colour'd Turbant, which they call a Tandour.
They are obliged to pay the Carache as well as the Greeks, and are treated with
more scorn and Contempt: But they are naturally of so intrigueing a Temper,
that they thrust themselves into all sorts to Business, and are at present the
only Managers of Trade; for there are no other Brokers in the Levant.

I know not whether you will complain of the unusual Length of this Letter; but
I can assure you that the writing of it has fatigued me so extremely, that,
though I had not finished my Subject, I should have been forced to break off
abruptly.

I am, SIR, Your, etc.
Smyrna, July, 1692.
LETTER XXIII.
SIR,
JUst now I Am informed that five Barbary Vessels anchored this Morning at
Fosche, which is a little Harbor at the Mouth of the Gulf. If this be true,
we must expect to see the Streets always full of those insolent Scoundrels,
from whom the Franks receive a Visit once every Year, though they would gladly
dispense with so troublesome a piece of Civility. I have not yet had Experience
of their Deportment; but the Accounts I have received from others have
extremely abated my natural Curiosity to be acquainted with the Customs of
Strangers: And I had much rather hear a Description than be an Eyewitness of
the Disorders they committed in this City, which are still so fresh in the
Memory of the People, that they hardly talk of any thing else. I know not
whether you could hear without Disturbance a Relalation of those Abuses, if you
were in a place where you might shortly expect to see 'em repeated: But since
you are at so great a Distance from the Scene of the Tragedy, you may venture
to read it without fearing to be made a Spectator of it: And besides, there can
be nothing more proper to give you a clear Idea of the Weakness of the Turkish
Government.

About a Year ago the same Barbary Ships touched at the Port where they have
now cast Anchor, which is only four or five Leagues distant from this place;
and since these Sea Monsters are not restrained by the least shadow of
Discipline, one half of 'em was perpetually in the City. These pretended
Soldiers are a mere Rabble of Murderers, Robbers, and the most desperate
Villains, who, to avoid the just Punishment of their Crimes, flock from all
parts of Africa to the Seacoast, where they find on board the Ships, a
Sanctuary that secures 'em from being made accountable for their past Offenses,
and are at the same time privileged to re-act their former Barbarities without
control; so that they are equally dreaded by the Turks, Greeks, and Franks,
though the Storm falls heaviest upon the last, especially since the Bombarding of
Algiers, which has inspired 'em with a horrible Aversion against the French,
and against all other Franks for their sake.

Two or three Days after their Landing, two of 'em drinking in a Tipling-House
picked a Quarrel with a Frenchman, who seeing 'em advance toward him with
naked Poniards, discharged his Pistol at 'em, and then made his Escape.
Immediately the two Barbarianss one of whom had received a slight Wound by the
Shot, being reinforced by some of their Fellows, ran through the Streets,
swearing like enraged Furies, and threatening to murder all the French without
exception. In the Heat of their Rage they met three Mariners of Provence coming
out of a Barber's Shop, whom they instantly assaulted, and dragged by the Hair
along the Street to the Bazar, where they butchered 'em with their Poniards in
a most barbarous manner. The French Consul being alarmed at the News, commanded
those of his Nation to keep within Doors all that Day, and sent for Soldiers
and Arms from on board the Ships that were in the Port, to secure him from the
Insolency of the incensed Rabble. Next Morning he ordered forty Men, armed with
Carabines and Pistols, to bring off the Bodies of the three Seamen that had
lain all the while in the Street. As soon as the Barbaria^s heard of their
Design, they resolved to oppose the Execution of it; but since they had no
Firearms, and are extremely afraid of Shot, they fled after the first
Discharge, and left the Bodies to the French, who carried 'em off without any
Opposition. In the mean time the Consul had sent a Message to the other two
Consuls of England and Holland, to beg their Assistance in the Common Cause of
the Three Nations: But these Gentlemen did not think fit to irritate an enraged
Mobb that had not positively declared against any other Nation but the French.
And it appeared by the Event, that they acted wisely in so nice a Juncture; for
the Neutrality they observed, and the Care they took not to kindle the Fury of
the Barbarians by appearing too much in the Streets, had so good an Effect,
that the English and Dutch received not the least Injury during the Tumult,
except some affronting Words. The French Consul being disappointed of the
Assistance he expected from the two Nations, and not knowing to what Saint he
should make h^s next Address, resolved at last to demand Protection from the
Cadi. Immediately he sent two Merchants, and as many Interpreters to complain
to that Officer of the Injuries he had received from the Barbarians, and to
assure him that if the Tumult were not quickly appeased, he wou^d seek Redress
at the Port, and in the mean time would Arm those of his Nation in their own
Defense. But instead of the Aid he expected, he had the Mortification to
receive only a faint Excuse; for the most favorable Answer his Messengers
could obtain from the Cadi was, that he had not Forces sufficient to suppress
the seditious Multitude; and that the best Advice he could give his Master, was
to defend himself as well as he could. The Consul perceiving that this was in
effect an absolute Denial, dispatched an Express to Monsieur de Chasteauneuf,
to acquaint him with the extreme Danger that threatened the Nation, and to
entreat him to use his Interest at the Port for the procuring a Grand Mandamus
against the Barbarians.

Before I proceed farther, 'twill not be improper to inform you, that a Grand
Mandamus is an express Order from the Sultan, which he never grants but in
Cases of great Necessity, and of the highest Importance. Those who refuse to
submit to it are declared Rebels against the Grand Signior; and the Law ordains
that such Persons shall be treated as Infidels: So that these Orders may be
called the Grand Signior's Thunders; as Excommunications are said to be the
Thunders of the Vatican.

The Consul waited with an extreme Impatience for the Return of his Express,
and during the space of three Weeks which that Messenger spent in his Journey,
and in dispatching his Business, the French were forced to suffer the Insolency
of the Barbarians, whose Fury was so far from being appeased, that it wanted
little of its first impetuosity; for they continued still to beat and affront
all the Frenchmen that came in their Way. Nor could the Greeks and Jews escape
their Rage, for as many of 'em as were found with yellow Babouches, long
Breeches, or any sort of Habit or Ornament prohibited by Law, were sure of the
Bastinado; these Villains pretending that they would restore Justice in the
City, and reform the Abuses that had crept into the Government. One Day they
happened to meet an old Drogue-man with a Chacsir, after the Turkish Fashion,
and immediately asked him by what Authority he wore that Habit: The poor Man
replied, that he wore it as Interpreter of France; but this Answer instead of
pacifying 'em, irritated 'em so extremely, that after a severe Beating they
took away his Chacsir, and sent him home with a bare Breech. At last the Grand
Mandamus came, forbidding the Barbarians under pain of Rebellion to molest the
French; and ordaining the Cadi, and all the Inhabitants of Smyrna, to shut up
their Shops, and be ready to assist the French in case of any Tumult or
Disturbance. The Consul was extremely proud of this Order, and after he had
notify'd it to the Cadi, thought himself as secure as if he had obtained a
strong Reinforcement: But the Barbarians, who had received Advice of it from
the Cadi, instead of submitting to the Sultan's Command, began to Rage with
more Violence than before. The first who felt the Fury of this new Storm, were
a Surgeon and another Frenchman, who received three Wounds with a Poniard.
Afterward they besieged the Consul's House, and would have set Fire to it, if
they had not been prevented by fifteen or twenty Janisaries, whom he had called
to his Assistance. The Cadi seemed to be an unconcerned Spectator of all these
Disorders; for when the Consul sent to require his Assistance, according to the
Order he had received from the Port, he answered him in plain Terms, that he
neither would nor durst incense the Barbarians, and that he was resolved to
expect the Event without interposing in other Men's Affairs. In the mean time
the Inhabitants of the City shut up their Shops, according to the Grand
Signior's Order; but they were so far from assisting the French, that they had
not the Courage to appear in the Streets: And if by good Fortune the Captain
Bassa had not arrived with seven Galleys, it is hard to divine what might have
been the issue of these Disturbances. You may easily conclude, that our
Countrymen, after such late and fatal Experience of the Barbarity of those
Infidels, are extremely alarmed at the News of their Arrival: And their Fears
are increased by the Advice they have received from Constantinople, that there
were two Frenchmen murder^d by 'em there in their own Houses. It Is true, the
two Protestant Nations have hitherto suffered nothing but Words; but who can
secure 'em from the Danger of being made Sharers in the common Calamity, if
another Tumult should happen. It Is impossible to reflect without Horror on
their manner of attacking a Christian that has the Misfortune to come in their
way. As soon as they perceive him at a Distance, they draw their Poniards, and
with a Howling and Wolvish Noise, run bellowing out these Words, alla, alla,
alla, in the same Tone they use when they board a Ship. In such Cases it is in
vain to think of Resistance; and as soon as a Man sees 'em coming, he must
place his only Confidence in the Swiftness of his Legs; For if a Turk should
offer to stop 'em, they would infallibly turn their Poniards against him.

These are the fatal and inevitable Consequences of the Weakness of the Turkish
Government: And the Grand Signior must be a tame Spectator of the Insolency of
three or four Hundred Scoundrels, (for there were no more of 'em,) and
patiently suffer 'em to domineer over a great City, slight his Grand
Mandamus's, and assassinate almost under his Whiskers those whom he had taken
into his Protection in so particular a manner.

The present French Consul has been very unfortunate in the Discharge of his
Office. He has been twice affronted by the Barbarians; and besides, he has a
very small Share in the Ambassador's Friendship, and is yet less beloved by the
Nation, who take all Occasions to mortify him. The Other Day there happened a
Quarrel between him and the Capuchins, who are Curates of the Parish, on the
Occasion of the Election of a Grand-Vicar. For the Consul was persuaded by the
Jesuits to promote one whom they recommended to him, and resolved to make him
Officiate on S. Lewis's Day, and pronounce that Saint's Panegyric. The
Capuchins would not own the new Vicar, and were so incensed against the Consul,
that they threatened to shut the Doors of their Church; but perceiving that he
was resolved to break 'em open, they were unwilling to expose themselves to so
public an Affront, and contented themselves with giving out that they would
Excommunicate the Consul, who laughed at their Anger, and told 'em in a
deriding manner, that since nothing less than Excommunication would satisfy
'em, he would let 'em know that he could Excommunicate as well as they, and
that they should find his Sentences more effectual than theirs were wont to be.
This Consul is absolutely governed by the Jesuits, and so entirely devoted to
'em, that he cannot live without 'em. Among the Marks of his Affection to that
Order, I may reckon the late splendid Entertainment which he gave to Father
Grimaldy, who passed by this Place in his Return from China, from whence he was
sent with the Character of an Envoy to the French King. This Jesuit has a
strange Ambition to appear Great, and talks perpetually of the Honors he
receives from the King of China, and of the Favors that Monarch bestows on
some other Fathers of the Society, whom he has made Mandarin's of the first
Order. It must be acknowledged, that the Jesuits are perfect Masters of the Art
of Intriguing; they have always made it their Business to insinuate themselves
into the Affection of Princes, and have managed their Ambitious Designs with so
much Dexterity and Success, that we have already seen some Fathers of that
Order dignified with the Title of Ambassadors by the Courts of Siam, China,
Poland, Tartary, etc. You see, Sir, how suitable their Actions are to the
pretended Humility of their Profession: And I leave you to judge with what
Confidence they can boast of their renouncing Ecclesiastical Dignities, while
they court Secular Preferments with so much Eagerness.

In the Account I gave you of the Temper and Disposition of the Turks, I forgot
to take notice of their surprising Neglect of the Public Interest, in which
Respect they run exactly Counter to the Maxims that are observed in all
well-governed States. If we consider this incurable Flaw in their Government,
we may venture to conclude that Posterity will not find many Objects of
Admiration in the future Monuments of their Power and Glory. If the Egyptians,
Greeks, and Romans had not been inspired with a nobler Ardour, we should not
now see so many Curious and Inquisitive Persons undertake such long and
troublesome Voyages to visit the Ruins of their ancient Grandeur, or to
discover the Medals that give some light to the History of the Great Men for
whom they were coined. The Turks are so extremely careless of the Management of
Public Affairs, that their Streets are not so much as paved; and I Am apt to
think there would not be a Fountain in their Cities, nor a Bridge on their
Rivers, if some dying Persons did not bequeath Legacies to be employed in
erecting such useful Works. The ill Posture of Affairs in this Country is a
natural Consequence of the Constitution of the Government; for what Order can
be expected in a place where there are no incorporated Societies, Town-Houses,
Sheriffs, or Burgo-masters. They have no Public Buildings or Walks, and their
Cities are extremely ill-built. There are no fixed Posts nor Couriers; so that
when a Man has occasion to write to any remote place, except Constantinople,
Aleppo, or Cairo, An Arabian Impostor at his Conjurations P. 309

he must sometimes wait a whole Year for an Occasion; and even between Smyrna
and Constantinople there are only Arabs who go a-foot, and frequently stay a
Month before they set out. I leave you to judge how stale the News must come to
several places, and what an universal Ignorance must reign throughout the
Empire. There are some Turks who know not so much as the Name of the reigning
Sultan; and even in the places that are most frequented, by reason of their
Convenience for Traffic, such as Smyrna, the Inhabitan's are scarce acquainted
with the most important Transactions in the World. For they never publish any
Books, Journals, Gazettes, or the least Account of Public Affairs; nor do I
believe that there is in all Turkey a Man capable of such an Undertaking. The
Time they allow for the Improvement of their Knowledge is entirely spent in
studying the Art of Magical Divination and Fortune-telling, which they have
borrowed from the Arabs, and have so high an Opinion of, that they esteem it a
necessary Qualification in one that pretends to Learning. There is a very
famous Soothsayer in this place, called Solomon Aga, of whom I heard so many
Wonders, that I went on purpose to see whether there was any Solidity in so
suspected a Science. When I came to the Place of his Abode, I found a Man whose
Mien and Aspect was exactly suitable to the Idea we usually have of a Magician;
for he was black and lean, his Looks was gloomy and dismal, and his Beard
almost covered his Breast; and besides, he had about twenty Arabic Books full
of Figures. As soon as I entered, I told him, by a Friend that performed the
Office of an Interpreter betwixt us, that the Fame of his great Learning had
drawn me to see him; and begged him to acquaint me with some part of my future
Destiny. He replied that I was a Christian, that my Friend was also a
Christian, and that consequently we were Brothers. I was not at all pleased
with so impertinent an Answer; but since I knew that the Turks are extremely
fond of Sentences, I looked upon his Bluntness to be an Effect of his Humor,
and desired my Friend to ask him whether he could give me a particular
Information concerning my Fortune. Yes, said he, and more than that; if you
please I will make you Discourse with the black Angel, who will teach you to
speak all sorts of Languages. Since my only design was to discover the utmost
Reach of his Skill, I took him at his Word, and earnestly prayed him to show me
the Angel, which he promised to do the next Morning at the Hour of Quindi. When
I returned at the appointed Time, I found him extremely puzzled to find out
some way to save his Credit, and that he was resolved either to flinch from his
Promise, or to fright me from demanding the performance of it: For at first he
asked me a Hundred Crowns, concluding that I would not purchase the
Satisfaction of my Curiosity at so dear a Rate: However, I resolved to touch
him in the most sensible Part, knowing that he would be extremely concerned for
the Loss of his Reputation. I told him then that I perceived his Learning was
not so profound as he pretended, and that if he were not sensible of his own
Ignorance, he would not demand so extravagant a Sum for so small a Matter.
These Words, as I expected, had some Influence upon him; for he told me, but to
convince me of the Injury I did him by suspecting the Truth of his Pretensions,
he would show me the Angel, and would make me speak to him for fifty Crowns.
But he was extremely surpised, when instead of endeavoring to beat down the
Price, as he concluded I would, I immediately agreed to the Bargain: However,
he concealed the Perplexity of his Thoughts as well as he could, and
endeavored to find out some other Starting-Hole. He assured me that he would
gladly give me the Satisfaction I desired, but the Ceremony could not be
performed till one a-Clock in the Morning: He advised me therefore not to place
too much Confidence in my Courage, which could not preserve me from being
seized with an Astonishment and Terror that might be attended with very
dangerous Consequences. He added a hundred other Reasons to deter me from
adventuring on so hazardous a piece of Curiosity; but at last, perceiving that
I continued fixed in my Resolution, he promised to satisfy me that Night, and
began to talk of Perfumes, Characters, and Evocations, which were so far from
Daunting either me or my Friend, that we returned thither in the Evening, well
armed, and resolved to Fire briskly at the Devil if he should have the
Confidence to attack us. If you should ask me what made me so desirous to be
acquainted with Monsieur le Diable, and what Business I had to do with him, I
should be exremely puzzled to give you a satisfactory Answer: But to deal
plainly with you, I did not believe that 'twas in the Conjurer's Power to bring
us to a Sight of him, and 'twas that perhaps that made me so resolute and
courageous. At last Midnight being come, he began to prepare his Perfumes, and
to bring his Books and Instruments, which I concluded he did only to amuse us;
and after all these Ceremonies, he told us that by reason of the Obscurity of
the Moon he could not show us the Angel, but he would make him speak to us in
Arabic, Turkish, or Italian, which we pleased. This unexpected Shuffling
convinced me that he was an Impostor, and I was so enraged at the
Disappointment, that I left him without daining to return an Answer, and
immediately went to my Lodgings.

By this Instance you may judge of the boasted Skill of all those feigned
Arabian Magicians; for this Man was reputed one of the most learned Professors
of that Art in Asia: And yet it is as certain as you may think it incredible,
that some Franks are so besotted with those mystical Fooleries, that they are
not ashamed to employ all their Time in so useless an Occupation. I know a very
expert and much-esteem'd Painter, called Le Brun, who neglecting his Business,
applies himself wholly to the Study of Divination, and spends whole Days in
turning over his Magical Books, which he procures to be translated into French
at a very considerable Charge. But notwithstanding all the Confidence of this
pretended Diviner, it is impossible that his Art can be true, since the very
Principles on which it depends, are certainly false; and to convince you of the
Absurdity of his Pretensions, 'twill be sufficient to acquaint you with his
usual Method of Divining. He has two little Bones with Eight Sides a-piece, on
each of which there is a small Character engraved; and when you propose your
Question, he throws the Bones, and observes the Characters that appear on the
sides that happen to be uppermost. Then having made several Combinations of
these Characters, with certain Numbers, according to the Subject of the
Question, he draws a Scheme or Figure, which he seeks in one of his Books,
where he finds a Sentence written, which he fancies to be the desired Solution.
Thus you see it is plain that the whole Mystery depends on the Fortune of the
Dice: But when I endeavored to convince him of the Uncertainty of his Art
which betrayed him into so many Errors, that not One Answer in Thirty was found
to be exactly true, he replied very gravely, that these Mistakes were
occasioned by his Ignorance, and that he did not yet comprehend the Depths of
that infallible Science; adding, as a Confirmation of the Certainty of the Art,
that notwithstanding the small Progress he had made in it, he never found that
his Book had returned a Cross or Impertinent Answer. And to convince me of the
Truth of his Assertion, he made several Trials in my Presence, and I observed
always that the Answer, whether True or False, related to the Subject of the
Question; nor will I scruple to confess that I was somewhat surpised at so odd
an Effect of Chance.

The Turks are also very much addicted to the study of the Philosopher's Stone,
or the Art of making Gold and Silver; and I remember a story on this Subject,
which I had from a Turk, who is reckoned a Man of Honor. Two Persian Dervises
came to Constantinople about four Years ago, and after they had staid a
Fortnight, told their Landlord, that though they had no Money to pay for their
Lodging and Entertainment, they were resolved not to go away without giving him
entire Satisfaction. I know not what Credit he gave to their Promises, but he
quickly perceived the Effect of 'em, for they took a large Copper-Dish, which
they found in the House, and having melted it down in his Presence, threw a
little Powder upon it, which immediately changed the Copper into Silver. They
retained one half for themselves, and left the other with their Landlord, who
upon trial found it to be true Silver: And besides, they presented him with a
small Quantity of the Powder. The Grand Vizier Ismael, hearing of this
Accident, sent for the Man, and obliged him to deliver up the Powder, which he
showed to several expert Chemists, who according to his Orders, endeavored to
find out the Secret. But all their Attempts were unsuccessful; and I Am the
rather inclined to believe the Conclusion of the Story, because I look upon
this Art to be no less frivolous and uncertain than that of Divination.

I am, SIR, Your etc.
Smyrna, August 1691.
LETTER XXIV.
SIR,
IN compliance with your Desire I shall in this Letter, present you with a
short View of the Life of Soliman, Emperor of the Turks, who died June 22. and
was succeeded by his younger Brother, Achmet.

The present Grand Signior, Achmet, the deceased Soliman, and the deposed
Sultan Mahomet, were three Brothers, the Sons of Sultan Ibrahim, who was
strangled in the Castle of the Seven Towers, in the heat of one of those
mutinous Tumults of the Janissaries, that happen so frequently in this Country.
His eldest Son Mahomet, who was then very young, was declared Emperor by the
Interest and Solicitation of the Sultana Mother, and of the famous Visie^,
Kopergli, who owed his Advancement to her, and ever afterward served her with
an inviolable Fidelity. This Prince's Reign may be justly reckoned disastrous;
for not to mention those frequent and terrible Seditions that made him tremble
so often, and in one of which he was at last dethroned, his Armies were several
times ^outed by the Venetians, and the Duke of Lorrain before his Death, had
almost driven him quite out of Hungary. The Turks, who are the most
ungovernable Subjects in the World to an unfortunate Prince, and who are
possessed with a Belief of a certain Predestination, that overrules the Fate
of their Emperor on which they imagine the Fortune of the Empire depends,
concluded that the Reign of Mahomet would be a perpetual Scene of Disasters:
and the Grandees encouraged the Superstition of the People, in Expectation of a
favorable Opportunity to execute the Designs they had premeditated against the
Government. They could not have desired a more inviting Juncture to attempt and
carry on so vast an Undertaking, than the Disturbances that were occasioned by
the ill Success of the Campaign of 1687. and especially by the Loss of the
Famous Battle of Hersan; where the Imperialists killed Ten thousand Turks on
the Spot, pillaged their Camp, made themselves Masters of Ninety Pieces of
Cannon, and their whole Train of Artillery. The Consternation that was
occasioned among the Turks by the News of this Defeat, was increased by the
Advice they received almost at the same time that the Bridge of Esseck was
seized by the Count de Dunevalt, immediately after the Victory. The Grand
Vizier, who commanded the Army in Person, dreading the usual Fate of his
Predecessors on such Occasions, endeavored to secure himself by laying the
Blame on the Generals that commanded under him; and resolving to prevent the
Designs of his Enemies, persuaded the Grand Signior to put 'em to Death. But
though the Orders for that Effect were actually given out, there was so strong a
Party already formed both against the Vizier and the Sultan, that the Great
Officers of the Army, with the Chiaoux Bassa at their Head, made the whole Army
revolt, and marched toward Constantinople, with a Resolution to depose
Mahomet, and place his Brother Soliman on the Throne. The News of their
Approach so terrified the Sultan, that knowing no orher Way to appease the Fury
of the Rebels, he abandoned the Grand vizier, and sent the Imperial Signet to
the Chiaoux Bassa, whom he thought to gain by satisfying his Ambition. But he
quickly found that the Danger was greater than he imagined; for that Officer
declared that he would not accept the Sultan's Offer till the Grand Vizier,
Tefterdar, Receiver of the Customs, the Caimacan, and some others whom he
named, were put to Death. The Persons whose Heads he demanded were the only
faithful Servants of the Grand Signior, who was extremely perplexed at so
unwelcome a Proposal; knowing that his Visier's Death would infallibly put a
Period to his own Life, or at least to his Reign. However the Necessity of his
Affairs constrained him at last to sign the fatal Order: the unfortunate Vizier
was strangled, and his Head sent to the Chiaoux Bassa, who was so far from
being appeased, that his Insolence was heightened by this Mark of the Sultan's
Condescension. He dismissed the Messengers with Scorn, telling 'em in a
domineering Manner, That they could not justly expect he would be satisfied
with one Head instead of Twenty which he had demanded; and that this way of
proceeding convinced him that the Government was not much concerned for the
Quiet of the Empire. Thus the Sultan was constrained to send all the rest of
the Officers whom those insolent Rebels required; and soon after perceived
there was no Hope of reducing 'em to a Sense of their Duty: for all the
Prisoners were barbarously murdered in the Middle of the Army by the Chiaoux
Bassa's Order. This last Act of Inhumanity struck such a Terror into the Grand
Signior's Mind, that concluding himself to be irrecoverably lost, he resolved
in the Fury of his Despair to put to Death all his Brothers and Sons. To
comprehend the Reason of this dismal Resolution, you must know that the
Religion of the Turks inspires 'em with a certain Veneration for the Ottoman
Blood, that over-awes 'em even in the the midst of the most terrible Seditions,
and is so deeply rooted in their Minds, that they would rather choose to suffer
the most cruel Death than to see the Throne possessed by a Prince of another
Family. And therefore it is the usual Custom of those Emperors to begin their
Reign with the Death of their Brothers, that the Throne may be secured from the
Attempts of so many dangerous Pretenders. Thus Sultan Amurath, the Uncle of
these three Emperors, put to Death all the Males of the Family; and if the
Tenderness of a Mother had not prompted the Sultana Valide to hide Ibrahim, who
was the Youngest, the whole Race had been extingush'd. For the Sultans are more
concerned for their own Security than for the Preservation of the Royal Line.
Nevertheless Sultan Mahomet would never hearken to the Persuasions of some of
his Counselors, who advised him to put that cruel Maxim in Execution, and
endeavored to make him sensible that the Quiet of the Empire could never be
secured but by the Death of Soliman and Achmet. But since he would not put 'em
to death while they were in his Power, he found, at last, that he could not
execute that bloody Resolution when his Despair constrained him to attempt it:
for the Bostangi Bassa, who was one of the Conspirators, carried the two
Princes to the old Seraglio under a strong Guard, who mocked the Sultan when he
demanded to be admitted with some of his Servants; and the Army was already
posted in and about Constantinople. That Night a Council of the Great Officers
was held in Santa-Sophia, where they came to a final Resolution to place
Soliman on the Throne, and he was declared Emperor the next Day with universal
Acclamations of Joy. Thus Mahomet was deposed, and Soliman, who was no less
averse to Cruelty than his Brother, contented himself with ordaining that he
should receive the same Treatment which he had made him suffer for so many
Years. When the Capigi Bassa came to secure his Person, and to acquaint him
with the New Emperor's Order, he found him on the Sopha drinking Coffee, with
a Serenity of Mind that may be almost reckoned a Prodigy, considering the
deplorable Circumstances of his Condition. He submitted without making the
least Resistance, saying, That it was impossible to oppose the Decrees of
Heaven, and that whatsoever is predestined must necessarily happen.

In the mean time the Caimacan, who was one of Sultan Mahomet's Favorites, had
the good Fortune or Interest, to secure himself from being enrolled among the
rest of those miserable Victims that were sacrificed to the Fury of the Chiaoux
Bassa. But as soon as he perceived that his Master was irrecoverably ruined, he
resolved to prevent the implacable Malice of his Enemies by a speedy flight:
and considering that Christendom was the only Place where he could expect to
secure his Life, he embarked that Night on a Saique accompanied only with one
Servant; and having made a sufficient Provision of Gold, Silver, and Jewels,
attempted to get into a French Vessel of Ciotad, commanded by one Captain
Crevilliers: but the Mariners who had been already alarmed with the News of
those terrible Disturbanees, would not suffer him to approach the Ship till he
had declared his Name, and acquainted 'em, that the Caimacan of Constantinople
desired to speak with the Captain. As Soon as the Captain appeared, the Caimacan
entreated him to receive him on Board his Ship, and transport him to France;
assuring him that he might set sail the next night without any Opposition, and
offering Twenty thousand Sequins, or Fifty thousand Crowns for his Passage.
This was a very tempting Offer to the Captain, and he has since told me, that
he would have most willingly accepted it, if the Caimacan had had the the
Prudence to conceal his Name; but since both that and his Quality was known by
the whole Ship's Company, neither Compassion nor Covetousness could prevail
with the Captain to run so great a Hazard; so that the poor Caimacan was forced
to steer his Course toward the Canal of the Black Sea, thinking to make his
Escape that way. But he was quickly discovered by the great Quantity of Silver
which he had about him, and was brought back to Constantinople, where he was
beheaded. A Hundred other Bassa's underwent the same Fate; and the Grand Vizier
giving a full Career to his Spite and Revenge, filled the whole City with Blood
and Slaughter. There was nothing to be seen in the Streets but Janissaries and
Spahi's, assaulting and murdering those whom they met; and no Man when he rose
in the Morning was sure of going to Bed at Night. The Franks were extremely
afraid, lest the Storm should fall on them: the Ambassadors secured their
Houses with strong Guards, and all the Vessels in the Port, English, French,
Dutch and Venetian, joined together, and put out to Sea, with a Resolution to
defend themselves to the last Extremity, in case they should be attacked. To
conclude; I have heard some Turks, who are both very old, and well skilled in
the History of their Country, affirm, That the Quiet of the Empire was never
disturbed by a more Bloody Sedition. However 'twas at last appeased, though the
Calm lasted not long; for in March there broke forth another terrible
Insurrection against the New Sultan, whom all Men began to look upon as
incapable of the Government. Nor were they much mistaken in their Opinion of
him, and it is strange they did not sooner foresee the dangerons Consequences of
so great a Revolution; for how could a Man learn the Art of Ruling so
troublesome an Empire, who had spent his whole Life in a close Prison, where he
could only converse with Books, and was so perfect a Stranger to the Management
of Affairs, that he was ignorant even in the most common Things. Thus the best
Quality they could expect or desire him to be indu'd with, was an Easiness of
Temper, and a Willingness to be absolutely governed by his Ministers; and
indeed it may be said, that there was never a more tractable Prince; for during
the whole Course of his Reign he never made Use of his Absolute Power in any
one Act, but only in preserving his Brothers, whom he was often advised to put
to Death; especially on this Occasion, when the Rebels threatened to restore
Mahomet to the Throne, and had almost effected their Resolution: for the Vizier
was massacr'd in his own House by the Janissaries, who were the Authors of the
Revolt, and had made themselves Masters of the City. But the Sultan having very
seasonably displayed the Banner of Mahomet, the Saphi's, the Leventi, and the
People run to his Assistance, and dispersed the the Janissaries. After the
Tumult was calmed, the Bassa of Natolia, who headed the Rebels, was obliged to
beg Pardon, and above Five hundred of the Mutineers were hanged; though their
Death made but a poor Amends for a whole Quarter of the City, and above Twenty
Galleys and Sultana's which they had burnt. 'Twou'd be needless to give you a
more particular Relation of these Accidents, since you have doubtless read an
Account of 'em in your public Journals or Newspapers; and the only Reason why
I mentioned 'em, is because they give some Light to the Transactions that
succeeded 'em, which perhaps have not yet come to your knowledge. While the
whole City was in a terrible Combustion, and the Leventi animated by a Desire
of Plunder, were seeking an Occasion of breaking forth into fresh Disorders,
there came a whole Troop of 'em to the French Ambassadour's Palace, and in a
very insolent Manner desired him to receive a certain beggarly Greek, whom they
brought along with 'em, to be his Drugger-Man, or Interpreter. At first
Monsieur de Girardin rejected the Proposal, telling 'em that he did not want a
Drugger-Man, and would not take one upon their Recommendation; but seeing they
began to be unruly, and threaten to set Fire to his House, he grew more
complaisant, and received the Drugger-Man more civilly. Nor can he be blamed
for suffering himself to be hectored by the Rabble, since it is certainly the
wisest Course to submit on such Occasions.

After the Sedition was quieted, Soliman retired to Adrianople; for he did not
think himself safe in a City that becomes the Sultan's Prison upon the first
breaking forth of an Insurrection; and after that time he never resided in it.
He conferred the Dignity of Grand Vizier on one Ismael Bassa, a Man without
Experience, and one who had nothing to recommend him but the Favor of his
Master. No sooner was he entrusted with the Administration of the Government,
but the Empire was overrun with those Disorders and Confusions that are the
natural Consequences of the Unskilfulness of the Principal Minister of State.
Several Bassa's began to form Cabals, and enter into separate Associations.
Some espoused the Interest of the Sultaness, the Mother of the deposed Mahomet,
who plotted to restore her Son; others declared in Favor of one Jeghen Bassa,
who pretended to be of the Ottoman Race: some resolved to be independent,
without acknowledging any Head of their Party, and all in general resus'd to
submit to the present Government.

In the mean time the Emperor carried on the War very prosperously; for the
Duke of Bavaria took Belgrade by Storm, and the Prince of Baden, after he had
defeated the Bassa of Bosnia, made himself Master of the whole Province. The
next Year was remarkable for more Signal and Glorious Advantages; for the
Prince of Baden, who commanded the Imperial Army in Hungary, fought three
Battles successively, and obtained as many important Victories.

The first Battle was fought near Passarowitz, where the Turks lost seven
Thousand Men, a hundred Pieces of Cannon, all their Bombs, Carcasses, Mortars,
Powder, Tents, etc. The second Victory was obtained on the 24 th. of September,
near Nissa, where the Serasquier who commanded in Person, could not prevent the
Loss of all his Cannon, and eight Thousand Soldiers. The third Battle was
fought near Widen; and during the Heat of the Action, the Imperialists carried
the Town by Storm. Besides, the Prince of Baden had taken Nissa, Zwornick,
Nowigrath, Arsowath, and several other Places, which opened a free Passage into
Bulgaria and Macedonia, and from thence into Romania; so that if the War had
been carried on for some time with the same Vigor and Success, the
Imperialists might have advanced to the Gates of Constantinople. But in the
beginning of the last Year, the Vizier Ismael was deposed, and succeeded by
Kopergli Oglou, Bassa of Scio. 'Twas then the Turks began to hope they might
see a happy Turn of Affairs; they remembered the great Actions of the famous
Vizier of that Name, and were persuaded that this Minister would imitate so
glorious a Example. Nor were they disappointed in their Expectation; for the
new Vizier was not inferior to his Predecessor either in Valor, Strength of
Mind, or any other Endowments that are necessary to fit a Man for the
Management of Affairs; and the Empire was quickly sensible of the Advantageous
Influences of his Government. I have already acquainted you in a former Letter,
with the prosperous Success of their Arms during the last Campaign, which gave
Occasion to the French Ambassador to take notice of the Sympathy between the
two Empires, and was afterward solemnized by that Triumph of which I gave you
a short Description. And therefore instead of troubling you with a tedious
Relation of those Events, which you have doubtless heard of, and have not yet
forgotten; I shall only tell you, that if that Great Man had not been killed at
the Battle of Salankemen, the Christians would have had Reason to dread a fatal
Revolution, which they could hardly have prevented any otherwise, than by a
speedy Peace. And indeed that Design was carried on so successfully, that every
one expected a happy Conclusion of their Negotiations, when they were
unfortunately interrupted by the Visier's Death. For he was not at all averse
to the Proposal, and was so far from being acted by that base Love of Riches,
with which the Turks are generally possessed, that, contrary to the usual
Maxims of his Predecessors, he pursued no other Interest than this of the
State. He had often discoursed on that Subject with Monsieur Collier, the Dutch
Ambassador, whose Reasons made the greater Impression upon him, because of the
Character he had received of his Merit, Capacity, and Dexterity in public
Negotiations. And that able Minister had prepossessed the Mind of the Vizier
with such strong Inclinations to a Peace, that, if we may be allowed to judge
by the most promising Appearances, he would have actually concluded it, if he
had not been prevented by Death. For Monsieur Collier had made so good Use of
such a favorable Opportunity, that almost all the Articles were agreed on, and
the Emperor had empowered the Prince of Baden to sign the Treaty; and had
appointed the Counts of Kinsky and Straatman to be his Assistants. The King of
Poland and the Republic of Venice had also sent their Plenipotentiaries: but
instead of the much-desir'd News of a Peace, we received an Account of the
dreadful Battle of Salankemen, in which the Vizier was one of the first that
lost his Life. The Aga of the Janissaries, the Serasquier, and Ten other Bassa's
of Note, had the same Fate; and the Turkish Army fled with so much
Precipitation and Terror, that the Memory of the Oldest Men cannot furnish 'em
with an Instance of so entire a Defeat. They lost above 20000 Men, all their
Cannon and Baggage; and, in a word, all they had in their Camp. I cannot
express the Consternation that was spread over the whole Ottoman Empire, by the
surprising and melancholy News which was brought into this Country by some that
had the good Fortune to escape; who never speak of that Battle without a
certain Dread and Amazement in their Countenance, which gives us a more lively
Idea of the Horror of that Day, than the most particular Relation that could
be made of the Action.

Monsieur de Chateauneuf takes so deep a Share in the Public Sorrow, that I
know not whether he could support so terrible a Blow, if the Visier's Death did
not comfort him a little. For that Minister never had the Happiness of his
Favor, because he would not be led by his Advice; and I know a Man to whom the
Ambassador expressed his Thoughts in these very Words, speaking of a Peace;
'Twill, doubtless, be speedily concluded, said he; The Dutch Ambassador is
perpetually with the Vizier, and has got such a Power over him, that he can
undo in one Day all that I am able to do in Ten. Nor were his Fears groundless,
for I can assure you that Mr. Collier is perhaps the fittest Man in the World
to manage such a Negotiation. In the first place, he knows the Original of all
the Great Men at the Port, and is perfectly acquainted with their several
Humors, Intrigues, and Interests. Besides he is the Son of an Ambassador, and
from his very Birth has been enured to Business, which by that Means is become
so natural to him, that he manages the most intricate Affairs with a certain
happy Easiness that can only be acquired by a Person of so rare an Industry,
and after a long Residence at the Court. These are the Advantages which
Monsieur de Chateauneuf wants: it is true, he has a great deal of Wit, and never
sleeps away an Opportunity of Acting; but after all, an Ambassador at his
Arrival from France may be reckoned almost as great a Stranger at the Port, as
if he had dropped from the Clouds. The Genius and Humor of that Nation is
directly opposite to ours, and Mr. Collier has studi'd it so carefully, and
understands it so perfectly, that he could easily give the Bassa's themselves a
Lesson on this Subject. So that if Monsieur de Chateauneuf did not
counter-ballance these Advantages with large Bags of Gold and Silver, which are
always wont to outweigh Reason in Turkey, the Peace would have been long since
concluded. This puts me in Mind of a Story, which will give you an Idea of the
usual way of managing Affairs in this place.

The Captain of a Venetian Ship, who arrived some Months ago at Constantinople,
under the Protection and Colors of Holland, was solicited by the French
Ambassador to put himself under his Protection, and was at last allured to
yield to that Minister's Request by the Promises he made him to obtain
considerable Favors for him, both as to the Entry and Exportation of his
Goods. Mr. Collier, who upon all Occasions maintains the Honor of his Masters
with the highest Zeal and Courage, would not endure an Affront that seemed to
be directly aimed at the Republic. As Soon as he heard of it, he sent Orders to
the Captain to take down the Banner of France, if he was not resolved to suffer
the utmost Severity of his just Indignation: but that deluded Officer slighted
the Message, and so was himself the Cause of all the Misfortunes that
afterward befell him. For after his Excellency had given Notice to the Grand
Vizier that there was a Prize in the Port, Orders were immediately sent to
seize the Vessel, which was declared to be lawful Prize; and the Captain with
all the Seamen were put in Chains. You may easily conclude that the French were
extremely mortified to see a hundred Wretches loaded with Fetters, and sold for
Slaves, merely for setting up the Banner of that Nation. Monsieur de
Chateauneuf received a very severe Reprimand from Monsieur de Pontchartrain,
and 'twas generally believed that his Indiscretion on this Occasion would make
him be recalled from the Port. In the mean time he was perpetually at the Grand
Visier's Gate, importuning him for the Relief of the Ship and Mariners: but
after all his earnest Solicitations, he could not obtain a more favorable
Composition, than that he was permitted to redeem the Men at the Rate of Fifty
Crowns a-piece; and the Ransom of the Ship was fixed at Ten thousand Crowns,
which was more than its real Value. Since that time the Credit of the French
Protection is extremely lessened; and I Am apt to believe that few Captains will
hereafter be guilty of the like Imprudence. And even I know several Venetian
Captains who will not put themselves under the Protection of France, because
the Ambassador has imposed a Tax of Fifteen thousand Crowns upon the Vessels
of that Nation by way of Reprizal, for the Money he paid to the Grand Vizier.
This Imposition occasions a great murmuring among the Venetians, who pretend
that he was obliged in Justice to redeem the Vessel at his own Charge, since he
was the only Cause of its Misfortune.

I perceive that I have insensibly wandered from my Subject, and am ready to
acknowledge that this would be an unpardonable Fault in an Exact and Methodical
History: but since I only promised you a clear and faithful Account of the
Observations I should have Occasion to make in my Travels, I do not think my
self obliged to make an Apology for every little Digression.

The Emperor Soliman died on the twenty second of June last: some believe that
his Death was natural, but others say that it was occasioned by the Sultaness
the Mother of Mahomet. The last of these Opinions is most generally received,
and would seem very probable, if it had produced any advantageous Alteration in
the Condition of that unfortunate Prince; but there was not the least Motion
made in Order to his Restoration. Achmet was unanimously elected, and his
Accession to the Throne was attended with a certain Tranquillity that is rarely
observed in this Country. The Misfortunes that happened in the Beginning of his
Reign seem to be the Forerunners and Presages of future Disasters; for before
the first Month was expired, he lost that Great and Memorable Battle of
Salankemen, of which I have already given you an Account. And if I may be
allowed to give Credit to the probable Conjectures of those who are best
acquainted with the Genius of his Subjects, I may venture to foretell that he
will never be an old Emperor, though he is already in the Eight and fortieth
Year of his Age. For the Franks are possessed with a less advantageous Opinion
of him than of his Predecessor Soliman, whose Reign was nevertheless disturbed
with an almost perpetual Revolt that kept his Throne continually in a tottering
Condition.

The Death of the Vizier Kopergli, according to the usual Custom of this
Country, was followed with several Changes of Officers, and the Death of many
great Persons, among the rest of one Mustapha Aga, whom I knew at
Constantinople. He was born at Leghorn in Italy, and had the Disadvantage to be
descended of a Family which had no considerable Fortune. He was taken by the
Turks at the Siege of Candy, and renounced his Religion at the Desire of the
Grand Vizier, who had a good Opinion of his Abilities, and resolved to put him
in a Way of Bus^ness. He was easily prevailed with to embrace the Turkish
Faith; for since he was naturally of an aspiring Temper, he entered with Joy
into the Service of a Man by whose Interest he might expect to raise his
Fortune, and either out of Gratitude, or Policy, he chose always to depend on
that Family. So that the late Vizier, Kopergli Oglou, was his particular
Patron, and advanced him to the Tophana, that is, the Founding or Casting of
Metals, of which he was Directour-General, as well as of the Mint, which is the
most gainful Post in the Empire. And besides he made a very considerable
Addition to the usual Profits of that Office, by inventing and introducing a
certain Copper Coin, called Mangours: for each Piece was ordered to pass at the
Rate of six French Deniers, though 'twas no larger than a Dutch Doit, or a single
French Denier; so that buying the Copper at twenty Pence a Pound, the Profit
amounted to Six in Seven. Not long after the Advancement of Kopergli Oglou,
Mustapha proposed this Expedient to fill the Treasury, which till this time was
very empty; and had Orders to coin Four thousand Purses of that Money, or Two
millions of Crowns. So prodigious a Quantity of those Pieces could not but
occasion great Disorders, and a general Interruption of Trade; and besides
those that were coined at the Mint, there came several Barks laden with 'em
from France and Thessalonica, where they were coined by the Jews, so that there
are above Two hundred thousand Crowns of Counterfeit Money at present in the
Empire. At last People were so discouraged at those Abuses, that about three
Months ago they began to refuse to take these Pieces for more than one half,
and at present they will not take 'em at all, notwithstanding the repeated
Orders of the Grand Signior, who (as I intimated before) is not much respected
in this Country. The Disorders occasioned by the debasing of the Coin, and the
vast Estate Mustapha Aga had acquired, were the Causes of his Death. His
Enemies had long before begun to exclaim against the Methods he took to oppress
the People; pretending that he was a Christian in his Heart, and that he would
at last make his Escape to Italy with all the Treasure he had scraped together
in the Empire, which certainly had been the most prudent Course for a Man in
his Circumstances. But since the Desire of Riches is like the Thirst of some
diseased Persons, which is increased by Drinking, instead of heark'ning to the
Advice of his Friends, he took a quite contrary Method, and sent for his Sister
and Nephews, thinking by that Means to vindicate himself from the Aspersions
that were fixed upon him by his Adversaries. Besides he placed an entire
Confidence in the Grand Vizier, and thought himself absolutely secure under the
Protection of so kind and powerful a Patron: but he ought to have considered
that his Patron was Mortal, and that his Interest would expire with his Life.
It Is plain by the Event, that he should have acted more warily in so dangerous
a Post; for I have just now received a Letter which informs me that he was
strangled, after they had given him the Torture to make him discover his Money.
And he was even so strangely infatuated, that though he was not apprehended for
the Space of Eight Days after the Visi^r's Death, instead of making his Escape,
he chose rather to expect his Fate at his own House; where he was at last
arrested by the Caimacan, with his Wife, Sister, and Nephews. These unfortunate
Creatures, who have not yet renounced the Catholic Religion, sent to beg
Monsieur de Chateauneuf's Protection for the obtaining of their Liberty: but he
is too much a Politician to hazard his Interest at the Port to preserve the
Honor of his Religion.

They begin again to talk of Peace more than ever; and I^m informed that the
Dutch Ambassador has prevailed with the New Vizier Hali, to continue the
Negotiations for that Effect at Adrianople, whither he and the English
Ambassador, Sir William Hussy, will set forward in few Days; and it is
generally believed that the Treaty will be brought to a happy Conclusion,
as soon as the Count de Marsigli is returned from Vienna, whither he went to
receive the Emperor's final Instructions: So that I hope I shall be able in my
next to send you some considerable News. In the mean time

I am, SIR, Your, etc.
Smyrna, September. 1691.
LETTER XXV.
SIR,
I Have not forgot the Promise I made you at the End of my last Letter; but I
know not if you will thank me for keeping my Word, since instead of the News I
hoped to send you, I must acquaint you that the Negotiations for a Peace are at
an End, or rather interrupted for some time; for it is so much the Grand
Signior's Interest to conclude a Treaty, that without pretending to the Spirit
of Prophecy, I may venture to foretell that it will be renewed. In the mean
time it will not be improper to give you an Account of this unexpected
Accident. The English and Dutch Ambassadors arrived at Adrianople in the
Beginning of the last Month, and had several Conferences with the Grand Vizier,
in which the greatest part of the Articles were mutually agreed on; and the
only Difficulty that obstructed the happy Conclusion of the Treaty, was the
Visier's insisting upon the Restoring of Buda, and the keeping of Caminiec,
concerning which they expected Instructions from the Emperor. While Affairs
were in this Posture, the Plague began to rage so violently at Adrianople, that
the Ambassadors thought fit to retire to a Vilage two Leagues on this side the
Town, till the Fury of the Distemper should be somewhat abated. But the Baron
de Chateauneuf having received new Instructions, which in all probability were
accompanied with some weighty Proposals, came to Adrianople, though he was
neither sent for nor expected; and without the least Regard to the preservation
of his Life, he had the Courage to brave Death in the midst of a City where she
seemed to have fixed the Seat of her Empire; for the Plague made so terrible a
Havoc, that there died above a Thousand Persons a Day. At the same time it
happened that Sir William Hussy was in a Gallery, and perceiving a Company of
Men in the Plain, he had the Curiosity to send one of his Servants to inquire
who they were. As soon as he heard that 'twas the French Ambassador, he began
to dread the Consequences of that Minister^s Journey; for he considered that he
would never have exposed himself to so imminent a Danger, and even without
being called, if there had not been some hidden and extraordinary Design in
Agitation. It Is thought that the French King being informed of the great
Progress that was made in the Treaty, sent Instructions to his Ambassador,
impowering him to conclude a secret Alliance with the Turks; and it is but too
plain that these are more than bare Conjectures; for the Vizier would never
afterward hear the least Word of a Peace. However, it is certain that Sir
William Hussey's Vexation at so unexpected a Disappointment, contributed not a
little to his Death; for you must not give credit to the Surmises of those who
pretend that he was poisoned, since there was not the least Mark of Poison
found in his Body, which was opened by his own Surgeon, in the presence of
his Chaplain, Secretary, and the rest of his Domestic Servants. But though in
all probability the French had no hand in this Gentleman's Death, I dare not
pronounce 'em guiltless of the Attempt that was made upon Count Marsigli, who
was assaulted near Belgrade, in his return from Vienna with his Imperial
Majesty's Answer. His Chiaoux, and two of his Servants, were killed upon the
Spot, and he was wounded in five places both with Sabres and Pistols: But
before they had time to dispatch him, the Prince of Moldavia came seasonably to
his Assistance, though he could not seize the Murderers, because they fled as
soon as they perceived him. All these Circumstances, and the Juncture of the
Time, make me very inclinable to believe that this Attempt was not made without
a particular Order. I took Occasion Yesterday to discourse concerning this
Accident with the Consul de Hochepied, whose Virtue makes him so incapable of
Suspicion, that he cannot believe the French would be guilty of so Barbarous an
Action; and besides, he is persuaded that the Murderers would have seized on
the Count's Papers, if they had been set on by the French. But in my Opinion
that Circumstance ought not to be alleged as an Argument in their Vindication;
for the seizing of the Papers would have plainly discovered the Authors of the
Murder; and we may reasonably suppose, that though the French King takes no care
to conceal the boundlesness of his Ambition, he would be loath to be reckoned
an Abettor of Murderers. And besides, he might well dispense with a Sight of
the Emperor's Orders and Count Marsigli's Instructions, since he entertains so
many Spies at the Port, who make it their Business to discover the most secret
Transactions, and had in all probability acquainted him with every thing that
related to the Negotiation. Thus Mr. Collier has had the Misfortune to see all
his Hopes unexpectedly blasted; and we may reasonably suppose that his Vexation
is considerably heightened by the impossibility of regaining his Ground: For
Money is the prevailing Argument at the Port, and the infallible Rule by which
all Controversies are decided. I cannot better represent the Genius of the
Aga's, Bassa's, that Visiers that compose this Court, than by comparing 'em to
a Company of Merchants, who would sell the very State if they could, to the
highest Bidder. And the same Character may be universally applied to private
Persons; for Interest is the Idol to which they sacrifice their Quiet, Honor,
Emperor, and even the Empire it self. This is the fatal Source of all those
terrible Disorders and Revolutions, of which we find so many Instances in
History, that would seem altogether incredible if almost every Day did not
furnish us with fresh Examples of 'em.

There is at present in this Place one of Count Tekely's Relations, who came
lately from France; and it is observable, that he was not at all surpised at
the News of the unsuccessful Conclusion of the Treaty, which makes us believe
that he expected so sudden a Change, and was not ignorant of the Causes of it.
He lodges at the Consul's House, and is just ready to depart for
Constantinople, where it is said he intends to lodge with Mon^ieur Chateauneuf.
I know not what Treatment he expects from the Ambassador, but I Am apt to
believe he will not meet with a very Ceremonious Reception: For when the Count
himself paid a Visit to the Ambassador at Sophia, he received him in his Bed,
and pretended a Fit of Sickness, to avoid the Ceremony of a formal Reception;
for there were some Reasons that inclined him to receive the Count as Prince of
Transylvania, as there were others that obliged him to treat him only as Count
Tekely.

The Triumph of a Christian that has renouned the Faith



I had Occasion this very Day to see the Triumphant Procession of a Genoese
Renegado, who came hither in a Ship belonging to Provence. Since the Cadi's are
obliged by the Chartel not to receive a Christian that intends to abjure his
Religion till they have first acquainted the Consul of his Nation, who is to
examine whether his Apostasy be voluntary or constrained; the Cadi of the City
sent to inform the French Consul, that a Frank who came under the Banner of
France, was resolved to turn Musulman, adding, that he might send his
Interpreters to examine the new Convert, and re^eive his Declaration. The
Consul replied, that he did not know the Man, nor was at all concerned with his
Resolution; but hearing that the Cavalcade was to pass by his Gate, he sent
Word to the Cadi, that he would take it as an Affront, and order the Renegado
to be seized in the midst of his Triumph, and chastis'd with five hundred
Bastonado's. Nevertheless he was so far from endeavoring to execute his
Menaces, that he suffered the whole Procession to pass under his Windows
without making the least Attempt to disturb ^em. I shall take this Occasion to
give you a ^^ief Account of the Ceremonies that are used when a Christian
intends to abjure his Religion. First they instruct him in the Principles of
the Mohammedan Religion, and after a whole Month spent in that Exercise, they
gather a Contribution to buy a Suit of Clothes for him, which sometimes amounts
to fifty Crowns, but rarely exceeds that Sum; and they commonly use Force when
People are not willing to contribute out of Charity. Then the Renegado is
carried before the Cadi, in whose Presence, and of two Effendi's, and several
other Persons, he makes a public Profession of his Faith with the following
Ceremonies. First an Isman makes him perform the Goul, which is their most
Solemn Ablution, and as he begins to wash himself, he pronounces these Words,
bis millah el azem ve ellem doullillah allah din is lam; In the Name of the
Great God, Glory be to God, the God of the Musulman Faith. Then the Isman
himself performs the Goul, for they reckon themselves polluted by touching a
Christian; after which they both put on their Clothes, and come before the
Cadi, who says to the Renegado, Art thou willing to turn Musulman. After he has
replied, Yes, the Isman takes the Alcoran in both his Hands, and holding it
above the Christian's Head, he says first bis millah, in the Name of God; then
addressing himself to the Christian, he proceeds thus; Allah ecber, allah
ecber, allah ecber, eschad in la illah, illallah, eschad in Mebemet resoul
allah; which are almost the same Words that are proclaimed by the Muezins from
the Minarets or Steeples of the Mosquees. The Renegado replies, Illah, illallah
Mehemet resoul allah; There is no other God, and Mahomet is his great Prophet;
and as soon as he has made a public Profession of his Faith by pronouncing
these Words, they put a Turbant on his Head, and make him kiss the Alcoran,
which he could not do before without a Crime. Then they embrace and caress him,
and put all things in order for the Cavalcade, having already provided two or
three Hundred Men, armed with Sabres, Carabines, and Pistols, with six Ensigns,
two of which march before, and the other four surround the Renegado, who is
almost entirely covered by 'em. He is mounted on a fine Horse, which the Cadi
lends him, adorned with a rich Vest, which he wears all the rest of the Day.
The Soldiers march four in a Rank, expressing their Joy by loud Shouts and
repeated Volleys of Shot, the Renegado walking in the midst of 'em with the
Ensigns. Thus they march in a Triumphant manner through the City; but all this
Pomp is but an Introduction to the Scene of Pain, for as soon as the Triumph is
over, they proceed to Circumcision, which is thus performed: They draw their
Prepuce over the Glans or Nut of the Yard, and pressing it between two little
Pieces of Iron, they cut off with a Razor that part of the Foreskin which
reaches beyond the Glans, and at that very Moment the Apostate must once more
repeat these Words, la illah illallah, Mehemet resoul allah. After this
Ceremony, the new Musulman must keep his Bed fifteen Days; for the Cure of the
Wound is rarely completed sooner; after which he may choose what Employment he
pleases; that is, he may either List himself in the Army, or enter into
Service, though such Persons usually become extremely miserable. For there is
nothing more common than to see a Renegado begging; and the Turks are so far
from relieving 'em in their Distress, that the very Name of a Renegado is
sufficient to make those who bear it hated and despised, not only by the
Christians, who look upon 'em as base and cowardly Apostates, but even by the
Turks, who can never be persuaded by all their seeming Devotion that they are
sincere Professors of the Musulman Faith.

Thus, Sir, I have at last finished the Account I promised to give you of this
Country, which I intend to leave very speedily. I design to embark on a French
Ship, which, with another Vessel of the same Nation, is bound for Venice, from
whence I resolve to continue my Journey to Holland by Land, during which I hope
my Observations will furnish me with fresh Matter to entertain you now and then
with a Letter. I thought to have passed by Thessalonica, that I might have
satisfied my Curiosity with a View of a very considerable Rarity, I mean the
Bones of a Giant that were found by some Workmen in that Place, as they were
digging the Foundations of a House for the Bassa. All the Surgeons of the
Country have examined 'em, and have given in a formal Attestation in which they
conclude that these are the real Bones of a Man, whose Height, according to
their Computation, amounted to above Twenty Feet; so that this may be looked
upon as a Confirmation of the Story of the Giant at Spire in Germany. But I
must even content my self with the Accounts I have heard of that Curiosity,
since our Captain intends not to touch at that Place. I shall have the good
Fortune during our Voyage to have the Conversation of one Signior Stephano, an
Italian Engineer, who having spent Eight or Ten Years in the Turkish Service,
is not willing to continue longer in so dangerous a Post. He is an ingenious
and witty Person, and will doubtless prove a very agreeable Companion: Besides,
he intends to carry his Wife along with him, who is a little Greek, about
Eighteen Years old, and the prettyest Creature in the World; so that I hope to
pass these Seas with more Pleasure than I did before.

We have just now received the good News of Count Marsigli's Recovery, with
which I shall conclude this Letter. I have already told you that he was very
dangerously wounded, and am glad I can now inform you that the Vigor of his
Constitution, and the Care of his Physicians, have happily restored him to his
Health. If the Malice of his Enemies had succeeded according to their Desire,
the Emperor would have had reason to bewail the Loss of a Man who is very well
fitted for the Management of important Negotiations. He was born at Pisa in
Italy, and is descended of a very considerable Family; but has not yet been
dignified with any other Character than that of Secratary to the English
Embassy; though he is really a secret Envoy from the Emperor, and only assumes
the other Title that he may with more Security negotiate his Master's Affairs.
But if the Peace were concluded, he would certainly be rewarded with a higher
Post.

I am, SIR, Your etc.
Smyrna, October. 1691.
LETTER XXVI.
SIR,
OUR present Confinement puts me in mind of the eager Impatience of a Lover who
sees, but dares not approach his Mistress. For here we must lie in the
Lazaretto, and content our selves with making Court to the Signora Venetia
Bella, without the least hope of enjoying her Beauties, till we have purchased
the Charming Delight at the rate of Forty Days sighing and whining. We are
detained here by an Order from the Tribunal of Health, least we should spread
some Infectious Distemper; and I among the rest am forced to bear this uneasy
Restraint, though I Am at present in as perfect Health as any of these Cautious
Gentlemen. But perhaps you will be more inquisitive to know how we came hither,
than how we spend our Time here; and therefore I shall proceed to give you a
short Account of our Voyage.

I left Smyrna some Days after the writing of my last Letter, not without a
very sensible Affliction at my taking leave of Monsieur and Madam de Hochepied,
from whom I had received so many Favors and Civilities during my abode in
their House.

Our Voyage was disturbed by an almost perpetual Storm, which redoubling its
Fury from Day to Day, made us conclude more than once that we should certainly
be buried in the Waves. Poor Signior Stephano, whom I mentioned in my last,
fell sick two Days after he embarked, and being unable to bear the tempestuous
Working of the Sea, died Eight Days after. The Superstition of our Ship's Crew
furnished us with a very pleasant Scene; for they unanimously concluded him to
be a Sorcerer, because they had seen him draw some Mathematical Figures during
the first two Days of our Voyage, and were absolutely confirmed in that Opinion
by a curious Mechanical Experiment he happened to try in their presence, by
lifting up a very considerable Weight with one Hand, which those thick-skull'd
Animals thought impossible to be performed without the Assistance of Magic.
This ridiculous Conceit made so strong an Impression upon upon 'em, that they
slighted all the Arguments and Asseverations I could use to undeceive 'em, and
not only persist in their Belief of Signior Stephano's Skill in the Diabolioal
Art, but impute all the bad Weather to his Conjurations* The Captain pretends
to be of the same Opinion, though I know not how to reconcile his Complaisance to
the young Widow to the Sentiments he seems to have of her Husband; For he
obliges her to perform her Quarantain on Board his Ship, and resolves to make
her his Wife.

The Storm forced us to stand in to a Canal between two little Islands, called
Millo and Argentiere. The first is Forty Miles in Compass, and the whole
Country is Mountainous, except a pleasant and fertile Plain, six or seven Miles
long, in the midst of which stands the City of Millo, containing about Twenty
narrow Streets. The Inhabitants are generally Greeks; but there are also 3 or
400 Souls of the Latin Church, who have their Bishop and Cathedral. The
Venetians maintain a Podestat in the Island to gather the Tribute; but there is
no Garrison kept in it, though it receives frequent Visits from the Turks; so
that the first Corsair who comes with a numerous Company, is King of the Island
so long as he pleases to reside it it. Yet the Pirates never commit any
disorders in this place, by reason of the Assistance they receive from the
Merchants that live here, who furnish 'em with Commodities to be paid out of
the next Prize that falls into their Hands. There is a French Ordinary in the
Town, where one may find pretty good Entertainment: And I remember I saw a Man
there of so free and open a Disposition, that I should have thought him a
Rarity in that Country, if I had not been told that all these Islanders are
generally of that Humor. He took occasion to Discourse of a Maid who was his
Wife's Daughter, and declared that he would willingly dispose of her to a
Husband. One who was present liked the Proposal, and told him that he would
ease him of the Burden if he pleased to bestow her upon him. With all my Heart,
replied the Father: Then, said the other, I desire to know what you are willing
to give with her. What do you ^ean, replied the old Gentleman, Give with her,
^^oth' a; Why, I wont give her self for nothing. You most take me for a silly
Coxcomb indeed, if you think I Will give you a pretty lively Girl, and hire you
to take her? No, I beg your pardon, it is you must give the Money: And if I can
find none that will take my Daughter on these Terms, I Will even keep her, and
make use of her my self.

The Women are so accustomed to the Converse of the Pirates, that they are
generally very liberal of their Favors, but not quite so frank as their
Neighbors of Argentiere, which is another little Island, about Twenty Miles in
Compass, containing only a little Town and a Village, both inhabited by about
Five hundred Women; for there is not a Man in the Island, except Seven or Eight
Papa's, who perform Divine Service. These Women have no Trade to maintain 'em,
but live purely on the Work of Nature; so that all the Merchants and Corsairs,
who come to the Island, choose a Female-Companion, either fair or brown,
according to every Man's particular Fancy. The Children are left to the
Disposal of the Women; the Girls grow up and work to maintain their Mothers;
but as soon as the Boys are Twelve Years old, they are put on Board the first
Vessel that touches at the Island.

From thence we continued our Voyage to Zant, a considerable Island belonging
to the Venetians. It contains a hundred Miles in Compass, and produces great
Store of delicious Wines, both Muscadin and other Sorts. But since Italy is
sufficiently stocked with these Commodities, the Inhabitants of this Island dry
most of their Grapes, and send 'em to England and Holland. Both the City and
Harbor are commanded by a very fine Castle, where the Proveditore, who is
always chosen out of the Principal Nobility, resides. The Inhabitants are Rich,
and there are several Gentlemen among 'em. This is the first place as you come
from the Archipelago, where you meet with People clothed after the manner of
the Franks; yet many of 'em wear a Turkish Vest above their other Clothes. The
Venetians have built several Churches for the Use of those who profess the
Romish Faith; and do what they can to establish that Religion, in Opposition to
that of the Greeks, which is the Religion of the Natives. The City is long and
narrow; which is all the Account I can give you of it, for those who come from
the Levant are not suffered to go ashore till they have performed their
Quarantain. The Prince of Brunswick, who serves in the Army of the Republic,
passed the whole last Winter in this place; and gained the Love of the
Inhabitants to such a Degree, that there is not a Man of 'em who would not
sacrifice himself for his Sake. I heard a Story of that Prince, which I Am
confident will give you some Diversion. He fell in Love with a very Beautiful
Courtezan, who treated him with an extraordinary Coyness; either because she
had a particular Aversion to him, or (which is the more probable Reason of the
two) because she thought he was very deeply engaged, and intended to make him
pay dear for a Favor which he desired with so much Ardour. But whatever was
the true Cause of her Rigor, the Prince persisted in his unsuccessful
Courtship; but his Patience being at last exhausted, he resolved upon a
Stratagem to satisfy at once both his Love and Revenge: There are in Zant
certain Porters called Cestariols, whose Business is to carry home the
Provisions that are bought by the Citizens at the Market. The irritated Prince
procured a Cestariol's Habit, which disguised him so well that he had no Reason
to fear a Discovery. In that Dress he went to the Courtezan's Waiting-Maid, and
told her, that he was so passionately in Love with her Mistress, that he should
certainly lose his Reason if she would not suffer her self to be touched with a
compassionate Sense of his Sufferings. And to engage the Maid to employ her
Interest in his Favor, he presented her with Ten Sequins, which amount to
about Five and twenty Crowns; and assured her that if by her Assistance he
could procure one Night's Pleasure, he would give her as many Sequins more, and
would besides reward the Signora so liberally, that she should never have
Reason to repent her Condescension to him. The Maid was extremely surpised at
the Cestariol's Bounty: however she forgot not to deliver his Message to her
Mistress, who seemed to receive it very coldly; for she thought such an Action
would make her be looked upon as a common Prostitute. But the Maid, who perhaps
was not so scrupulous, and had so considerable an Interest in the Success of
this Affair, used all the Arguments she could invent, to persuade her Mistress
to a Compliance, and concluded her Exhortations with this wise and prevailing
Remark, That a Cestariol with a full Purse would prove a better Customer than a
Proveditore with an empty one; adding, that the Mistress might expect a very
Noble Acknowledgment from one that had been so liberal to the Maid. These sage
Remonstrances had so good an Effect, that the Cestariol was introduced in the
Evening to the Signora's Chamber, where he quickly stormed the Place that had
so long withstood his Attacks. 'Twou'd be as needless to give you a more
particular Account of his Night's Work, as it would be to represent the
Confusion and Astonisment that seized the Fair One in the Morning, when she saw
her Chamber full of Servants that came to dress her Bedfellow, and found that
the pretended Cestariol was transformed into the Prince of Brunswick. However
she endeavored to set the best Face she could on so cross an Adventure, and
comforted her self with the Expectation of a magnificent Reward. But she could
no longer conceal the Discomposure of her Mind, when instead of a Handful of
Sequins the Prince presented her with Threepence, adding, That if she had
entertained him as a Prince, he would have paid her as a Prince; but since she
had only treated him as a Porter, she must content her self with Porter's Wages.

Departing from Zant, we left Corfou on our Left Hand, and entered the Gulf, at
the Mouth of which we lost our Longboat in a Storm. The Fury of the Tempest
being somewhat abated, we continued our Course with a Side-Wind, and about
Midnight perceived, by the Light of the Moon, a Sail, which passed very near
our Ship without haling us. But she had scarce left us half a Mile when she
tacked about, and bore down upon us with full Sails; and since she was lighter
than our Vessel, she quickly came up with us. Our Captain concluding that she
designed to attack us, commanded every Man to his Post, and put all things in a
Readiness for an Engagement, swearing that he would fire at her, if she came
nearer. Some of the Seamen endeavored to persuade him that a Corsair would
hardly venture to cruize in the Gulf; and that if the Vessel we feared had had
such a Design, she would have either fired at us, or boarded us as she passed
by. But he continued fixed in his Resolution, telling 'em that he placed more
Confidence in his Guns than in their Arguments; and that if the Captain did not
know his own Business, he would endeavor to instruct him. And indeed he kept
his Word, for as soon as could have a full Aim to point his Guns at her Side, he
gave her a Broadside, and tacking about, raked her fore and aft: but it seems
she was better acquainted with the Rules of Good-breeding than we expected, for
she quickly returned our Compliment with the same Ceremonies, and then bore
away. Our Cabin was pierced with a Shot, which was all the Damage we
received, except the breaking of a Barrel of excellent Wine, which I had
provided at Zant for my own Use, during the Quarantain.

Two Days after we made the Height of Ragusa, which is a considerable City
seated on the Seaside; Toward the Sea it is defended by a strong Citadel, and
on the other Side by a high and inaccessible Mountain. Its Figure is almost
round, and its Circuit exceeds not two Miles. The Houses are generally pretty
well built; but there are none that deserve a particular Observation. The
Government is Aristocratical, not much different from that of Venice, only its
Weakness makes it act more cautiously for the Preservation of its Liberty. The
Senate is composed of Gentlemen and a Doge: but this Dignity instead of
continuing for Life, as at Venice, lasts but a Month, after which a New Doge is
Elected with so little Intriguing, that oftentimes a Gentleman walking in the
Public Place, is surpised with the News of his Election. During the time of
his Government he is served and entertained at the Public Charge, after which
he returns home to dress his Garden. Since the Government of the Castle is a
more important Office, and the Ill-management of it might prove more fatal to
the Republic, it lasts not so long as the former: for a New Governor is chosen
every Night, and obliged to remain in the Castle till his Successor come to
relieve him. So that the Nobles reckon this Commission rather a Trouble than an
Honor; and would be as glad to be exempted from it, as a Captain would be
pleased to be excused from mounting the Guard. The Garrison consists of Two
hundred Men, and besides the Burgers are obliged to keep Guard with 'em. The
Gentlemen are exempted from that Trouble, but they must not lie one Night out
of the City without a special Permission. S. Blaise is the Patron of Ragusa, as
S. Mark is of Venice: and is painted on their Banners and Ensigns, and wherever
it is the Custom to place the Arms of the Republic. A Mile from the Town toward
the Mouth of the Gulf, stands the ancient City of Ragusa, which at present is
called Ragusa Vecchio. It Is inhabited by some poor People, and seems rather to
be a Village than a City. The whole Territory of Ragusa extends not Thirty
Miles round the City, and at Sea they are only possessed of the Island of
Augusta. This little Republic makes a great Noise with a certain imaginary
Liberty, of which the Ragusans are extremely fond, though really they are not
Masters of themselves; for they are absolutely commanded by the Venetians, and
must do what whatever they please. The Turk and Emperor content themselves
with a moderate Tribute, without meddling with the Affairs of the Republic; but
if the Payment be delayed, the Ragusans run the the Hazard of paying dear for
their Neglect. And besides they are on several Occasions insulted over by the
French King, and other European Princes; and must tamely suffer the greatest
Abuses, without daring to repine at the Hand which oppresses 'em. I have all
along observed, during the whole Course of my Travels, that one may find
everywhere fresh Instances of the Folly and Weakness of human Nature: and the
very Sight of this Place is sufficient to put a Man in mind of that Reflection.
For it is certain that the Liberty or Independency of the Ragusans, as well as
of several other States, is their greatest Misfortune; and that they would be
infinitely more happy under the Dominion of some potent Master, that could
protect 'em from all the Injuries and Affronts which they are daily obliged to
suffer without the least Hope of Redress. And I Am confident, if you consider,
without Prejudice, the Advantages on both sides, you will conclude with me,
That, notwithstanding their boasted Liberty, a Wise Man would rather choose to
be a Subject of Venice, than to be a Free Citizen of Ragusa. But to return to
my Voyage.

The Wind coming fair, we left Ragusa, and the next Morning we came to an
Anchor in the Harbor of the little City Parenzo in Istria, where we took a
Pilot. For the Republic keeps always a sufficient Number of Pilots in this
place, for the Convenience of Ships that are bound for Venice; which are
obliged to have Recourse to their Assistance, because from thence to the
Lagunes the Passage is extremely hazardous, by reason of the Banks of Sand that
are formed by the Rivers Po and Brent at their Falling into the Sea. These
Banks are so dangerous, and subject to so frequent Alterations, that the most
skilful Pilots, who are acquainted with every Rock and Shoal in the Passage,
are forced to steer perpetually with a Line in their Hand, for fear of some
fatal Blunder, which would certainly be punished with Death. The Difficulty of
the Passage is a very considerable Disadvantage and Obstruction to Trade; but
it may be reckoned the main Security of Venice, which cannot be attacked on
that Side. For though a Fleet of Ships should be conducted to Malamoca by
Venetian Pilots, 'twou'd be impossible for 'em to ride there, by reason of the
stormy Gusts that happen so frequently in that place.

After the charming View of Constantinople from the Sea of Marmora, I never
beheld a finer Prospect than that of Venice. At the Distance of Thirty Miles
you begin to perceive the Spires of the Churches, and the Prospect is still
enlarged the nearer you approach; which gives the ravished Spectatour the Idea
of a Great City springing out of the Water. Nor can you possibly free your self
from this pleasant Delusion of the Fancy till you have entered the Town; for
all the outer Houses of the City are founded on Piles in the midst of the
Water. The Port of Venice is a large Plain covered with Water, in which there
are certain Islands or Rising-Grounds, level with the Water, on the biggest of
which Venice is built. most of the other Islands are also covered with
Buildings, and make particular Towns; the most considerable of which is called
Judeca, or the Jews Quarter. It Is said to contain Forty thousand Souls; the
Houses are fair, and there are large Gardens, whither the Inhabitants go to
divert themselves during the Summer, and are accommodated with all sorts of
Provisions, cool Liquors, and oftentimes with very agreeable Company.

The curious Traveller ought also to take a View of the Island of Mouran, where
the fine Looking-Glasses are made that are so famous over all Europe; besides
several other Curious Works in Glass and Crystal.

These Islands are called Lacunes or Lagunes, both such as are, and such as are
not, inhabited. Two of 'em are set apart for the use of those who come from the
Levant, where they are obliged to perform their Quarantain in certain large
Hospitals, called Lazaretti. The first, called Lazaretto Vecchio, is but a Mile
distant from Venice; but the other, where we are confined, is five Miles from
the City. It Is one continued Building, consisting of two Stories, 300 Paces
long, and divided by High Walls into six Apartments, each of which has a
particular Gate that leads into a Square Court, where there is a Well, but the
Water is so bad, that we never use any but what is brought from Venice. Every
Apartment contains Twenty Chambers, Ten above, and as many below, separated
like Cells, with a Chimney in each. Those who perform their Quarantain are
constantly attended by a Guardian or Keeper, sent for that purpose by the
Tribunal of Health. And we have the Misfortune to be plagued with one who
mortifies us extremely: For he not only denies us the Liberty of conversing
familiarly with those who come to see us, but will not suffer us to approach
within Ten Paces of 'em; and besides, they are obliged to take the Wind of us.
No Person whatsoever, nor even the Doge himself, is exempted from these
troublesome Severities, which are appointed for the Public Security, and for
the Preservation of the City from contagious Distempers. But though we are not
permitted to entertain those who are without the Lazaretto, there are some
things which they are allowed to receive from us, such as Bread, Wine, Vessels,
Tobacco, Money, Wood, and generally every thing that does not consist of
Threads. And yet, which in my Opinion is the most intolerable piece of Nicety
in the World, they will not suffer a Letter to come out of our Hands till it be
opened and smoked: And I was even forced to open Monsieur de Hochepied's
Letters to his Friends in Holland; so that I shall be obliged to deliver 'em
unsealed to the Persons to whom they are directed. When a Man comes to lodge in
one of these Rooms, he finds nothing but Four bare Walls, and must therefore
buy an entire Set of necessary Furniture: But as for Provisions, there are
Barcarioli, who bring whatever you call for, allowing 'em a third part of the
Price for their Pains. Every Man must be his own Cook, a Disadvantage which is
more easily supported here than any where else; for our Time is so great a
Burden to us, that we are glad of any Occupation; and that which in another
Place would be reckoned a Trouble, is esteemed a Recreation here. The Lazaretto
is governed by a Prior, appointed by the Tribunal of Health. His Revenue
amounts to a Thousand Ducats, worth about 3 s. 9 d. a-piece. He is entrusted
with the Keys of the six Apartments, which are kept shut from Sunsetting till
Eight a-Clock in the Morning. The Guardians are under his Command, and are
obliged to give him an Account of every thing. There are 120 of 'em in Office,
who are employed by Turns, according to the Number of Ships that arrive in the
Port. Their Salary, which amounts to half a Ducat A Day, besides their
Entertainment, is not paid by the Republic, but by a Tax laid upon the
Passengers and Goods that are committed to their Care. In the same Lagune there
is a large Enclosure where the Goods are laid in a sort of Stalls or
Market-Houses, supported by Pillars without Walls, and open on all Sides. And
there are Faquini or Porters appointed to remove 'em from time to time, and to
take care that nothing be lost or damaged.

You have doubtless heard of the great Number of Spies that are kept by the
Senate to give notice of every thing that is said or done against the
Government. These Informers are a horrible Plague to those who are under the
Dominion of this Republic, as well natural Venetians as Greeks. For the least
Offense exposes a Man to the Severity of the Inquisition of the State, which is
at least as terrible a Tribunal as that of Rome. Nor is it possible for a Man
to know when he should be upon his Guard; for those who profess the greatest
Friendship and Fidelity, are oftentimes mere Informers. And besides, there are
Spies of all Ranks and Orders; Servants, Merchants, Officers, Citizens, and
Nobles, who disguise themselves with so much Care and Dexterity, that it is
impossible to penetrate into their hidden Designs. The Republic is so cautious
in preventing Discoveries of this Nature, that those who undertake such a
Commission are enjoined to conceal it even from their Wives and Children, under
pain of suffering the most rigorous Penalties. And the Scandal and Odium that
attends their Profession is alone sufficient to oblige 'em to Secrecy, though
they were not kept in awe by the Fear of Punishment. This breeds an universal
Diffidence and Shieness among all sorts of People, and makes 'em extremely
reserved in discovering their Sentiments to one another, especially in the
presence of certain Persons who are more particularly suspected, such as Monks,
and the Guardians of Health in the Lazaretti, who are generally reckoned to be
the Inquisitor's Spies, and I believe not without reason, as you will perceive
by the Relation of an Accident that happened to my self.

As soon as a Vessel enters the Port, the Tribunal of Health sends immediately
a Guardian with a Phanti on board to conduct the Passengers to the Lazaretto,
that no time may be lost; for the Quarantain is not reputed to begin till the
Day after they come ashore. But though this Custom is very exactly observed on
all Occasions, there arose a Dispute in our Ship about some Matters relating to
Trade, that retarded our Landing Four Days, which consequently were not
reckoned in the Forty Days of our Quarantain. This Delay occasioned a general
Discontent among us, and we were the more sensibly afflicted, because we
neither foresaw nor knew how to remedy our Misfortunes. However, the Greeks and
Venetians whom he had take on board at Zant, concealed their Resentments with
all possible Care. But I who was not so well acquainted with the Customs of the
Place, and perhaps am naturally of too free a Humor, could not forbear
complaining of this Injustice that was done us, and was even so far
transported, that I expressed my Impatience and Indignation in very bold and
emphatic Terms. In the mean time I was extremely surpised to perceive an
universal Silence among those who heard me, and was so vexed to find that none
of 'em would join with me, that at last I held my Peace. An Hour after, the
Captain took me aside, and told me that I was ruined: I entreated him to let me
know the reason that made him give me so unwelcom an Admonition: Because,
replied he, you have spoken disadvantageously of the Government before a
Guardian, who is certainly an Informer; adding, that he would not have spoken
so freely for a Hundred thousand Crowns. Then he related five or six Tragical
Stories of Persons that had lost their Lives for less provoking Crimes, and
added so many Arguments to convince me of my Danger, that I began to be afraid
in good earnest, and to complain of his Unkindness in not giving me more timely
warning. He replied, that he never thought of it, and that he could not imagine
me to be ignorant of a thing that was so universally known. The only way I can
suggest to you, added he, to prevent your Ruin, is to be silent for the
future, and to bribe the Guardian with a Present, which perhaps will stop his
Mouth. In pursuance of his Advice, I gave the Guardian two Sequins, and
endeavored to oblige him by all the Marks of Friendship and Kindness during
the two days we remained on Board after that Accident. Yet after all, he
informed against me, at least I had reason to suspect him; for the Prior told
me the other Day, that the Inquisitor had spoken concerning me, and had signified
to him, that there was a very turbulent and impatient Frenchman in his
Lazaretto. This Reprimand abated, instead of increasing, my Fears, for the
Inquisitor wou^d not have spoken to the Prior, if he had intended to punish my
Boldness. However, this Accident shall teach me Circumspection for the future;
and may serve for a Warning to such of your Friends whose Curiosity may incite
'em to visit this Place in their Travels: For Strangers are in a more
particular manner exposed to the Severities of that dreadful Tribunal; and I Am
persuaded that such indiscreet Expressions have oftentimes proved fatal to
Travelers.

I am, SIR, Your, etc.
Lazaretto at Venice, December. 1691.
LETTER XXVII.
SIR,
AT last I have obtained my Liberty, and have bidden a joyful Farewell to that
nasty Lazaretto, where I was forced to do so tedious a Penance for my Sins. And
since I have reason to believe that all my Transgressions are blotted out by so
severe a Mortification, I Am even resolved to venture upon a New Score: There is
not a Town in the World so full of Invitations as this: I see every Day such
charming and enflaming Objects at the Opera, Ridotti, and whither so ever I go,
that a less sensible Heart than mine could not long resist the powerful
Temptation. There is a greater Number of lovely Women here than in any other
Place of Europe, and their Charms are more alluring. Three Divinities seem to
contend which of 'em should contribute most to the Embellishment of a City
where they have fixed the Seats of their several Empires. Venus makes it the
Scene of all the soft Delights of Beauty and Love; Apollo displays the
ravishing Variety of his beloved Harmony; and Momus charms both the Eye and Ear
with splendid Masks and ingenious and witty Comedies. Venice is a Cluster of
enchanted Islands, where Joy and Pleasure have establishd their peaceful Sway,
without the least Disturbance from tumultuary or gloomy Passions. It Is all over
charming; every Object inspires Love, and fills the Mind with a resistless and
surprising Delight. But I must not forget that I write to one who is too
inquisitive to be satisfied with general Hints; and therefore I shall proceed
to give you a particular Account of this admirable City. I intended to have
begun my Letter with the Story of a pleasant Accident that happened to one of
my Friends at our coming out of the Lazaretto, where he performed his
Quarantain with me; but though I am not often guilty of a scrupulous Niceness in
observing the Rules of an exact Method, I Am loath on this Occasion to invert
the Order I intend to follow in the Description of the City; and therefore I
shall defer the Relation of my Friend's Adventure, till I come to speak of the
Venetian Curtezans.

The Observation I made concerning Constantinople and Cairo, may with equal
Justice be applied to Venice, and in the general to all great and populous
Cities; that there are very different Opinions concerning their Extent, and the
Number of their Inhabitants. Nor is this Controversy so easily decided as some
Persons imagine: For when did ever a Traveller undertake to count the Streets
of a great City? Or what more can the most inquisitive Stranger do than to
measure the Dimensions of a Public Place, or of a Temple? Judge then whether
any one can make a certain Computation of the Number of the Houses, or of the
Persons that inhabit 'em. And I may venture to add, that none but a Sovereign
is able to manage such a Design; and that the exactest Calculations that can be
made by Private Persons, are mere uncertain Conjectures, that can never be true
but by a lucky Hit, on which there can be no dependence. The same may be said
of the Bigness of a City, which ought rather to be computed from the Figure,
than from the Extent of its Circumference: And it is so difficult a Task to find
and describe the true Figure of a Town, that the Inhabitants themselves are
ignorant of it. How many different Judgments are made of the comparative
Bigness of London and Paris? Yet every Man thinks his own Opinion true; and the
same Remark may be applied to all other large Cities. I will not undertake then
to determine so intricate a Controversy, but shall content my self with
acquainting you, that Venice, as to its Extent, may, in my Opinion, be compared
to Rome, that the Streets are Narrow, the Ground extremely well Husbanded, and
the Houses full of People to the very Top. It has neither Gates, Walls, nor
Citadel, and yet cannot be justly said to be Weak. It Is esteemed impregnable
by many Authors, and that Opinion is so generally received, that you shall
hardly hear any Man give an Account of Venice without that Encomium at the End
of it. The Venetians themselves tell the Story so often, that at last they
imagine it to be a certain Truth, and would fain persuade others to be of the
same Opinion. But though they allege some Reasons in Confirmation of that
Assertion, they must not expect to make us swallow 'em by an implicit Faith. At
least I can assure you, their Arguments have made no great Impression upon me;
for I could never boast so strong a Faith as to give Credit to an obvious
Absurdity. However, Experience has taught me so much Wisdom, that I shall
hardly venture to own my Opinion in this Case during my abode here. Let 'em
magnify their City beyond all the Forts in the World, and defy the Ambition
of the most potent Sovereigns in Europe; their Arrogance shall never extort one
indiscreet Word from me so long as I remain within the reach of the
Inquisition: But as soon as I can set my Foot beyond the Limits of their
Dominions, I shall even make bold to talk as freely to any Man of the boasted
Strength of their City, as I now intend to write to you.

You may remember I acknowledged that Venice is impregnable on the Side next
the Sea, and gave you an Account of the Reasons which inclined me to be of that
Opinion. But I Am fully persuaded that it is not impossible to attack it with
Success on the other side, unless it be defended by an Army strong enough to
baffle all the Attempts of the Besiegers, in which Case, I must confess, it may
be said to be impregnable; but upon the same Supposition any Town in the World
may plead a Right to that Title: Whereas a Place that may be properly called
impregnable, must be strong enough to endure a Siege two or three Years without
Relief; that is, it must be able to resist any Enemy but Famine, which is a
necessary Consequence of a long and close Siege. I confess there are very few
such Places in the World; yet I have seen one, I mean Malta, and it is probable
there are some other Forts which merit the same Character. As for those Places
that may be subdued by Force, though not without extreme Difficulty, they may and
ought to be called Strong, but cannot justly be said to be Impregnable. Yet the
last of these Epithets is very frequently abused and misapplied; for it is as
usual to honor a Place with that Title, as it is rare to find one that deserves
it.

If this be the true meaning of the controverted Term, and if none but such
Places as these can be properly said to be impregnable, as it is plain they
cannot; I know no reason that should hinder me from excluding Venice out of
that Number. It seems to be no very difficult Undertaking to seize on the Lido
and Malamoca, two inhabited Islands, and by securing those Posts, to intercept
the Communication of the City with the Sea, and to cut off all Relief that
might be expected that way. An Army might also soon take Possession of several
little uninhabited Lagunes about Venice, from whence the City might be easily
battered and bombarded; and God knows what Havoc the Bombs would make in so
compact a City as this. And besides, the Multitude of the Inhabitants would
quickly expose 'em to all the Desolations that are usually caused by Famine. I
confess the Arsenal is so well furnished that all the Burghers might be armed
in Four and twenty Hours; but what use could they make of their Arms in a Town
which in case of a Siege would instantly be turned to a Prison: For there is no
covered Way through which they could sally out upon their Enemies; and though they
could contrive one, the Citizens of Venice would make but a very feeble
resistance. I have so mean an Opinion of their Military accomplishments, that I
dare boldly affirm that Ten thousand well-discipln'd Soldiers would do more
execution than a Hundred thousand of 'em. Was not Paris starved by 30000 Men,
though at the same time it was defended by 150000 Citizens, who might have
sallied out when they pleased? What then would become of Venice in such a Case,
where the besieged must be cooped up in their Houses, and could never make a
Sally to disturb or annoy their Enemies? Perhaps I shall be laughed at for
maintaining that this wonderful Place that dispises and defies the most potent
and triumphant Enemies, might be entered and set on Fire by a sufficient Number
of Men with Torches in their Hands, without the Trouble or Charge of
Bombardment. But I would willingly be informed what could hinder 100000 Men
from making and executing such an Attempt. There are no Walls to stop or retard
their Progress; the City is open in Fourscore several Places, all the Houses
that surround it are pierced with Doors and Shops, and many of 'em are built of
Wood. I confess such an Expedition would require a vast Number of Boats; but
when I speak of 100000 Men, I do not mean that they should all be employed in
the Attempt: The Fifth part of 'em would serve to carry on the Attack; and the
Besiegers might find a sufficient Number of Boats in the adjacent Harbors,
without giving themselves the trouble of making new ones.

My Opinion in this Case is so singular, and so directly opposite to the
Notions that are entertained by the generality of Mankind, that you will
doubtless scruple to give Credit to my single Testimony, especially since the
Arguments I bring to confirm it depend on certain Circumstances with which you
never had occasion to be acquainted. And you will be apt to tell me, that the
Venetians would certainly have taken care to fortify their Capital City, if
its Natural Strength were not incapable of any Artificial Improvements. In
answer to the first part of this Difficulty, I shall only repeat what I have
already told you, that 'twas never my Custom to make my Judgment a Slave to
Authority, or to regulate my own, by the Opinions of others. I Am persuaded that
a blind Submission to Vulgar Notions, is one of the most fertile Sources of
Error, and that there is nothing so variable and uncertain, as the Sentiments
of Men in different Places and Ages.

I confess the other part of the Objection contains a greater and more puzzling
Difficulty. But though the Conduct of the Venetian Senate in this Case seems at
first View to depend upon some secret Reasons of State, the Mystery lies not so
deep but that it may be easily unriddl'd by a moderate Degree of Application.
You know that the Government of Venice is purely Aristocratical, and that the
Revolutions which happen in such Constitutions, are usually occasioned by
suffering one of the Members of the Body in which the Government is lodged, to
overtop the rest: For an Ambitious Person may be easily tempted by so inviting
an Opportunity, to establish the Grandeur of his Family by oppressing his
Fellow-Citizens, and to erect a Monarchy upon the Ruins of the Republic.
History and Experience furnish us with so many Instances of such Revolutions,
and these Examples are so universally known, that 'twou'd be needless either to
cite 'em, or to allege any other Arguments to prove so well-attested a Truth.
Now the Senate of Venice, whose Maxims are, without Controversy, grounded on
the most refined Politics, making a wise use of the Misfortunes of other
States, and being well acquainted with the weak part of their own, have
endeavored to prevent the Inconveniences that might arise from that necessary
Flaw in their Constitution, by the most prudent Laws and Proviso's that ever
were invented; and their Care for the Preservation of the State has been
attended with such excellent Success, that the Republic continues still to
subsist on the same Foundations on which 'twas first established. To give you a
Specimen of the admirable Politics of that wise Body, I shall briefly take
notice of some of those Laws and Customs that are interwoven with the
Constitution of their Government. The Doge is entrusted with so small a Share
in the Management of the State, that he may be justly called a mere Shadow of
Grandeur. There are Inquisitors appointed to have an Eye upon his Actions, who
may call him to an Account when they please. He is not allowed the Liberty of
public and familiar Conversation, nor suffered to appear in the City but on
certain Days of Ceremony. The Nobles are forbidden to entertain any
correspondence with Foreign Princes, or their Ministers. They are not permitted
to wear Arms, to use any Ornaments of Gold or Silver, to keep a numerous Train
of Servants, or to affect any Marks of Grandeur. The Custom of walking in the
Broglio was introduced to prevent the dangerous Consequences of private Cabals.
The Inquisitors of State were established for the Security of the Government;
and it is the same Consideration that moves 'em to entertain above a Thousand
Spies. And to conclude, that illustrious Body in which the Government is
lodged, the celebrated Senate of Venice, which knows so well how to maintain
its Honor on other Occasions, keeps neither Guards about the Place of its
meeting, nor a Garrison in the Town; wisely considering, that if ever an
Insurrection should happen, those Mercenary Soldiers, however appointed for the
Defense and Preservation of the State, would be made the Instruments of its
Ruin.

I will not trouble you with a particular Account of all the Laws and
Regulations that were instituted for the same end, and are still observed in
this place. But from what has been said on this Subject, you may easily
perceive that those prudent Senators make it their principal Care to prevent
Intestine Disorders, and to render the Nobles incapable of invading the Public
Liberty.

Now if the Senate should order a Citadel or Fort to be built at Venice, they
might with Justice be accused of contriving the Instruments of their own Ruin,
and of undermining that Noble Fabric, which they have taken so great Care to
secure. But they are too wise to be guilty of so fatal a Blunder; and it is
better to be in some measure exposed to the Insults of Foreign Invaders, than
to lie at the Mercy of Domestic Enemies. Besides they have no Reason to be
afraid of their Neighbors; for it is the Interest of all the Princes and States
of Italy, to preserve the Republic, that it may continue to be the Bulwark of
Christendom on that side, and to counter-balance the Power of the House of
Austria. And as for the Turks, they are at too great a Distance to undertake an
Expedition against the City.

Thus you see that there are several weighty Considerations that deter the
Senate from fortifying their Capital City: and there are no less pressing
Reasons that oblige 'em to encourage the Vulgar Opinion of its pretended
Impregnability.

If I should send you a particular Description of this City, I could only
entertain you with a Repetition of what you have read perhaps in a hundred
Authors. And therefore I shall content my self with communicating some of my
Remarks to you, in a loose and familiar manner.

Some pretend that Venice is built on seventy two Islands or Lagunes, which are
separated by such narrow Channels that they seem to form one little Continent:
and there are others who reject this Opinion. I will not undertake to decide
the Controversy, but only tell you what I have seen, and leave the whole
Matter to your Judgment. It Is certain that Venice is founded on a Spot of
Ground that rises at least to the Surface of the Water; for the Earth appears
in the Streets, Keys, public Places, and Houses. It Is true they are forced to
make use of Piles, because the Ground is not firm enough to support the Weight
of a large Palace without sinking: but that ought not to make us doubt the
Truth of a thing that is confirmed by the Testimony of our own Eyes; for the
same way of Building is generally used in all Moorish or Fenny Places, and
particularly in Holland. It Is no less certain that this Spot of Ground is at
present a Mass of Islands, so that it remains only to consider whether the
Canals that separate these little Islands be Natural or Artificial. This
Question is not easily to be determined, for one may allege very plausible
Arguments either for the Affirmative or Negative part. It Is probable the
Venetians might dig these Channels, for the more convenient Carriage of Goods,
which by this means are brought to their Doors, and for the Embellishment of
the City, which is the only Town in the World that can boast of such a
Situation. But there are so many, and so considerable Reasons, which favor the
contrary Opinion, that I Am almost entirely convinced of the Truth of it. In the
first place, It Is plain that the Venetians have taken all possible Care to
husband the Ground on which the City is founded. The Streets are so narrow,
that in most of 'em three Men cannot walk abreast, and in some, one Man can
hardly pass by another. And the Foundations of the Houses on one side are laid
in the Water, without any Key or Passage betwixt 'em and the Canals. We cannot
then suppose, with the least Shadow of Probability, that the Prospect of any
Convenience could oblige 'em to waste so considerable a quantity of that Ground
which they manage so thriftily, that the City is everywhere full of Boundaries,
to restrain the Proprietors of the Houses from breaking in upon the Streets.
And besides, what Reason can there be alleged for their leaving so many large
Spots of Ground entire; for though you are informed that a Man may go in a Boat
to any House in the City, you must not take these Words in a strict and literal
Sense, but only as a figurative Expression, to signify that there are a great
Number of such Houses in Venice. I can assure you that there is not a Canal
within five hundred Paces round of the House where I lodge; and that there are
twenty such Places in the City. I shall only add that the Canals are crooked,
and generally unequal both in Length and Breadth; which, in my Opinion, may
serve to convince any considering Person, that they are not Artificial.

All the Streets in the City, without Exception, are narrow and crooked; but to
make amends for these Disadvantages, they are so clean that one may walk a Year
in 'em without meeting with any Dirt: and besides they are paved with large
square Stones, which always after a Shower grow as white as Marble. In several
parts of the City there are little empty places called Campi or Fields; which
were probably left for the Convenience of intrenching, if an Enemy should enter
the Town; for they are not at all Ornamental. The only considerable Place or
Field in Venice, is that of S. Mark, which certainly claims all our Admiration.
It Is two hundred and fifty Paces long, and eighty broad. The Church of S. Mark
faces one of the Ends of it, and that of S. Geminian the other. It Is bordered
on each side with those stately Piles of Building called the Old and New
Pro^^^aties, which make it, without Controversy, the most Magnificent Place in
the World. The Front of each Procuraty is supported by a large Portico, ten
Paces broad; and all along there are double Piazza's, one of which entering
into the Building serves for Shops, which are let by the Signiory to those who
sell Perfumes, Limonade, and Coffee. The Procurators of S. Mark lodge in these
Palaces, which for that Reason are called the Procuraties: but when any Foreign
Prince comes to take a View of 'em, or on some other Occasions of Public
Rejoicing, the Partitions are taken down, so that one may walk from one End to
the other, and all the several Apartments are united into one spacious House.
That on the Right Hand, as you go to S. Mark's Church, is called the New, and
that on the Left the Old Procuraty. The first has two principal Fronts, one of
which looks into the Place of S. Mark, and the other into the Broglio,
over against the Palace of St. Mark, which is an Ancient and Magnificent
Structure, where all the Councils meet; such as the Grand Council, the Council
of the Finances called the Ceca, the Marine Council, etc. The Ceca is a
distinct Apartment in the Palace of S. Mark; and though it is built after the same
Manner, and with the same Stones, the large Grates and double Doors of Iron,
with which it is enclosed, make it resemble a Prison rather than a Palace: And
besides the Smoke that arises from the Furnaces has so penetrated the
Stone-Walls, that they are black even within the Chambers. Here the Money is
coined, and the Public Treasure kept in great Iron Chests, secured with three
Locks, the Keys of which are committed to the Custody of three Procurators,
who, under Pain of Death, dare not make the least Attempt to open 'em till they
are all met together. The Council sits twice a Week, which are the only Days
for all sorts of Payments.

The little Arsenal of the Nobles, whose Arms are always kept ready charged, is
in the same Palace of S. Mark; and the Doge's Apartment is in the Right-Wing,
from whence there is a Passage to the Church, whither he goes sometimes
incognito to hear Mass; but usually he performs his Devotions at a private
Chapel in his own Apartment.

S. Mark's Church is a large Structure, square on the Outside, covered with
four Leaden Domes, of which the largest is in the Middle, without any Spires or
Steeples. The Top is surrounded with Stone Balisters for the Convenience of
walking. You enter the Church through a Portico composed of five Arches, the
highest of which is in the Middle. There you may take a View of those Large and
Stately Gates of Brass, which the Venetians brought from Santa Sophia at
Constantinople, when they robbed that City of so many valuable Curiosities to
enrich their own. Among the rest, I cannot forbear taking Notice of the four
Brazen Horses that are placed upon the same Portico. It Is Pity they are not
more carefully preserved; for they are so finely shaped, that Nature her self
could not mend those Artificial Animals. It Is true, they have endeavored to
piece 'em, but all their Care and Skill will never be able to restore 'em to
their primitive Beauty.

The Figure of the Church within resembles a Cross, the Quire representing the
upper part. It Is vaulted throughout, and enriched with very fine Mosaic-Work,
like that of Santa Sophia, but not near so lasting: for it decays so fast, that
they are forced to keep some Workmen on purpose to repair it; whereas the other
remains entire notwithstanding its great Antiquity. And besides there is
another Difference betwixt the Mosaic-Work at Venice, and that at Santa Sophia;
for the latter is smooth and plain, whereas the former is full of Figures.
These are the only Pieces of this Nature I have had occasion to see in my
Travels, except one at Scio. The Floor of the Church is adorned with another
sort of Mosaic no less precious than the former, consisting of several small
Pieces of Porphyrie, Jasper, and Serpentine or speckl'd Marble, not unlike to
the Tables and Cabinets of Ebony, that are inlaid with Shells and Naker.

The Arms of all the Doges that have hitherto governed the Republic are placed
round the Walls. They are generally magnificent, and even some of 'em are of
Silver curiously wrought. The only Fault I can find in this Church is its
Obscurity, which hides the greatest part of its Beauties: For in all other
respects it is enriched with the finest Ornaments, such as Altars, Pictures, and
Vessels of Gold and Silver. 'Twou'd be needless to present you with a Catalogue
of the rare Curiosities that are to be seen either in the Church or Treasury,
since you will find 'em all particularly described in a Treatise written by
Monsieur de S. Didier.

It Is Pity the Venetians should have lost the Body of their good Patron, S.
Mark, and that their Loss should be attended with this mortifying Circumstance,
that they know neither the Time nor Occasion of it. It Is true the common People
believe that he retired into a Pillar, which they showed me, and that he thrust
his Hand out of that Column when he gave the Ring to the Doge; but most of 'em
scruple not to confess that they know not where he is, nor whither he went.

They made me also take Notice of a Stone, which they pretend is the same that
yielded Water to the Israelites, when they were tormented with Thirst in the
Wilderness. If this be true, we must allow that Rock a Power to multiply its
Kind; for it is still to be seen in the Deserts of Arabia, between Sues and Tor,
as I have heard several credible Persons affirm, as well Christians, as Turks
and Moors, who assure me that it stands by it self in the midst of a Sandy
Desert; and that one may both easily perceive the Holes that gave a Passage to
the Water, and discern the very Track or Print that was made by the Stream.

The next place in Venice that claims a particular Observation, is the Arsenal,
which is certainly the best furnished Magazine in the World. For though it
contains no less than two Miles in Compass, it is filled and even crowded with
Cannons, Bombs, Grenades, Muskets, Sabres, Gunpowder, Ropes, Sails, Anchors,
etc. To give you an Estimate of the prodigious Quantity of Ammunition that is
hoarded up in this Place, 'twill be sufficient to tell you, that in case of
Necessity, it is sufficient to arm and equip fifteen Galleys, four Galeasses, as
many Ships, and a hundred thousand Men. The Arsenal is governed by three
Nobles, and under them by the Pilot of the Republic, whom they call the
Admiral, who is entrusted with the Care and Inspection both of the Stores, and
of two or three hundred Men, that are constantly kept at Work. He never goes to
Sea but once a Year, to steer the Bucentaur on Ascension-Day, when the Duke
accompanied by all the Nobles, performs the Ceremony of Wedding the Sea. They
set so high a Value upon this Vessel, that the Pilot is obliged under Pain of
Death to bring it back in Safety; which makes him so cautious in observing the
Weather, that when he perceives any Clouds, or the least Appearance of a Wind
on the Day appointed for the Solemnity, he procures it to be delayed till the
next Sunday.

It Is the Opinion of one, That Venice contains Four hundred Palaces, fit to
receive and entertain a King. This is certainly a very bold Assertion; and yet
I dare not positively contradict it: for the Palaces are so Numerous and
Magnificent, that I may venture, without a Hyperbole, to affirm that they are
sufficient to adorn Ten Cities. On the great Canal alone there are at least Two
hundred, which seem to out-rival one another, whether you consider the Boldness
of the Design, or the Fineness of the Structure; and confound the amazed
Spectatour with so vast a Medley of different Beauties, that he knows not which
to prefer, or where to point at the Principal Object of his Admiration. If your
Curiosity should lead you out of the City, to take a View of the neighboring
Continent, especially toward Padua, you would be tempted to fancy your self
among the Habitations of the Gods; for every Palace resembles a Magnificent
Temple, adorned with all the most exquisite Beauties of Architecture. It must
be acknowledged that the Italians, and particularly the Venetians, are the best
Architects in the World; and that the finest Houses in France are not
comparable to these Palaces on the Outside.

I shall take this Occasion to give you a general Idea of their Manner of
Building. The Height of the Edifice is exactly proportioned to its Bigness,
according to the nicest Rules of Architecture. The Houses are covered with fine
Platforms, where a Man may enjoy the Pleasure of walking without going out of
his own House; and when he grows weary may either sit down on the Benches, or
rest on the Balisters that surround the Platform. The Fronts of the Houses are
adorned with Portico's, Columns, Balconies at the Windows, Frizes, Festoons,
Niches, and Statues. These Ornaments are accompanied with Courts, Anti-Courts,
delicious Gardens, Fountains, Grotto's, and all the other Embellishments that a
luxurious Fancy can contrive. I can assure you that this is a true and faithful
Representation of these glorious Edifices; and I leave you to judge whether
they may not justly be called Palaces, and whether any thing could give a
higher Idea of the Grandeur of the Venetian Nobles. The main Reason, in my
Opinion, that makes 'em employ so great a part of their Treasure in Building,
is because they are not permitted to display their Magnificence any other way.
For since they are not suffered to consume their Money in splendid Equipages,
and rich Habits, it is plain they must either build, or find some other way to
bestow their superfluous Cash. And, it is probably the same Restraint that
tempts 'em to throw away such vast quantities of Money on Courtezans and at
Play. You would hardly believe me, if I should tell you what prodigious Sums
are consumed every Year at Bassette, especially during the Carnaval; when the
Ridotti or Gaming-Houses are open. None are admitted into these Houses without
Masks; that all sorts of People may enjoy an equal Liberty, and that there may
be no Occasion for Disputes, nor any Marks of Distinction in a place where
every one is welcome for his Money, and where there is always a confused Medley
of Noblemen, Citizens, Ladies, and Courtezans: Yet this Order is not observed
with the utmost Rigor; for one that has a false Nose, or counterfeit Whiskers
is held to be sufficiently Masked. The Nobles keep the Bank, and relieve one
another by turns from Morning till Night. They bear good or bad Fortune without
discovering the least Alteration either in their Countenance or Humor: and
seem as little concerned when they lose a Thousand Sequins by one Card, as when
they gain One by another. I have had Occasion two or three times to see the
Bank broke, but could never perceive the least Sign of Disturbance in the
unfortunate Gamester. And which is no less surprising, I have seen other
Noblemen continue to play with the Loser, upon his bare Word, to the Value of
Ten thousand Ducats, which were always punctually paid next Morning. It Is true,
the Loss does not fall wholly upon one Person, for there are sometimes a
Hundred of 'em joined together; and this is perhaps the main Reason that makes
'em bear their Misfortunes so patiently. Besides the Bank is seldom a Loser at
the last; and the Ridotti are sometimes so full of Money, that they know not
where to keep it. All the Cash is entrusted to the Care of some Nobleman, who
is usually one of the poorer Sort; and yet it is never observed that he retains
so much as one Penny.

You may expect, in my next, an Answer to your Questions concerning the
Nobility.

I am, SIR, Your etc
Venice, Jan. 1692.
LETTER XXVIII.
SIR,
I Remember I told you, that the Order of Malta might be divided into four
Classes; and I shall begin this Letter with applying the same Observation to
the Noblemen of Venice: for though all who bear that Name are united into one
Body, their Families are not equally Illustrious. The first Classis or Rank,
consists of those Families who founded the Republic, and were Noble before that
time. The second comprehends those who were elected before the Shutting up of
the Council, which was called, Il Serrar del Consiglio. The third contains
those who obtained that Honor as a Recompense for some eminent Services done
to the State; and are therefore called Gentlemen by Merit. And the fourth is
made up of Nobili per Soldi, or Gentlemen by Purchase, who bought the Title.
But notwithstanding so considerable a Difference in their Pedigrees, they have
all an equal Right to give their Voices, and enjoy the same Privileges: All,
from the Highest to the Lowest, go to the Great Council, and are honored with
the Title of Excellency. And even it happens not unfrequently that the most
Illustrious Members of that Body are not most respected: for oftentimes a
Gentleman of three Days standing is advanced to the Dignity of a Procurator,
while the Ancient Families, and those that gave a Being to the Republic, are in
a miserable Condition. Here, as well as every where else, it is the Custom to
worship the Rising Sun, and to court those who seem to be the Darlings of
Fortune: The Richest are always esteemed the Greatest Lords, and stand fairest
for Preferment. However since all Elections are decided by Plurality of Voices
in the Grand Council, the poorer Sort of Gentlemen are treated with more
Complaisance than they could expect, if they had not a Right to Vote on such
Occasions; since it may sometimes be in their Power to dispose of the
Procuratorship, and even of the Ducal Coronet. This puts me in mind of a Story,
which perhaps will divert you; you must take it on the Credit of its Authors.
There was, say the Venetians, a certain poor Gentleman, who had Occasion to
take a Journey into the Country: Before his Departure he went to a Great Lord,
who was his Neighbor, and entreated him to lend him a Cloak; but had the
Mortification to receive a flat Denial, and was forced to have Recourse to
another. Not long after the Doge di'd, and the rich Nobleman had so great an
Interest in the Council, that when they proceeded to Balloting, he wanted but
one Voice to be chosen. In the mean time the poor Gentleman happened to come
in, and was immediately accosted by his wealthy Neighbor, who, with all
imaginable Submission and Respect, begged his Voice; and assured him, that he
would always look upon him as the Author of his Fortune. But the Gentleman
remembering his late Incivility, replied in an angry and disdainful manner, No,
my Lord, you must even resolve to go without a Coronet, as you made me go
without a Cloak. The Consideration of the frequent Occasions they have to make
use of the Assistance of the rest of their Body, makes 'em treat one another
with a great deal of Civility, if I may be allowed to use so weak an Expression
to signify the Compliments and Ceremonious Niceties of their Salutations,
which are so extravagant, that in any other Country they would be esteemed
Ridiculous. It Is pleasant to observe how they court one another when they meet
on the Broglio: I have often seen Noblemen who stood Candidates for the highest
Preferments, prostrate themselves before a poor Gentleman whose Vest was not
worth a Groat, as if he had been a King, or somewhat more than Humane. The
Venetian Salutations are quite different from Ours; they perform 'em slowly, to
express the Modesty and Humility of their Respect, and bowing their Heads to
their very Knees, continue sometimes for the Space of a Minute in that Posture,
offering their Service in the most submissive Expressions; after which they
raise their Bodies, and immediately begin again, repeating the same Ceremony
two or three times. And they are so nicely scrupulous in such Cases, that if
any Nobleman should venture to shorten his Reverences, or to imitate the French
Air in the least, he would be reckoned a base Man, who had lost all Sense of
Honor.

When a Stranger comes to serve in the Venetian Army, he must immediately learn
their Fashions, as the only way to avoid their Hatred, and to raise his own
Fortune; though it must be acknowledged these fawning Ceremonies are extremely
troublesome and uneasy. I had occasion the other Day to see the Entry of a
Procurator, and took notice of some Colonels and other Officers who marched
before the Senate to the Church, where they stopped within the Door, and saluted
every Nobleman as he passed by, with a Reverence, such as I described before;
so that for a large Quarter of an Hour they were perpetually employed in that
troublesome Task. But besides those profound Reverences, there are a Thousand
other Niceties, and nauseous Flatteries, which are the necessary Consequences
of their Excessive Civility. You must weigh every Expression you use either in
Letters or Discourse; for it is not enough to avoid the Word Voi or You, which
would be reckoned a Downright Affront, and to use always the Third Person Lei,
or Ella, but you must take care to repeat the most submissive Phrases, such as
If it please my Patron, If my Patron vouchsafe to command me, etc. You must
still say, My Patron said or did such a thing; and whatever Epithet you bestow
upon him, you must never forget to add issimo to the End of it; for 'twou'd be
reckoned a poor Compliment to call a Man Nobile, Docto, or Galanto, instead of
which you must say he is Nobilissimo, Doctissimo, and Galantissimo. The same,
or rather greater Ceremonies, are observed in Writing; I remember I have seen
some Letters from the Captain Generals Cornaro and Mocenigo to a Greek
Merchant, in which they gave him the Title of Molto Illustre Signor. Four
Fingers breadth lower the Letter began thus, Ho ricevuto de vostra Signoria
molto Illustre, etc. and the rest was all of a Piece: At the End of the Letter
were these Words, de vostra Signoria molto illustre, devotissimo Servitore;
then a Space of Six Fingers breadth, and the Subscription at the Bottom. I was
extremely surpised at the Extravagancy of these Compliments, when I considered
the Quality of the Writers, and of him to whom the Letters were directed; and I
leave you to judge what Ceremonies must be observed between Equals. A Letter to
a Nobleman must be directed thus, Al' Illustrissimo and Excellentissimo Signor,
and mio Padrone Colendissimo, il Signor, etc. and the Body of the Letter must
be suitable to the flattering Superscription. You must take care to give every
Man the Titles that are appropriated to Persons of his Rank and Quality: Thus
when you speak to a Tradesman, you must call him Signor Pietro, or Signor
Paolo; to a Citizen or Merchant you must say Vostra Signoria, and, in Letters,
Vostra Signoria molto Illustre. A Counselor, Physician, Notary, or a Gentleman
who is a Subject is styled la Signoria Illustrissima; The proper Title of the
Nobles is l' Excellenza; and the Doge is usually called la Serenita, or il
Serenissimo; for they rarely say il Dogio. But when they say il Principe, they
always mean the Republic. Thus all Orders and Proclamations begin thus, Il
Serenissimo Principe fa sapere; The most Serene Prince declares, or gives
Notice: And it is usually said in familiar Discourse, Il Principe ha prohibito le
Pomp; The Prince has prohibited the wearing of Costly Apparel, etc. Thus they
speak when they do not so much as think of the Doge, who has no more Power to
make such Regulations, than the meanest Officer that belongs to the Republic;
and far from being a Sovereign, he is so much a Subject, that he dares hardly
move one Inch without Orders. Francis Morosini, the present Doge, was elected
to that Dignity in April 1688, while he was obtaining Victories for the
Republic abroad. And yet as told and infirmas he is, he was forced to continue
in that fatiguing Employment, and at last, with much ado, and after a whole
Year spent in humble and earnest Solicitations, he obtained leave to quit the
Service, and returned to Venice last Year. He is the first Doge that ever
entered the City with the Ducal Coronet on his Head: Nor could the Senate
refuse to grant some unusual Mark of Honor to the Conqueror of all Morea.
However, I Am strongly inclined to suspect that the main Consideration which
made him so uneasy till he had obtained a Permission to leave the Army, was
his Fear of losing the Glory he had acquired. And you will be of the same
Opinion if you consider the ill Success of his Attempt upon Negropont; and the
slow Progress he made in the Siege of Napoli di Malvasia, which held out two
Years against him, and was still in so good a Condition at his Departure, that
there was little or no hope of reducing it; though for want of Provisions the
Garrison was obliged to surrender the Place to the General during the last
Campaign.

The length of this Siege puts me in mind of Candy, which for so long a time
was attacked and defended with equal Obstinacy and Vigor. 'Twas the same
Morosini who commanded in the Place, and the Senate being unwilling to waste so
much Blood and Treasure in the Defense of a Place which, after all, they could
not hope to preserve, sent him positive Orders to Capitulate. But he was so
desirous of Glory, and had so mean an Opinion of the Turkish Valor, that he
assured the Senate, if they would continue to supply him with necessary
Provisions, he would either save the Place, or bury himself under its Ruins.
Yet, for all his bravery, he was forced to submit to the Chance of War, without
performing either part of his Promise: And at his return to Venice he had the
mortification to meet with a very bad Reception on the Broglio. Some of the
Nobles were so incensed against him, that they discovered their Spite by
abusing him to his Face, asking by way of Derision, Ha! is not this Morosini;
while others replied with equal Bitterness and Contempt, No, no, that cannot be
the Man who promised to bury himself under the Ruins of Candy, if he should
find himself unable to preserve it. But the Malice of his Enemies did not
evaporate in Jests, they were not satisfied with so poor a Revenge, but
prosecuted him so warmly, that his Head was in a tottering Condition. One of
'em represented his Crime to the Council, and in a vehement and pathetic
Discourse, accused him of abusing the Senate, by promising such things as he
could not perform, and of engaging the Republic in a prodigious Charge, which
might have been better employed another way. Nor was this the single Opinion of
one Person, for several others voted him guilty: Yet his good Fortune delivered
him from so great a Danger, and has now set the Coronet on his Head; he is
somewhat lean, and of a middle Stature; his Hair and Beard are white; he wears
Whiskers, and a little Tuft of Hair upon his Chin. I saw him at the Entry of
his Kinsman the Procurator Morosini; and since I have occasion again to speak
of that Solemnity, which I only mentioned before, I shall now give you a
particular Account of it: But before I describe the Order of the Cavalcade, it
will not be improper to acquaint you with the Preparations that were made in
the Church of S. Mark.

From the Door of the Nave or Body of the Church to that of the Quire, there
was a Lane bordered with Rows of Benches, through which the Doge and Procurators
were to pass; and both the Floor and Benches were covered with Turkish
Tapestry. The Quire was also full of Benches, without any Difference or Mark of
Distinction; only the Doge's Place was covered with red Velvet; and besides,
there was a Cushion of the same Velvet at his Feet, and another on the Place
where he leaned at Prayer. The Altar was embellished with the richest Jewels,
Relics, Candlesticks, and other Ornaments; and the Patiarch's great Vicar
waited in his Seat for the Doge's coming. He wore a Chasuble embroidered with
Pearls, worth above 6000 Ducats; and the Hangings of the Altar were no less
rich.

The Church being thus prepared, the Signiory or Noblemen began their Cavalcade
from the Hall of the Great Council in S. Mark's Palace, where they were
assembled to assist at the Solemnity. In the first place marched the Doge's
Servants, to the Number of Forty, in long Livery Cloaks. Then came the
Societies of Tradesmen, or rather a confused Company of private Persons who
came of their own accord to honor the new Procurator; for their Presence was
not required by any positive Order. These were followed by a Hundred Sclavonian
Soldiers, armed only with Sabres, who had obtained leave to come from the Army,
and appeared on this Occasion at the desire of their Commanders. Twelve or
Fifteen Officers marched before 'em, among whom was a Sergeant Major; and there
were some also in the Rear. These Officers were not armed, because they came
voluntarily, not by command; for at Venice every Man is welcome on such
Occasions, though he be not invited. Then came the Eight Standards of the
Republic, Two Red, Two White, Two Blue, and Two of a Violet-colour; the Red
being carried first, to signify the present War. These were immediately
followed by the Signiory, who marched Two and Two, in open-sleev'd Gowns, or
Robes of Red Cloth furred with Ermines. There were at least Three hundred
Nobles, comprehending the Senators and the Procurators, who formed the last
Ranks, and consequently were next the Doge. He that made his Entry walked among
the rest, without any Mark of Distinction either in his Habit, or any other
Respect; so that if some Persons had not showed him to to me, I could not have
distinguished him from the rest of the Procurators. The Robes or Gowns of all
the Procurators are exactly alike; nor is there any difference among the Nobles
in respect of their Habits; that so none may pretend to Superiority over
another. After them came the Doge, who represents the Sovereign: He had a Vest
of Red Brocado, with Gold Flowers, and over that a Duc^^ Mantle, of a very rich
Stuff of Gold. His Coronet is a Cap of Pastboard neatly covered with the same
rich Stuff, and adorned with some Galoons, without either Pearls or Precious
Stones. There is a sort of Point on the hinder part of the Cap, that bends a
little forwards. The magnificent Coronet that is kept in the Treasury, is only
used on the Day of the Doge's Coronation. He was accompanied on the Right Hand
by the Pope's Nuncio, and on the Left by the French Ambassador, Monsieur de la
Hay. The first was in a Camail and Rochet, and the other in a black Cloak. Two
Citizens bore the Doge's Train, which otherwise would have trail'd above four
Feet on the Ground. Last of all marched Fifty or Sixty Nobles, in the same
Order as before. As the Noblemen passed by, there were certain old and young
Women that strewn the Way with Flowers and Green Leaves, especially before the
Doge: In the mean time the Guns at the Arsenal were fired, and the Company was
entertained with the Noise of the Prince's Trumpets and Kettle-Drums, which
were placed on the Top of the Portico of the Church, between the two Brazen
Horses, from whence they might be easily heard, because it is not Three hundred
Paces from thence to the Hall of the Great Council. As soon as the Doge
entered, he went immediately to perform his Devotions upon the Steps of the
Altar, where he kneeled without a Cushion. As he returned to his Place, the
Nuncio happened to be on his Left Hand, and the Ambassador on his Right, but
they instantly changed Places, and proceeded as before to the Place where the
Doge was to sit. After the Doge had seated himself, the Nuncio sat down on his
Right Hand, and Monsieur de la Hay took his Place on the Right Hand of the
Nuncio; so that the Nuncio sat between the Doge and the Ambassador. This
preposterous Order will perhaps surprise you; for according to the Ceremonies
that are observed on such Occasions, the Doge ought to have sat in the Middle:
But I had forgot to tell you, that there was no particular Place appointed for
the Doge, neither a Tribune, Pew, nor so much as an armed Chair; so that he was
forced to make use of the Seat that belongs to the Dean of the Canons, which is
the first on the Right Hand next the Door of the Quire. The rest of the Seats
in the same Row were filled by the Procurators and Senators; so that the Doge
had only the first Place among the Senators, without any other Mark of
Distinction than the red Velvet with which his Seat was covered.

The Doge's Behavior during the Mass was not very edifying, for he spent the
whole time in discoursing with the Nuncio and the French Ambassador, and
expressed a great deal of Earnestness by his Actions. Though I could not pretend
to divine the Subject of his Discourse, I could easily perceive that he talked
of some important Affair; for Monsieur de la Hay rose from his Place, and
talked with him above a quarter of an Hour, choosing rather to stand while the
Nuncio sat, and to turn his Back to the Altar, than to lose the Opportunity of
imparting something with which, in all probability, he longed to entertain him.
After the Mass was ended, the Doge and Nobles returned in the same Order as
before, to the Palace of S. Mark, where they were regaled by the New Procurator
with a splendid Collation of Wax, for so it might be properly called, since
most of the Dishes contained nothing else. The whole Table was covered with
Trophies, Confections, Turky-Cocks, Partridges, and Fruits represented in Wax,
excepting two or three Places where there were Dishes of good and delicious
Victuals: For the Italian Cooks are at least as skilful as ours. I never saw
People eat more heartily than these Gentlemen, and I Am apt to believe that
their Custom of serving up the Dishes singly might sharpen their Appetite; for
it is certain that the very sight of a full Table cloys the Stomach. Yet I could
not forbear telling one of the Company, that this manner of Entertainment, and
especially the Feast of Trophies was very odd and ridiculous: But the Person to
whom I addressed my self, made a shift to answer my Objection by pretending that
they observed this Method to avoid the trouble of covering so large a Table
several times, which could not be done without Confusion.

That and the two following Days were spent in rejoicing; The Streets were full
of People in Masquerade, and the Merchants exposed their richest Commodities.
There was nothing to be seen in the Shops but Brocado's of Gold and Silver,
Galoons, Fringes, and Ribbons; Sonnets in Honor of the Procurator were
scattered about by Thousands, and Prints of him every where hung out. At Night
there were great Illuminations at his Palace, and at that of S. Mark; and the
whole City in the general seemed to be full of Joy; though it is certain the Pomp
would have been much greater if the Magistrates, to whom the Regulation of such
Ceremonies does properly belong, had not published an Order three Days before,
to moderate the Expense of the Solemnity: For otherwise the whole City would
have been illuminated, the Ladies would have adorned themselves with Pearls and
Jewels, all the Lacqueys would have appeared in Liveries, and the Canal would
have been covered with magnificent Gondola's, embellished with Flaggs and
Streamers, and filled with Consorts of Music. Besides the Procurator's Friends
would have signalized their Joy in a particular manner, by Feasts,
Illuminations, and Fireworks: But all this Pageantry was prevented by a
positive Order from the abovementioned Tribunal. At the same time, another
Edict was published, which concerns all Persons in general, and is only a
Repetition of those Regulations that were formerly made on such Occasions. By
this last Order all Venetians, whether Nobles or Citizens, are prohibited to
wear any sort of Stuff, embroidered Fringe or Galoon, of Gold, Silver, Steel,
or any thing that shines or casts a Luster. The same Edict forbids Lace, new
Fashions of Clothes, Liveries, and the Painting or Adorning of Gondola's; and
restrains the Women from using Gold or Silver Ribbons, and from wearing above
three Rows of Fringes or Lace on their Pettycoats, and even those Ornaments
must only be worn on the Forepart of the Pettycoat. But those who are called
Novices are allowed, during the two first Years of their Noviciate, to wear a
String of Pearls, and a Gold Fringe about their Pettycoats. The Novices are
such as are newly married.

All Strangers are excused from complying with this Order for six Months after
the Day of their Arrival; but as soon as that time is expired, they must submit
to the Custom as well as the Natives, unless they belong to the Retinue of an
Ambassador; though Offenses of this Nature are rarely punished.

When I consider the extreme Eagerness with which the Noble Venetians contend
for the Ducal Dignity, I cannot forbear reflecting on the Weakness of Humane
Nature, which exposes us to the most fatal Delusions, and prompts us to court
the dazzling Appearances of Grandeur, though we are convinced of the Vanity of
that Enjoyment in which we seem to place our Happiness. For, in my Opinion, the
Condition of a simple Senator is infinitely more happy than that of the Doge.
He is permitted to enjoy the Pleasure of Walking, to visit his Friends, and to
go to the Opera and Ridotti. He is not perpetually watched, and haunted Night
and Day by a Multitude of Spies, under the Name of Counselors; nor is he
obliged to give an exact Account of his Actions. But the Doge is a gaudy Slave
loaded with Fetters, which are not the less heavy because they are gilded: And
his Authority extends no farther, than to nominate some Officers of the Palace,
and to create some Knights of S. Mark.

This Order of Knighthood may be divided into three Classes or Ranks. The First
comprehends the Knights of the Golden Star, who are all Noble Veneians, that
owe their Dignity to their Merit, and wear a Star bordered with a Gold Galoon.
The Second Rank consists of the Knights of S. Mark, who are called Knights of
the Senate: And this Honor is usually conferred as a Recompense, on Colonels,
and even sometimes on Captains, who have signalized their Bravery in an
extraordinary manner, or rendered some important Services to the Republic. The
Captain General recommends the Person to the Senate, who, if the Balloting run
in his Favor, receives the Order, and with it a Pension of at least a Thousand
Ducats a Year. These Knights wear a Medal at one of their Button-holes, with
the Figure of S. Mark on one Side, and a Device on the Reverse, according to
the Pleasure of the Senate. They are honored with the Title of Illustrissimo,
and are much respected: but the Dignity is indifferently bestowed upon all,
whether Noble or Ignoble, Venetians or Foreigners. The Third and last Rank is
made up of the Doge's Knights, who confers the Honor on whom he pleases, and
oftentimes on those who never wore a Sword; for any Man may purchase the Title
of Illustrissimo at the Rate of a Hundred Sequins, which, if I am not mistaken,
is the usual Price of this Dignity. Yet notwithstanding the Lowness of the
Rate, the Doge finds but few Customers; for the Italians are not overfond of so
unprofitable Honor. So that this Classis of Knights consists chiefly of
Foreign Officers, who receive some Benefit by the Title; since it not only
procures 'em a more than ordinary Respect, but confirms 'em in the Possession
of their Employments.

Since the mentioning of these Officers puts me in mind of the Venetian Army, I
shall take this Occasion to give you some Account of the Forces that are
maintained by the Republic. The total Number of the Soldiers both at Land and
Sea, hardly amounts to Four and twenty thousand; and of these there are usually
Twelve or Fifteen thousand in the Field. The Captain General, who commands 'em,
is always a Noble Venetian, and has under him a General of the Landforces,
Lieutenant-Generals, and Sergeant-Majors, who are almost alalways Foreigners;
for the Noble Venetians are not very ambitious of Military Employments. It Is
true, they cannot be accused of Want of Courage; but since a Soldier must serve
his Apprenticeship with his Musket on his Shoulder, before he can attain to
any Perfection in his Art, they cannot endure to think of stooping so low: and
even there is hardly one of 'em that would not think it beneath him to accept a
Captain's Commission. The Soldiers are for the most part Foreigners, as well as
the Generals; for, except three or four small Italian Regiments, which are not
much esteemed, the rest of the Army consists either of Germans, or Frenchmen,
whom they call Tramontani. The Pay of Foreigners is double to that which is
allowed to the Italians; and no Captain must receive a Soldier of another
Nation into his Company, under Pain of being cashiered without Remission. But
the same Order is not observed in the Italian Regiments, for any Man may be
admitted to serve in 'em. And since the Foreign Captains would be at a Loss for
want of Men, the Republic takes care to supply 'em with Recruits: Only they
must be very cautious in preventing the Desertion of their Men; for when a
Company is extremely diminished, the Captain is always reformed, and the
Soldiers serve to recruit the rest of the Regiment. I know several Officers,
who lost their Places by Misfortunes of this Nature; which sometimes cannot be
avoided, especially among the French, who desert by Hundreds at a time. If it
were not for this only Inconveniency, I should have a very good Opinion of the
Venetian Service; for a Foreign Captain has no less than a Hundred Ducats a
Month, which makes Two hundred and fifty French Livres; a Lieutenant has
Thirty, and an Ensign Twenty five. Besides there is not a Place in the World
where a Soldier has a nearer Prospect of Advancement; for since the Army is not
very Numerous, and the Noble Venetians never pretend to Military Preferments, a
Stranger has a fair Opportunity of raising his Fortune: So that a Captain must
either be extremely unfortunate, or negligent in the Performance of his Duty,
if his Service be not rewarded with a Colonel's Commission, or even with more
considerable Preferment. The Army is full of Sergeant-Majors, who owe their
Fortune merely to their Merit; and there is no Post so high which a brave Man
may not in time hope to obtain. It Is a wonderful Encouragement to a Young
Aspirer, to see daily so many Examples that flatter and excite his Ambition.
Besides their traveling by Sea frees 'em from the Charge of providing an
Equipage; which is a great Advantage to those who are not over-stock'd with
Money. Add to these Conveniences the free and unconstrained Way of living
a-la-mode de Venice; and it must be acknowledged, that a Man may easily choose a
less comfortable Employment. I know the World has generally so bad an Opinion
of the Venetian Service, that it is usually the last Refuge of those who are
reduced to Extremity: Nor am I ignorant that the Officers are not here on the
same Foot as in France, and that the meanest Scoundrels find Admittance; but,
after all, the Service is not really less advantageous for these
Inconveniences.

But, as for the Common Soldiers, their Condition is so miserable, that I would
rather choose to serve a Tinker, than to carry a Musket at Venice. Their Pay
amounts to no more than Three Pence a Day; and besides they must furnish their
own Clothes. Judge then what Provision they can make for their Bellies, and
whether their Desertion can be reckoned a Fault. Those who serve at Sea have
the same Pay, and Clothes into the Bargain; but they must buy their Provisions,
for they are allowed only Bread and Water. There are Eleven Ships belonging to
the Republic, commanded by the Captain General; for there is no Admiral. But
besides the little Care that is taken to keep 'em in Repair, they are so
defective in all Respects, that they hardly deserve the Name of Ships, much
less of Men of War. In every Ship there is a Noble Venetian, with the Title of
Commander, who pehaps never saw a Mast before his coming on Board: but he has
under him a Captain, whom he consults, or rather suffers to command. These
Captains (who are usually old and expert Pilots) have Thirty Ducats a Month
besides their Entertainment; and may in time be advanced to the Command of a
Merchant-Ship, if the Owners think fit to trust 'em. The Banner of Venice is
Red, with a Lion in the Middle, holding an open Book in one of his Paws, with
these Words, Pax tibi, Marce, Evangelista meus. Many take this Lion for the
Arms of Venice, but they are extremely mistaken; for the Republic has no Coat
of Arms, and would be loath to adorn a Scutcheon with that Sacred Beast, whom
they honor as an Emblem of S. Mark, or rather that Evangelist himself
represented under the Figure of a Lion. I knew that Painters usually give that
Saint a Lion for his Companion; but I could not believe that the Venetian Lion
was the Saint himself, till I was convinced by the repeated Affirmations of
several credible Persons, and even of some Noblemen; who, to satisfy my
Scruples, told me the following Story.

S. Mark was a Youth of such exquisite Beauty, that his only Sister fell so
desperately in Love with him, that notwithstanding all his Holy Admonitions,
she haunted him Night and Day, followed him whithersoever he went, and
continually begged him to satisfy her Passion. At last the young Saint
perceiving that all his Severity could not extinguish her Criminal Flame,
besought God to transform him into the most hideous Creature in the World. His
Prayer was granted, and he was instantly turned to a Lion, whose gaping Mouth,
and horrid Roaring, so terrified his Sister, that immediately she fell upon her
Knees, prayed to God to forgive her, and was converted. The Open Book he holds
in his Talons, represents the Gospel, of which they pretend to have the
Original in the Treasury; and the Words that are written in it are the same
with which Christ saluted him when he came to visit him in Prison.

Perhaps you will think that this Story deserves a place in Ovid's Metamorphoses;
but I can assure you the Venetians are obliged to believe it, under Pain of
being accounted Heretics. Sometimes they represent him with, and sometimes
without Wings, but they seldom or never forget to draw Rays about his Head; and
very often the Doge is painted kneeling before him. At least he is thus
represented in all the most remarkable Places, such as the Front of the Palace
of S. Mark, etc.

I Am sensible I have already detained you too long, but I must not finish my
Letter before I have finished the Account I promised to give you of the
Venetian Nobles. I had formed so strange an Idea from the Character I had
received of 'em, that I looked upon 'em as the most Haughty and Ill-natured Men
in the World. And even a Famous Author has the Confidence to affirm that one of
their usual Recreations is to affront Strangers who seem to be Persons of Note;
thrusting 'em into the Canal as they walk along the Streets, spitting upon 'em
at the Opera, beating 'em with flaming Torches, and hiring Bravo's to murder
'em. Yet to do Justice to that Illustrious Body, I can assure you, that I never
met with more civil and obliging Persons in the World. I have the Honor to
know two or three of 'em, and perceive daily so many conspicuous Marks of good
Nature in all their Actions, that I cannot, without Indignation, reflect on the
Impudence of those who have so unjustly blackened their Character. It Is true,
they take Care to maintain the Honor of their Birth, and their Authority over
the Citizens and the rest of their Subjects: but they are so far from insulting
or tyrannizing over 'em, that they are always ready to grant their Protection
to honest Men; and as for Strangers, there is not a City in the World where
they meet with a kinder and more civil Entertainment. They may do what they
please, for no Man either enquires into, or comments upon their Actions; and
when they meet with a Nobleman, they are treated with all imaginable Marks of
Honor and Civility. There are several Coffee-Houses under the Procuraties,
some of which are set apart for the Nobility; and that Order is so strictly
observed that a Citizen never enters into 'em. But if a Foreigner, who has the
Appearance of a Gentleman, go in to one of these Places, all the Nobles that
are there begin immediately to caress him; and there is not one of 'em who
would not willingly embrace the Offer of his Acquaintance, provided he belongs
not to the Retinue of an Ambassador: for they are severely prohibited by the
Laws of the State to entertain any correspondence with such Persons.

As for the Bravo's, I will not pretend to affirm that Venice was never plagued
with those barbarous and inhuman Murderers. It must be acknowledged that the
Senate tolerated these Abuses too long: There was a time when some Nobles kept
Fifteen or Twenty o^ those Ruffians; and there were others who were still ready
to serve any Man in their Way, that is, for so many Sequins would agree to kill
a Man, or to break his Arms for such a Number of Ducats. But the Face of
Affairs is wonderfully changed since that time, and so vast a Number of those
Villains have ended their Lives either on a Gibbet, or in the Galleys, that the
Race of 'em seems to be quite extinct. The Shirts of Mail that were sold in
those Days for Fifty Pistoles a-piece, are now sold for half a Crown to
Fishermen, who use 'em for catching Oysters: For these Cautions, that were once
thought so necessary for preventing secret Assassinations, are now become so
useless, that one may walk as secure through the City by Night as by Day, and
during the Carnaval as in Lent: At least I have not yet heard of any Disord^rs
since my Arrival. On the contrary, I should never desire to converse with a
more harmless and peaceable People; and if there are any Insolences committed,
I should rather accuse the French as the Authors of 'em, who in this, as well
as in all other Places, assume those Liberties by which they affect to
distinguish themselves from other Nations. Only I would not advise any Man to
hunt too boldly in a Nobleman's Enclosure; for it is certain that there is none
of 'em so Complaisant as to see his Wife kissed, without resenting the Affront,
and that notwithstanding the seeming Extirpation of the Bravo's, the injured
Nobleman would quickly find a sufficient Number of 'em to execute his Revenge.
Their Jealousy is accompanied with so implacable a Fury, that they would
rather ruin themselves and their whole Family, than suffer a bold Intruder
into their secret Delights to escape unpunished; and after they had sacrificed
the Lover to their Rage, they would infallibly complete their Revenge by the
Death of her who betrayed 'em. Such Accidents have sometimes happened, and it is
to be observed, that in such Cases the Senate never enquires into the Murder.
For every Nobleman may poison his Wife for Adultery, and cause her Gallant to
be poniarded, without fearing to be called in question for so bloody a Revenge;
since it is supposed that no Man would have recourse to such violent Methods, if
he were not fully convinced of his Wife's Infidelity. I confess this way of
satisfying their Revenge seems at first View to be extremely base and unworthy
of a Man of Honor: But you will be the less surpised at their manner of
Proceeding in these Cases, if you consider that, notwithstanding their
Nobility, it is not their Profession to bear Arms. For they are as much Men of
the Gown as the Presidents of the Parliament at Paris; and are therefore under
a sort of Obligation to abstain from Duels. Nevertheless since it is not just
that they should tamely suffer themselves to be Cuckolded, they must execute
their Vengeance by Proxy, since their Profession restrains em from making their
own Hands the Instruments of their Revenge.

I shall in the next place give you a short Account of their Habit: They wear a
black Gown exactly like that of a Minime Friar; only it is longer, wider, and
open before; the Sleeves are so big that they hang down almost to the Ground,
and they have a little Collar or Neckband like that which is used by the
Jesuits. In the Winter their Gowns are lined with a greyish Fur, which reaches
a hands-breadth beyond the Cloth, all along the Breast, and are tied about with
a Leathern-Girdle, adorned with Silver Buckles and Bosses. In Summer they use
neither Girdles nor Furrs; for they wear their Vests loose by reason of the
Heat, and line 'em with very thin Taffata: But they still wear Cloth Gowns of
the same bigness as in Winter. On their Shoulders they wear a sort of Bag or
Hood of the same Cloth, called the Stole, 18 or 20 Inches broad, and twice as
long, which is extremely troublesome. Under their Gowns they have only a little
Doublet, almost quite covered with black Lace, and adorned with Ribbans at the
turning up of the Sleeves. Their Shirts are always very white and fine. Their
Breeches are open and very wide, like those that were used by Citizens in
France Fifty Years ago; and they are also full of Lace and Ribbans. This Garb
is both stately and cheap; for a Gown lasts at least three or four Years. The
only Fault I find in their Habit is that they use neither Bands nor Cravates.
Formerly they were obliged to wear their own Hair, but now they use the finest
and longest Periwigs, which is certainly one of the most necessary parts of
their Dress: for their Caps are so ill-contriv'd, that there can be nothing
more proper to disfigure a Man's Face, which perhaps is the reason why at
present they only wear 'em in their Hands like a Fan.

These Nobles, notwithstanding the Dignity of their Character, scruple not to
go to the Market, and buy all the little Provisions that are required for the
maintaining of a Family. But I believe they are injured by those who pretend
that they carry home their Provisions in the Sleeves of their Gowns; for there
are Porters or Cestarioli, who have no other Occupation, and whose Hire is so
small, that even the meanest Tradesmen make use of 'em. Nor must you imagine
that the Principal and Rich Nobles buy their own Provisions; for the Markets
are only frequented by the poorer sort of Gentlemen, of whom there is a
considerable Number, and whose Condition is the more deplorable, because they
must not endeavor to improve it by Trading.

I know not what Apology to make for the excessive Length of my Letter, unless
you will be satisfied with that common Excuse for all sorts of Faults, that I
did not intend it. I confess that will not make amends for the trouble I have
given you, but I hope you will for once admit a Plea that can never be more
justly urged than in Cases of this Nature; for it oftentimes happens, that when
a Man comes to the End of the Leaf where he designed to have ended his Letter,
he finds himself obliged to begin another, and perhaps two or three before he
can finish his Matter.

I am, SIR, Your, etc.
Venice, 1692.
LETTER XXIX.
SIR,
I Have seen the famous Ceremony of Ascension-Day, and was so transported with
Pleasure at the Sight of that celebrated Solemnity, that I was strongly
tempted, and almost fully resolved to send you a Description of it. But upon
second and cooler Thoughts, I considered that I could add nothing to what so
many Authors have already said on that Subject, and therefore I shall only tell
you, that the prodigious Quantity of Gondola's that covered the whole Surface
of the Sea from Venice to the Mouth of the Lido, made me almost give Credit to
the usual Computation of the Venetians, who affirm, that there are Five and
twenty Thousand Gondola's in the City. The Number of those little Vessels might
be more easily calculated than that of the Inhabitants; because every Gondolier
is obliged to pay a certain Tax to the State. The Dexterity of these Boatmen is
surprising, and even almost incredible; for though they seem to fly as swift as a
Bird, and though the Canals are both narrow, and in several Places cross one
another, they never run foul of those whom they meet. To avoid the Disorders
that happen on such Occasions, they make a Noise at each Corner of the Canal to
give Warning to those that are within the reach of their Voice, who answer in a
Dialect consisting of Words that are only known to themselves, such as Preci,
Prami, and Sia, which they understand so well, that immediately they turn their
Gondola's, and pass by without touching one another. These Gondola's, which are
all made after the same Fashion, from that which belongs to the first
Procurator to those that are commonly hired, are a sort of flat-bottom'd,
narrow, and very long Boats. In the middle there is a little Chamber covered
with course black Serge, with an Opening before instead of a Door; and on each
Side there is a Window that may be shut with Curtains, or sometimes with a
Piece of the same Serge which hangs at the Top of the Gondola, and is usually
turned up in fair Weather. The Price of a Gondola ready made amounts to five
and twenty Ducats; but in those that belong to some of the principal Noblemen,
there are Grates that sometimes cost above a Hundred Crowns; and besides, the
Windows may be adorned with Glasses like those that are used on Coaches; which
is all the Embellishment that is allowed by the Republic. The meanest
Gondolier earns half a Ducat a Day; and there are some who will not serve under
a Crown: So that considering that every Gondola requires four Men, it will be
found at the End of the Reckoning that one of these Boats consumes as much
Money as the keeping of a Coach and Six Horses.

The Ceremony of the Bucentaur, according to the usual Custom, was succeeded by
a very magnificent Feast, that lasted Fifteen Days. This may be reckoned a
second Carnaval, and does really exceed the first. It Is true, there are no
Opera's nor Comedies, but that Defect is more than supplied by the enlivening
Beauty of the Season, and by one of the finest and richest Fairs in Europe,
which is kept in the Place of S. Mark, and in the Broglio, where the Shops are
ranked with such a harmonious Proportion and Uniformity, that one would think
it were a City purposely built for Pleasure. The Street of the Goldsmiths, and
that of the Mercers are extremely magnificent; for the Shops are full of the
richest Commodities, and every Morning and Evening one may have the Pleasure to
see the best Company in Town, and especially the Ladies, who come to oblige the
longing Spectators with a View of their Charms, and to make Strangers confess
that they are better furnished with the noblest Ornament of their Sex than all
the most celebrated Beauties in other Countries. And I cannot forbear adding
upon this Occasion, that the Liberty I observed in this Place seems to be
altogether inconsistent with the Slavery which these fair ones are said to
suffer. It Is certain that the Ladies in this Place are more closely confined
than in France; but their Restraint is not so severe as we commonly imagine.
It Is true, 'twou'd be thought indecent for a Woman to walk, or to entertain a
private Discourse with those of our Sex; nor is it usual for Ladies to make
Matches for Gaming. But to make amends for these Niceties, they are permitted
to see Opera's and Plays, to go to the Ridotti, the Fresco, and Fairs, and to
walk about the Streets in Masquerade, either alone or in Company. I leave you
to judge whether their Confinement be so rigorous as it is usually represented,
and whether they have reason to complain of the Severity of their Husbands. For
my part, I Am apt to think that there are few Men in France or Holland that
would willingly allow their Wives the Liberty to go abroad without any other
Company than one or two Maids, and after they have run Masqu'd about the
Streets all Day long, to pop into a public Gaming-House, where there are more
Courtesans than any other Company. This is the usual Recreation of the Venetian
Ladies, which they daily use without exposing themselves to their Husband's
Anger, or the Censure of their Neighbors; though in such Frolicks they meet with
many a fair Opportunity of indulging themselves in more criminal Diversions;
for they are perpetually surrounded with Temptations, and it is impossible for a
Lady to ramble about a whole Day without hearing Twenty Compliments of that
Nature. It Is the Custom of the Place, and the particular Privilege both of the
Carnaval and Fair, that any Man may demand the last Favor of a Woman whom he
finds alone in a Vizor-Mask; for that Circumstance alone gives her the
Denomination of Signora Mascara, and she is reckoned as lawful Prize as if she
were clothed in the obscenest and most extravagant Garb. You may freely accost
any Woman that wears this Badge, without putting off your Hat, or using any
other Ceremony whatsoever; but if they return no Answer to your second or third
Question, you may leave off your Courtship, and conclude that they will not be
debauched. Nevertheless it is highly dangerous to use the same Freedom with a
Lady that walks without a Mask; for in such Cases we are only allowed the
Privilege of Gazing and Wishing, and all other Liberties are so rigorously
prohibited, that the highest Affront that can be offered to a Woman, is to
salute her; for none but Curtezans will permit that Freedom.

These Masquerades are not only very diverting, but extremely commodious for
several sorts of People. How many Persons are there who would be confined to
their Houses by the Gravity of their Character, if such a Disguise did not give
'em an Opportunity of sharing in the publi^ Diversions. How many Princes,
Dukes, Procurators, and other Persons of high Quality, take the Advantage of so
savourable an Occasion to shake off that Load of Grandeur with which they are
continually oppressed; and breaking loose from their gaudy Prisons, ramble
about Incognito among the Crowd, and find more Pleasure in personating a
Citizen or Tradesman, than ever they could enjoy in their Palaces. For a Mask
has this admirable Quality, that it can in a Moment transform a Prince into a
Porter; and one of the greatest Advantages of such a surprising Metamorphosis
is, that every Man may resume his own Figure when he pleases. If we may believe
the Venetians, a certain Great Prince, who is known over all the World,
scrupled not to act a part in these agreeable Frolicks.

The whole Carnaval, and the Festival after Ascension-Day is spent in
Masquerading, and all that while there seems to be a New Republic formed in the
midst of the other. There is an universal Change in the Habits, Customs, and
Laws. All Marks of Distinction and Superiority are forgotten, or at least
neglected; All Persons are, or seem to be equal: Respect, Constraint, Ceremony,
Care, and Business, are banished from Society, and are succeeded by Joy,
Liberty, and an agreeable Sort of Folly. Under this Disguise many pleasant
Intrigues are carried on; and Strangers are obliged to that Concealer of
Blushes for many a happy Moment. I know one that was accosted by a Lady, who
carried him to a little House; where, having opened the Door with a Key that
she had in her Pocket, she put him in Possession of a thousand charming
Beauties; yet all his Arguments and Entreaties could not procure him a sight of
her Face; for her Mask was tied on with a Silver Chain fastened with a little
Padlock. But the strangest Mascara that ever I had occasion to see, or perhaps
that ever appeared in Venice, was a Woman who came to the Fair, covered from
Head to Foot with a sort of long Gown or Shroud. She had no Clothes under it,
not so much as a Smock, and from time to time she opened her Gown, and obliged
the Company with a full View of her Wares. Thus she walked three or four times
about the Fair, and was doubtless very narrowly and attententively viewed by
the Spectators. This Frollick was thought to be occasioned by a Wager.

During the Fair, the whole Place of S. Mark, and part of the Broglio, is
covered with Shops: The other part is full of Juglers, Tumblers,
Puppet-Players, Bears, and Mountebanks, who are dancing frequented by all sorts
of People, from the Nobleman to the Gondelier. But the greatest Crowd is about
certain Female-Astrologers, who are mounted on little Stages or Scaffolds,
covered with Lace and Ribbons like Puppets; their Faces painted white and red,
and surrounded with a great Number of Books, full of Figures and Characters,
though they understand no more of 'em than to distinguish the White from the
Black. There are also some Men who follow the same Trade; but they are not so
much followed as the Women, whose triple Top-knots draw the Multitude after
'em. They sit upon a Chair, from whence, as^from a Tripos, they blow good
Fortune to their Customers through a Tin Trunk eight or ten Foot long, the
Querist putting the other End to his Ear. The Price of a Consultation is no
more than Five-pence; and for so small a Sum you may have the Promise of as
much Honor and Riches as you please. These Wenches, who sometimes are not
ugly, observe an admirable Gravity in pronouncing their Responses; but they are
not so starched in private, and may be easily prevailed with to lay aside their
affected Severity. One of my Friends, who is a Germain Officer, happened
the other Day to try the Experiment; and since the Story is not unpleasant, I
shall make bold to entertain you with it. As we were taking our Diversion in
the Fair, we took particular Notice of one of those She-Astrologers, who was
one of the prettyest and gravest of the whole Tribe. She was surrounded with a
Crowd of People of all Ages and Ranks, who approached one after another to the
End of her Trunk to learn their Fate, and to hear the Oraculous Sentences which
she pronounced with an incredible Majesty and Authority. My Friend took his
Turn among the rest, and after she had acquainted him with his Fortune, told
her that he was desirous to consult her about some private Affair, and
therefore entreated her to turn the other End of the Trunk, that he might
communicate his Secret to her without disclosing it to the Company. But instead
of proposing some Questions to her about his Fortune, he told her through her
Trunk, that he came not to desire the Assistance of her pretended Art, which
served only to amuse the Vulgar; that 'twas in her Power to grant him a more
solid Favor; and that his Business was to enquire where and when he might
spend a Night with her. As Soon as she had heard his Proposal, she turned the
Trunk and replied, that he ought not to be surpised at her way of Living, by
imposing upon the Credulity of the People, since the only Occupation of the
greatest part of Mankind consisted in cheating one another, every one in his
own Way, and according to the Nature of his Employment; and that for her part
she thought five or six Crowns a day but a moderate Recompense for the Pains
she took in deceiving those that were willing to be deceived; adding however
that she was glad she had found a Man of Sense, that knew the Infirmities of
Humane Nature, and would laugh with her at the Follies of Mankind, and
concluded with giving him an Assignation at an Inn, where she promised to meet
him that Evening. Her agreeable Humor furnished us with Matter of Discourse
for above an Hour; but this was the End of the Adventure, for the Officer did
not think fit to drive the Jest further.

Though the Summer is scarce begun, the Heat is already so violent, that every
one endeavors to make it less insupportable by the Thinness and Lightness of
his Clothes. Now I speak of Habits, I wish you could see that which is used by
the Girls that visit the Fair every Day to look out for a Customer. For every
Mother that is willing to be rid of her Daughter, carries her thither every Day
as to a Market, with all the alluring Ornaments of an advantageous Dress. They
have large and very fine Top-knots; their Neck and Breasts are bare; and their
Habit consists chiefly of a little Cloak or Mantle of white Muslin, adorned
with red Ribbons, a single Petticoat of the same Cloth, a neat Pair of Shoes
and Silk-Stockins, exactly fitted to their Legs. There is nothing more proper
to inspire Love than the sight of those young Creatures, who for the most part
are charming Beauties; nor is a Man forced to purchase his Happiness at the
Rate of a tedious Courtship; for as soon as he feels Nature begin to work, he
may immediately address himself to the Mother, who is always ready to make the
Bargain. But though it will not cost you a Sigh to gain your Mistress's Heart,
you must pay dear for the Enjoymnent of her Person: for you cannot purchase a
handsome Maiden-Girl under 150 Crowns in hand, and as much every Year for
Entertainment. For 200 you may have the Choice of the Market, where you may
find some that look like little Angels. Nor are you obliged to buy a Pig in a
Poke; for you may view and handle her as much as you will, and examine your
Commodity both with your Eyes and Hands before you agree upon the Price. As for
the Maidenhead, if the Mother promise to warrant it, you may depend upon her
word: for these Matrons are too conscientious to impose second-hand Goods upon
a Customer; and besides they dare not venture upon a Cheat which they believe
may be so easily discovered. For it is as impossible to root this Opinion out of
the Minds of the Italians, as of the Oriental Nations; and whether it be true
or false, it is attended with this advantageous Consequence, that it makes the
young Women very careful of preserving their Treasure, since they believe it
impossible to conceal the Loss of it; at least it has this Effect on those who
intend to marry. But they who pretend only to be kept are not so nice, for though
they take care to preserve their Maidenhead, they never scruple to allow a Man
all the Liberties that can be used without deflowring 'em. I know a Woman that
has three Daughters; the two Eldest are public

Courtezans, but the Third, who is very pretty, is still A Maid.
una Putta, una Vergine, though she has lain perhaps with a Hundred Men. Yet she
is really a Maid, and would not sell her Maidenhead a Farthing under Two
hundred Crowns. I cannot leave this Subject without taking Notice of the
extravagant Opinion of the Italians, concerning one of the Properties of a
Beautiful Woman. Instead of little, hard, and well-separated Breasts, they love
to have 'em large and fleshy; so that when they put their Hand into the Bosom
of a Maid whom they intend to purchase, if she be not so well provided as they
commonly desire, she is forced to make some pretty Excuse, or to tell 'em
laughing, That she has lent her Bubbies to her little Sister, or has played 'em
away at Bassette. And even when a Frenchman meets with such Girls, and tells
'em that he is no Admirer of fleshy Breasts, they usually answer, Ay, Sir, you
are pleased to say so; but if they were larger you would like 'em better.

You will be apt to look upon this Way of buying Girls as very odd and
extravagant; but I Am confident you will be no less surpised at the Relation of
an Adventure that happened to one of my Friends, who is a French Officer lately
returned from the Venetian Army. I remember I promised you the Story, and I Am
resolved to keep my Word, though I must run the Hazard of giving you an ill
Opinion of my Friend's Chastity.

During our Confinement in the Lazaretto, we had no other Recreation, but what
we found in conversing with the Prior, who is a very accomplished Person: You
may easily divine the usual Subject of our Discourse. We hardly talked of any
thing but the Venetian Ladies, of whose Beauty and Gracefulness he gave us so
lively a Description, that his feeling Expressions made a very strong
Impression on the Officer's Mind. Then he proceeded to tell us, that we might
easily satisfy our Inclinations to Love in this great City, without exposing
our selves to the Censures of a Critical and Ill-natured World. In short, my
Friend was so charmed with his agreeable Conversation, and so well pleased with
the Hope he gave him, that he could not forbear protesting and repeating his
Protestations more than once, that he would not leave the City without tasting
the Dear Delight. His Guardian, who never left him, and had often heard us talk
on that Subject, concluded that he had met with a Man fit for his Purpose, that
is, one who would spare no Cost to indulge his Inclination to Pleasure.
Resolving then to make the best Advantage of so promising an Opportunity, he
took occasion to talk with him in private two days before our Departure, and
told him with a great deal of Confidence, that perceiving him to be a great
Admirer of handsome Women; and knowing that he would probably meet with some in
that great City whither he was going, he thought himself obliged to admonish
him of the dangerous consequences that frequently attended the Rashness of an
unexperienced Adventurer upon an unknown Coast; since those who seem to be very
sound and beautiful, are oftentimes mere lewd and rotten Strumpets. But, added
he, if you will trust my Honesty, and lodge at my House, which is both very
neat and civil, I have an only Daughter, who has as much Beauty as any Lady in
Venice; her I Will bestow upon you, and warrant her as sound and clean as a
Pearl, as I hope in the most holy Madona. Then the Officer asked him whether
she was a Maid, and he very ingenuously acknowledged that she was not, and that
she was kept by a Venetian Nobleman, who allowed her a 200 Crowns.
hundred Sequins a Year: but, continued he, though she has hitherto observed an
inviolable Fidelity to her Keeper, I have so strong an Inclination to make you
my Friend, that I Am resolved to give her to you, and I Am confident you will be
satisfied with her Person when you see her. My Friend considering that at
Venice a Man that loves to keep himself clean and neat, must not take a Lodging
at a Public House of Entertainment, and not knowing where to find a convenient
Lodging, accepted his Guardian's Offer, and went to his House, where he took a
very neat Room, and agreed both for Diet and Lodging at a very reasonable Rate.
The next Morning his Landlord carried him to his Daughter, who had a very
magnificent Apartment, consisting of three fine Chambers on a Floor, adorned
with large Looking-Glasses, Cupboard and Scrutores of China, with two Maids in
a very handsome Garb to attend her. My Friend was doubtless extremely well
satisfied with every thing he saw, and especially with the lovely Donna, who
was one of the most charming Beauties in the World: But his Satisfaction lasted
not long, for when he came to talk of the Price, she asked four times as much
as he was able or willing to give her; so that after two hours Wrangling, he
was forced to leave her without concluding the Bargain. Yet he continues still
to lodge at her Father's House, who professes as much Friendship to him as
ever. He told me that he observed one Piece of Furniture in the Young Lady's
Chamber that was very suitable to one of her Profession. 'Twas a very large
Couch covered with a Quilt of black Satin, and directly over it there hung at
the Cieling one of those Fans which I had occasion to mention in one of my
former Letters. She confessed that this was her Lover's Contrivance, to
qualify the extreme Heat of the Weather, which is never more insupportable
than when one is already sufficiently heated with the eager Recreations of
Love. And she assured him that the all Nobles have such Fans in their Houses.

Of all the Customs that are peculiar to the Italians, I know none that seems
odder and more incommodious than that of lying stark-naked in their Beds, which
is generally observed by Men, Women, Boys, and Girls; and notwithstanding the
Indecency of such a Custom, the most bashful Virgin never scruples to strip her
self to a state of pure Nature on her Wedding Night, and to become an Eve to
her new Adam. It Is true, most Persons of Quality lie as we do, though there are
several even of that Rank, who follow the common Fashion.

The Curtezans enjoy here no less Liberty than at Rome, and are divided into
two distinct Orders. The first consists of such as are kept by particular
Persons, such as the Guardian's Daughter; and these are so far from being
imputed infamous or contemptible, that they are envied by their Companions, and
are esteemed (as they say themselves) if not Done Honorate, at least Done de
proposito. And besides, they have this Advantage, that they can easily find a
Husband after they have gained Seven or Eight hundred Ducats; for most
Tradesmen are extremely fond of such considerable Fortunes. The other sort of
Curtezans are such as prostitute themselves to all Comers, and expose their
Bodies indifferently to all sorts of Persons. And even these, though they must
for ever despair of retrieving their Honor by Matrimony, disown the Name of
Putane, and call themselves Done d'amore.

But notwithstanding the extraordinary Kindness and Beauty of the Women, the
Venetians are generally so brutish, that they would rather choose a Boy, though as
ugly as an Ape, than the most Amiable Girl in the World. This is the
predominant Vice of the Nation, with which they are so miserably intoxicated,
that they spare no Pains or Cost to satisfy their beastly Passions: And even
some of 'em are such Prodigies of Infamy, and have so entirely lost all sense
of Humanity, that they turn S^ccubus's to Porters and Gondoliers, whom they
hire to act that Filthiness upon their polluted Bodies. All their Conversations
are larded with those detestable Impurities; and as in France it is the usual
Custom of young Persons to divert themselves with talking of their Intrigues
with a lovely Mistress, their Discourses in this Place run perpetually on their
Masculine Amors. Nor are the Turks, themselves more addicted to this unnatural
Abomination than the Italians seem to be. The Monks, especially, are infamous
for Sodomy as well as Whoredom; and perhaps not without reason, for though I am
not so particularly acquainted with their manner of Living, as to give you an
exact Account of their Customs and Practice, I can assure you (and one sight of
their Convents would convince you) that they assume a great deal more Liberty
than their Brethren in France. About some Weeks ago I visited the Convent of S.
Joanni Paolo, to see the fine Pictures with which it is adorned, especially that
of S. Peter Martyr, by Titian, which is esteemed one of the most finished
Pieces in the World; and that of the Last Supper, at the bottom of the
Refectory. After I had satisfied my Curiosity with a View of these admirable
Pictures, they showed me the Apartment of one of the Fathers, which certainly
merits the particular Observation of every curious Traveller; for I must
confess I should have rather fansy'd it to be the Residence of a Cardinal than
the Habitation of a solitary Friar. It consists of three small Pavilions,
ranked in a straight Line, each of which contains two Chambers and a Hall. They
are separated by two Gardens, planted with Orange Trees, and divided into
several Borders or Beds of Flowers, adorned with Busts and Statues. It Is true,
there is no Water; but that defect is supplied by a very fine Perspective,
representing a Fountain at the end of a long Walk, bordered with Trees. And
this artificial Fountain is discovered from the first Pavilion through the
second, which is pierced and left open for that Purpose. The Beauty of the
Chambers is suitable to that of the Garden; and to conclude, there are few
Places in the World less fit to inspire a Man with Thoughts of Mortification
and Repentance.

I must not finish my Letter without giving you some Account of the Opera's and
Comedies, which may be reckoned one of the principal Diversions of the
Carnaval. All the Beauty of the Opera's consists in Vocal Music and Machines;
for there is nothing in the Habits, Dancing, and even in the Plays themselves,
that merits a particular Description. And, generally speaking, they are much
Inferior to those that are represented at Paris; for though the French must
acknowledge themselves indebted to the Venetians for their Opera's, it is
certain that in this, as well as in several other Cases, they have surpassed
their Masters. The Venetian Music does not please all sorts of Ears; some
dislike the Affectation of their excessive Quavering, which made one say, That
they seemed to contend with Nightingales, who should be most admired for the
Volubility of their Throats. But I must confess I Am of another Opinion, and I Am
so charmed by the melodious Accents of a fine Italian Voice, that I can hardly
forbear crying out with the Venetians, I Am lost, I faint, I die. It Is true,
those agreeable Transports I usually feel on such Occasions, are purely
occasioned by the Music, and by the Beauty of the Voice, without any regard to
the Words, which are so far from contributing to the Delight of the Hearer,
that he ought not to give the least attention to 'em; since the Italian way of
singing is extremely unsuitable to tragical Subjects: For what Impression would
it make upon your Mind to hear an Orlando Furioso, or a despairing Atis, warble
out the terrible Passions with which they are agitated, in a perpetual
Quavering for a Quarter of an Hour together? Would you not imagine that those
Actors designed to ridicule the passionate Lovers whom they pretend to
represent? This puts me in mind of the Air with which Harlequin used to sing on
the Theater of Burgundy, Ha! tu vas trahir malheureuse, etc. This, Sir, is the
main Advantage that recommends the French Way of Singing beyond the Italian;
for the Music is made purposely for the Words, and so admirably well fitted to
'em in every respect, that the Singing is more expressive, and infinitely more
touching than the Words, especially when there is Occasion to represent a
Person transported with Sorrow, Despair, or Fury. But abstracting from this
Consideration, I Am still of the Opinion, that the Italian Music, singly
considered, is finer than ours, and that its Charms are extremely improved by a
sweet and tuneful Voice, which is no Rarity in this Place.

There are also many different Opinions concerning the Venetian Comedies; for I
have heard several Men of Sense not only despise 'em as Trifles, but absolutely
condemn 'em, as only fit to amuse the Eyes and Ears of Footmen and Porters.
Others, on the contrary, are so much in love with this Diversion, that they
would rather choose to deprive themselves of Meat and Drink, than to lose their
Share in so agreeable a Pleasure. For my part, I think these Opinions are
equally guilty of an Excess, and I see no reason that should oblige us to run
to either of these opposite Extremities. If every thing that is not properly
instructive, and does not directly tend to the Advancement of Virtue must be
absolutely rejected; I confess indeed, that the Italian Comedies ought to be
banished out of the Republic; but by the same Principle Masks, Balls,
Tournaments, and all sorts of Games must be condemned, and the most innocent
Pleasures must be reputed criminal. But since my Conscience is not so nice, I
must own my self so much a Friend to the Venetian Comedies, that I can easily
bear with all their Defects. It Is true, they can neither make us wiser nor
better; but that Fault, if it be one, is sufficiently atton'd for by the
Pleasure they give us. And I have often observed, that those morose Critics
who talk of nothing but Edification, are the first who burst forth into
Laughter, and express their Satisfaction by clapping their Hands. Yet there are
certain Indecencies which I could wish the Italian Poets would avoid; and it
were to be desired, that they had more Regard to the Respect that is due to the
Modesty of Ladies, and to the Rules of Civility that ought to be observed
between Man and Man. But after all, I have a much better Opinion of the French
than of the Italian Theater: For I had rather learn to know my self in the
Characters of Moliere, than to be an useless Spectator of the Postures of
Harlequin, or of the Dreams of Dr. Balouarde; though if I had a convenient
Opportunity, and knew not how to employ my Time better, I should never scruple
to laugh an Hour or two at their diverting Fooleries.

I had almost forgotten to acquaint you with a pleasant Custom which is usually
observed in this Place at the hearing of Opera's. The Female Musicians are
always applauded at the End of their Songs; but the Hearers make use of
different ways to express their Satisfaction. If they only say Cara, Cara, it is
a sign they are but indifferently pleased; but when they are touched to the
quick, they fill the whole Theater with repeated Acclamations, crying as loud
as they can, Mi Moro, Mi Buto; and not unfrequently make use of such immodest
and obscene Expressions, that I dare not so much as repeat 'em.

In Obedience to your Desire, I have made it my Business to enquire into the
Birth and Original of the late Pope Alexander VIII. You are misinformed by
those who assure you that he was descended from a Noble Family: For John
Ottoboni, his Great-Grand-Father, was a Merchant, and was not much taken Notice
of at first, though he afterward gained a considerable Estate, which recommended
both him and his Children to the Consideration of the Public. His Eldest Son,
John Francis, was advanced to the Dignity of Great Chancellor, the highest
Office to which a Citizen can pretend; for those who are raised to that Post
are honored with the Title of Excellency, and wear a Red Gown. His Son
Leonard, who had already served the Republic as Secretary to the Spanish
Embassy, and afterward as Agent in that Country, was advanced to the same
Office in the Year 1639. and continued in that Post till his Death. He left two
Sons, Francis, and Peter who was afterward made Pope: Francis married, and
left a Son called Anthony, who is still alive; but Peter, who had not yet taken
a Wife, endeavored to procure a certain Office, which, notwithstanding all his
earnest Solicitations, was bestowed on another Citizen, whose Family had never
been entrusted with the Management of any Public Affairs: And he was so nettl'd
at such an unexpected Disappointment, that for mere Vexation he resolved to
embrace an Ecclesiastical Life. Two or Three Years after, the Bishop of Padua
gave him a Place in his Chapter, where he continued for some time; but being
naturally of an impatient and ambitious Temper, he soon grew weary of that
Post: And I Am informed that he used frequently to tell his Friends that
something whispered perpetually in his Ears, and bid him go to Rome. These
Suggestions flattered his Ambition, and made him so uneasy at Padua, that he
left his Place, and went to that Great Ecclesiastical Court, where by his
Intrigues, Complaisance, and Dissimulation, of which he was an Absolute Master,
he acquired several powerful Patrons, and insinuated himself so dexterously
into the Favor of the rest, that in 1652, he obtained a Cardinal's Cap of Pope
Innocent X. and was afterward made Bishop of Brescia in the State of Venice.
But his Ambition was not satisfied by so considerable a Preferment; for he
still continued to manage his Game with so much Dexterity and Success, that at
last he was advanced to the Papal Throne by the French Faction, and by the
Interest and Solicitation of Cardinal de Bouillon, who to regain his Master's
Favor, left no Means unessay'd to raise this Prelate to the Apostolic See.
'Twas on the 6 th of October, 1689, that the Supreme Dignity was conferred upon
him; and his Advancement occasioned a general Satisfaction. Rome thought she
had now a Bishop, who would aim at nothing so much as the Exaltation of the
Church and the Holy See: France concluded that she had at last obtained a Pope
who was absolutely devoted to her Interest: The Empire and Spain hoped that he
would promote the Public Good of Christendom: And Venice was overjoyed to see
one of her Citizens in a Condition to raise the Glory of his Country. In the
last of these Places, especially, all possible Care was taken to express the
public Satisfaction with all the Marks of Splendour and Magnificence: Anthony
the Pope's Nephew was honored with the Title of a Nobleman, and at the same
time was made Knight of the Golden Star, and Procurator of S. Mark by Merit. He
sent his two Sons Peter and Mark to Rome, where the latter was immediately
preferred to an advantageous Match; and the former was made Cardinal Patron.
Dignities and Riches were heaped without measure upon all the rest of the
Pope's Relations, who seemed, like so many Mushrooms, to spring up in a Night.
Their sudden Advancement gave Pasquin occasion to say, That his Holiness had
signalized his Accession to the Pontifical Throne by a Miracle: And Marforio
demanding what it was, he replied, That the Pope had restored to Life one that
was Dead; meaning the Nepotism, which seemed to have been utterly extinguished
by Innocent XI. And indeed never Pope made so good Use of his Time as this
Alexander: But since I have already given you an Account of his Character and
Actions, I shall only add, that he went out of this World loaded with Curses,
that his Memory is odious to all Mankind, and that never any Man's Death was
less lamented than his. Rome detests him by reason of his Luxury, and because
he established the Nepotism: The Empire and Spain hate him as one that was
their declared Enemy: France is incensed against him because of the terrible
Blow he gave her toward the end of his Pontificate: And Venice abhors the
Memory of a Citizen, who instead of proving a Benefactor to his Country, seemed
on all Occasions to be its mortal Enemy. At Rome they began to express their
Hatred before he expired; for in the Night in which he died there was a Paper
affixed to the Gate of the Vatican, in which he was represented in the Posture
of (...) that is going to take Horse, with these Words written underneath, If
any Man would send a Letter to the Devil, here is a Post just ready to depart.

After his Death, Prince Anthony his Nephew, endeavoring by his Intrigues to
exclude Cardinal Barberino, and to promote the Faction of the Pignatelli, the
Venetians deprived him of the Procuratorship, and at the same time removed him
from the Management of Public Affairs, and even prohibited him to appear in
the Council; so that at present instead of a Procurator's Vest, he wears only a
Citizen's short Cloak. Yet he was not degraded, but only suspended from the
Exercise of his Offices.

I must not leave Venice without acquainting you with the ridiculous Opinion
the Italians have of the French Customs: They imagine that a Man may Kiss and
Handle a Young Woman as roughly and indecently as he pleases before her Father
and Mother, and that one may take the same Liberty with a Wife in the Presence
of her Husband; and from thence they infer, that they are guilty of more
Criminal Familiarities in private. You see what an injurious Opinion they have
of our Nation, and especially of the Chastity of our Ladies; and yet this
extravagant Conceit is only grounded on the Civility of our Countrymen, who
permit a Friend or Relation to Salute a Woman with a Kiss after a long Absence;
and are not so horn-mad as to enter an Action against a Man for every Kiss he
steals from a Woman.

Thus we see how fatally Men are deluded by that unconquerable Inclination they
have to magnify every thing. As soon as they hear of any thing that is
unusual, they instantly fancy it to be a Prodigy, and conclude that it is
either against the ordinary Course of Nature, or contrary to common Sense. I
have had occasion to discourse with several Persons that are no Italians, who
assure me that in England a Man may freely Kiss the first handsome Woman he
meets in the Street, and even that all Women, not excepting the chief Ladies of
the Court, are obliged to allow such Liberties. But though I never was in that
Country, I Am so far from believing the Story, that I Am confident, and dare
venture to affirm, that it is absolutely false.

I shall conclude my Letter with telling you that I have seen Padua, which is a
very large Town, but so dispeopl'd, that one half of the Houses are not
inhabited; and that I have bought a Horse to carry me to Holland; for I could
not endure to be so long shut up in a Coach. I have already sent my Horse to
Mestre, a little Harbor about five Miles from this City, in the Road to
Ausburg, and am putting all things in a readiness for my Departure. And
therefore to finish the Description of Venice, which some call the Rich, others
the Fair, and I the Licentious, I shall only tell you, that I Am extremely
pleased with three things in it, which I despair of finding in any other Place:
First, the Festival Solemnities, which are always accompanied with Shows:
Secondly, the obliging Sweetness and Beauty of the Women: And in the last
Place, the Neatness of the Houses within. I have often heard Holland commended
for the extraordinary Neatness of its Houses, but I Am persuaded that even in
this respect it does not exceed Venice: For the very Floors are covered with a
certain red Cen^^t, as ^ard as a (...), and as smooth and clear as a
Looking-Glass: And all the Furniture of the House is kept in the best Order,
and with the same Care and Exactness. Every Cobbler in the City takes care to
furnish his Apartment with Hangings of gilt Leather, a large Looking-Glass, and
some pretty Pictures; and the Magnificence of the Houses is always suitable to
the Riches of the Inhabitants.

I am, SIR, Your etc.
Venice, May 1692.
The END.

