THE Duke of Monmouth's CASE, WITH ALL The very strange Crimes, and great
Misdemeanors Alleged against his Grace, in a whole Dozen of Articles.
THE Tories have always the ill luck to over-do and ill time their Business;
their Malice and Rage is so great against the Protestant Religion, that it
blinds them, or else they never would have made an Information of a Riot
committed by a Person of that Rank, Blood and Fortune, as the Duke of Monmouth
is, in spite of all their abusive Instruments, Machinations and Disgrace,
continues his Loyalty to his Prince, together with his Love to his Religion,
Country, and the English Nation: I say, had they not been blinded with Rage,
Folly and Madness, they would not have accused such a Person on so frivolous
occasions. O blessed Act of Parliament! that secures the English Liberties, and
renders an Englishman Bailable, that he may not be sent to the Tower, or
Newgate, or any other Prison upon every objected Crime. God defend our Prince,
and our Laws, our Religion, and our Liberties, and continue both Nobles, Gentry
and Commonalty in their Obedience and Loyalty: We need not fear whilst we have
so good and Gracious a King; and yet some things seem strange to the Christian
World, that the meanest of the Rascality dare abuse the Royal Blood, and that
others are permitted to alledg on so groundless an occasion, a Riot upon a
Person that has born so great a Figure in the World, that has Commanded an
Army, that has showed invincible Courage and Bravery; that has the Blood of
Charles the Good and the Great running in his Veins -- Some would fain render
him Absalom a Traitor, who is rather like the young Scipio, ready with his
Sword to rescue his Father from the danger of his Enemies, or like Aeneas,
ready to carry him in his Arms from amidst the flame of a burning City; and who
is ready, together with his Prince, to defend his Country, and the Established
Religion of the Land. Hence rises the Hatred, the Malice, the Rage of
undermining Enemies, for the sake of his Religion, and because he is beloved by
the People; and tho nothing in all his Actions can be picked out to render this
Noble and Loyal Person Criminal, or that by the severest of our Laws tends any
ways to it; yet rather than not show their Malice to his Grace, whom some think
they may tread upon with impunity, they have drawn up Articles purporting a
Riot, which Allegations for the satisfaction of the World are here Printed.

The strange Crimes and Misdemeanors alleged against His Grace James Duke of
Monmouth.
IMprimis, That the Lord Colchester had caused to be hired fifteen Posthorses
for the Duke of Monmouth and his Retinue, to ride to an Horse-Match beyond
Chester.

2 dly. That the Lord Colchester was seen to whisper with another Gentleman for
almost half an hour.

3 dly. That his said Grace was met by several Companies of People on the way,
as he passed along, to the number of some Thousands, and most highly broke the
Peace, in crying, God bless the King, the Protestant Religion, and the
Protestant Duke.

4 thly. That he had willingly assented to be most splendidly Treated by all
the truly Loyal Gentlemen of the Country, to the great grief and sorrow of
heart among all the Tories.

5 thly. That on the same day his Grace won the Plate at Walesie, several
Persons made Bonfires at Chester, and drank the Kings Health with great Joy and
Acclamations, tho some of the disaffected Tories flang Chamber-Pots on their
Heads, for which the others returned a Volley of Stones at their Windows, in
requital of their rudeness.

6 thly. That diverse Gentlemen met together to Dine without any Braces of Bucks
sent them by Mr. C -- ch; and did highly derogate from the Principles of the
Tories, in drinking the Kings Health before the Duke of York's.

7 thly. That some Persons in his Graces Company was heard to affirm, that a
Popish Successor was no very good expedient for the establishment of the
Protestant Religion.

8 thly. That his Grace should ride with several Tory Gentlemen for the Plate
at Walesie, and win it from them to the great grief of the Nation.

9 thly. That the said James Duke of Monmouth should be heard to declare, that
he would willingly lay down his Life in Preservation of His Majesty's Person
and Government, as by Law established.

10 ly. That his Grace believed there was a Popish Plot, and no Protestant or
Presbyterian Plot whatsoever, as the Tories would fain have the People believe.

11 thly. That in like manner he did not believe the Five Jesuits and Coleman,
Executed at Tyburn, died Martyrs.

12 thly. That he should declare, he would never consent or assent to the
establishing Popery here in England.

To all which Articles and Allegations, his Grace was told he must give in
Sureties for the Peace, or otherwise stand Committed to the Sergeant at Arms
till he should be released by due Course of Law.

His Grace found Noblemen and Gentlemen enough to be his Bail very readily, and
accordingly his Grace gave sufficient Bail, whose Names are here Inserted, Viz.

The Lord Russel. Lord Clare. Lord Gray. Esquires. Leviston Gower. John Offly.

London, Printed for J. C.


